 
 
 
 
  Enfield Local Plan  
Main issues and preferred approaches 
June 2021  
www.enfield.gov.uk /enfieldlocalplan  Foreword  
Leader of the Council 
2 Making comments 
The Council is consulting on the next stage in the preparation of the new Enfield Local Plan 
2039.   
The plan and supporting documents can be viewed online at 
www.enfield.gov.uk/newlocalplan   If you do not have access to the internet, paper copies of 
the documents (including a summary version) are available to read at the Borough hub libraries:  
•Edmonton Green Library, 36-44 South Mall, Edmonton N9 0TN
•Enfield Town Library, 66 Church Street, Enfield EN2 6AX
•Ordnance Unity Centre Library, 645 Hertford road Enfield, EN3 6ND
•Palmers Green Library, Broomfield Lane, P almers Green, N13 4EY
Copies will be also be placed in community libraries, please check for opening times here:  
https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/libraries/contact-information-and-opening-hours/   
We would very much like to hear your views on the issues and policy options presented in this document.  There are a number of ways that you can comment:  
•On-line at www.enfield.gov.uk/newlocalplan
 – This is the quickest and easiest way  to
respond.
•V ia email  at: Localplan@enfield.gov.uk
•V ia post to: Strategic Planning & Design, Enfield C ouncil FREEPOST NW5036 EN1
3BR
Comments must be received by midnight on 13 September  2021 
How to find out more  
You can find out more by  visiting: 
•our website www.enfield.gov.uk/newlocalplan
•our dedicated digital engagement platform – https://letstalk.enfield.gov.uk/Foreword  
Leader of the Council 
3 Foreword by the Leader of the Council 
Enfield has many strengths and is full of potential. We have a growing population; an 
emerging and strengthening business sector; an ambitious regeneration and housebuilding programme; and an attractive environment – over half the Borough is green or blue. Our 
Borough has its challenges, with high levels of income deprivation and a desperate need for 
more affordable houses. We currently have over 4,500 residents on the housing needs 
register and on average a home costs 13.7 times household income.   
The Council is committed to creating a lifetime of opportunities for all residents, ensuring more quality homes in well -connected neighbourhoods, to investing in safe, healthy and 
confident communities, and to creating an economy that works for everyone in Enfield.  
This consultation version of the Local Plan plays an important role in shaping the future of 
the Borough - delivering good growth and affordable, quality homes while ensuring the 
landscape and character of the borough is enhanced.  
A ‘do nothing’ approach is not an option if we want to shape the growth of our Borough in a 
positive way.  
This “Issues and Options” version of the Local Plan 2039 provides a preferred spatial option 
for where and when this growth and enhancement can be delivered. Enfield faces difficult 
decisions in making choices about where and when new homes, new business and new schools can go in our borough, as we must protect our industry and also improve the character of our neighbourhoods and natural qualities of our landscape.  
By 2039 Enfield will be a place of growing opportunity for future generations, the green lung 
of London where new homes and jobs help all our communities thrive.  
•Housing growth will be accommodated across the Borough, with a focus on tow
n
centr
es and well -connected urban locations, as well as new sustainable settlements
at Chase Park and Crews Hill ;
•E
mployment floorspace will be delivered in town centres, existing employment areas ,
and new
 locations in the north and east of the Borough ;
•Ea
st-west disparities will be reduced by delivering high quality new infrastructur e, an
upl
ift in employment floorspace and environmental improvements ; and
•Im
provements to biodiversity and access to nature will be delivered across  the
B
orough, providing benefits to residents, mitigating and preparing for climate change,
and supporting a sustainable natural economy in the north of the Bor ough.
The pandem
ic has reminded all of us how important our open green spaces are for health 
and wellbeing.  The Local  Plan is an opportunity to provide more accessible green spaces 
for residents across our Borough, including in our more urban areas; this will address existing poverty and inequality.  
These green spaces, rewilding projects and new woodland creation also help Enfield play its 
part in reducing and mitigating climate change. The climate emergency is a responsibility we 
all share and a variety of Local Plan policies help us create a healthier planet for the children of Enfield.  
After this consultation, the Council will update and refine the Draft Local Plan and reconsider it at Full Council, before it is sent to the Secretary of State and a government Planning Inspector for evaluation.  Foreword  
Leader of the Council 
4 I encourage residents, businesses and other stakeholders to get involved in the consultation 
and help shape the future our borough.  
 C
llr Nesil Caliskan, Leader of the Council  
Table of contents  
Making comments  2 
Foreword by the Leader of the Council  3 
1. Introduction 5 
2. Good growth in Enfield 12 
2.1 Spatial portrait 12 
2.2 Key spatial issues 17 
2.3 Spatial vision and objectives 18 
2.4 Enfield’s spatial strategy 22 
Strategic Policy SP SS1: Spatial strategy 22 
Spatial strategy (options) 26 
Strategic Policy SP SS2: Making good places 31 
3. Place 34 
3.1 Enfield Town 38 
Strategic Policy PL1: Enfield Town 40 
3.2 Southbury 43 
Strategic Policy PL2: Southbury 45 
3.3 Edmonton Green 47 
Strategic Policy PL3: Edmonton Green 49 
3.4 Angel Edmont on 52 
Strategic Policy PL 4: Angel  Edmonto n 54 
3.5 Meridian Water 56 
Strategic Policy PL 5: Meridian Wate r 58 
3.6 Southgate 61 
Strategic Policy PL 6: Southg ate 63 
3.7 New Southgat e 65 
Strategic Policy PL 7: New Southgate 67 
3.8 Rural Enfield – a leading destination in the London National Park City 69 
Strategic Policy PL 8: Rural Enfield – a leading destination in the London
National Park City71 
3.9 Crews Hill 74 
Strategic Policy PL 9: Crews Hill 76 
3.10 Chase Park 80 
Strategic Policy PL 10: Chase Par k 83 
4. Sustainable Enfield 87 
Strategic Policy SP SE1: Responding to the climate emergency 88 
Policy DM  SE2: Sustainable design an d constructi on 89 
Policy DM  SE3: Whole -life carbon and circular economy 90 
Policy DM  SE4: Reducing energy dema nd 91 
Policy DM  SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon energy supply 93 
Policy DM  SE6: Renewable energy development 96 
Policy DM  SE7: Climate change adaptation and managing heat risk 97 
Policy DM  SE8: Managing flood risk 99 
Policy DM  SE9: Protection and improvement of watercourses 102 
Policy DM  SE10: Sustainable drainage system s 103 
5. Addressing equality  and improving health and wellbei ng
Strategic Policy SP S C1: Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s diverse
communities107 
Strategic Policy SP S C2: Protecting and enhancing social and community
infrastructure109 
6. Blue and green Enfiel d
Strategic Policy SP BG1: Enfield’s blue and green infrastructure network 112 
Strategic Policy SP BG2: Protecting nature conservation sites 115 
Strategic Policy SP BG3: Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and offsetti ng 119 
Strategic Policy SP BG4: Green Belt and Metropolitan Open La nd 121 
Strategic Policy SP BG5: Green Belt and edges of the countryside/urban areas 122 
Policy DM  BG6: Protecting open space 124 Policy DM  BG7: Watercourses  126 
Policy DM  BG8: Urban greening and biophilic princ iples   129 
Policy DM  BG9: Allotments and community food production 132 
Policy DM  BG10 : Burial and crematorium spaces  133 
Policy  DM BG10 : Burial and crematorium spaces – options  135 
Policy DM  BG11 : Blue and green infrastructure plans  139 
7. Desig n and characte r 141 
Strategic Policy SP DE1: Delivering a well -designed, high quality and resilient
environment142 
Policy DM  DE2: Design process and Design Review Panel 145 
Policy DM  DE3: Inclusive desi gn 147 
Strategic Policy SP DE4: Puttin g heritage at the centre of place making 149 
Policy DM DE5: Strategic and local views 152 
Policy DM DE 6: Tall buildings 156 
Policy DM DE 7: Creating liveable, inclusive and quality public realm 161 
Policy DM DE 8: Design of premi ses 163 
Polic y DM DE 9: Shopfronts and advertisements 165 
Policy DM DE 10: Conserving and enhancing heritage assets 168 
Policy DM DE 11: Landscape desi gn 171 
Policy DM DE 12: Civic and public developments 173 
Policy DM DE 13: Housing standards and desi gn 174 
Policy DM DE 14: External amenity standard s 176 
Policy DM DE 15: Residential extension s 178 
8. Homes for all
Strategic Policy SP H1: Housing development sites 182 
Strategic Policy SP H1 : Housing development sites – options 187 
Strategic Policy SP H2: Affordable housi ng 182 
Policy DM H3: Housing mix and type 198 
Policy DM  H4: Small sites and smaller housing development 202 
Policy DM  H5: Supported and specialist housi ng 205 
Policy DM  H6: Community led housi ng 208 
Policy DM  H7: Build to rent 210 
Policy DM  H8: Large scale purpose built shared housi ng 211 
Policy DM  H9: Student accommodati on 212 
Policy DM  H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodati on 215 
Policy DM  H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation – options 217 
9. Economy 221 
Strategic Policy SP E1: Employment and growt h 224 
Strategic Policy SP E1: Employment and growth – options 226 
Strategic Policy SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growt h 227 
Strategic Policy SP E3: Emp loyment locations and managing change 230 
Strategic Policy SP E4: Supporting offices 232 
Strategic Policy SP E5: Transforming Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally
Significant Industrial Sites233 
Policy DM  E6: Redevelopment of non -designated sit es 235 
Policy DM  E7: Providing for workspaces 236 
Policy DM  E8: Local jobs, skills and local procurement 237 
Policy DM  E9: Fostering a successful evening and night time economy 240 
Policy DM  E10: Creating a smart and digitally connected Boro ugh 241 
10. Town centres and high streets 244 
Strategic Policy SP TC1: Promoting town centres 245 
Strategic Policy SP TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres 247 
Policy DM  TC3: Floor space above commercial premi ses 251 
Policy DM  TC4: Market s 253 
Policy DM  TC5: Meanwhile u ses 254 
Policy DM  TC6: Managing the clustering of town centre uses 255 
11. Rural Enfiel d
Policy DM  RE1: Character of the Green Belt and open  countryside 259 
Policy DM  RE2: Improving access to the countryside and green corridors 261 
Policy DM  RE3: Supporting the rural economy 262 Policy DM  RE4: Farm diversification  and rural employment  264 
12. Culture, leisure and recreation 266 
Strategic Policy SP CL1: Promoting culture and creativity 267 
Policy DM  CL2: Leisure and tourism 269 
Policy DM  CL3: Visitor accommodation 271 
Strategic Policy SP CL4: Promoting sporting excellence 273 
Policy DM  CL5: Sport, open space and recreation 276 
Policy DM  CL6: Protecting  and attracting  public  houses 280 
13. Movement and connectivity 283 
Strategic Policy SP T1: Promoting sustainable  transport 284 
Policy DM  T2: Making active travel  the natural choi ce 286 
14. Environmental protection 289 
Strategic Policy SP ENV1 : Local environmental protection 290 
15. Delivering and monitorin g 295 
Strategic Policy SP D1 : Securing contributions to mitigate the impact of
development296 
Strategic Policy SP D 2: Masterplans to achieve comprehensive developmen t 299 
Policy DM  D3: Infrastructure  and phasing 302 
APPENDIX A – Local Plan evidence base  304 
APPENDIX B – Key performance indicators 306 
APPENDIX C – Site proformas  315 
APPENDIX D – Developer ’s contributions  384 
Glossary and acronym  buster  Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
5 1. Introduction
1.1 Enfield Council is in the process of updating its  adopted L ocal Plan. The New Enfield 
Local Plan (ELP) is an important document that will guide the future spatial 
development of Enfield Borough up to 2039, and beyond. 
1.2 The plan has to consider the amount and types of future new development that is  
required in the Borough, as well as when it is needed and in what form.  Most 
importantly, it sets out how this growth will be delivered in a sustainable manner that 
maintains and enhances the quality of the many unique places that make up the 
Borough of Enfield.    
Preparation of the Enfiel d Local Plan 
The Plan making process  
1.3 The requirements and consultation process for preparing a plan are set out by legislation in the form of the Planning & Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (and 
amendments in subsequent Acts). The Council must also follow the processes outlined 
in the Town and Country (Local Planning) (England) Regulations  2012.  A summary of 
the process is set out in Figure 1.1.  
Figure 1.1: A summary of the plan making process 
Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
6 1.4 Enfield is currently at Stage 1 – the plan preparation stage known as Regulation 18.  
Stage 1 involves: 
•collecting evidence about the Borough’s needs ;
•us
ing the evidence to identify issues and ways that they could be addressed thr ough
the pl
an; an d
•tes
ting spatial options .
1.5 The Regulation 18 stage can be repeated a number of times with several rounds of 
public consultation and is a stage of the process that can run over several years. 
What is this document  and why is further consultation needed? 
1.6 Enfield prepared and consulted on a Regulation 18 Issues and Options document in late 2018 / early 2019.  This initial Regulation 18 document very much focussed on explori ng broad issues and options but did not indicate the Council’s preferred 
approach, in terms of the scale of growth to be planned for, or in terms of the proposed spatial strategy.  
1.7 This draft plan is a further Regulation 18 consultation document.  It represents an advancement on the 2018/2019 Issues and Options consultation, in that it identifies a preferred level of growth and sets out a preferred spatial strategy and related policies for accommodating this growth.   
1.8 More specifically, a further Regulation 18 consultation is considered necessary to: 
•explore issues identified through the earlier Regulation 18 consultation;
•respond to changes in context, including: government planning policy ; the clim ate
and ec
ological  emergencies, COVID, and the recently adopted New London Plan;
•reflect the new and updated technical evidence base ; and
•identi
fy a preferred spatial growth strategy and preferred policy options .
1.9 Further engagement with local communities and other stakeholders is considered essential to enable the Council to test and refine its approaches before making a 
decision on the plan it wishes to take to the next stage of the plan making process.  
The nature and purpose of this document  
1.10 The Council is facing many complex challenges and difficult choices in developing its spatial plan for the Borough for the next 20 plus years.  This draft plan is in the form of a consultation document.  Its purpose is to help the C ouncil draw upon the many 
minds of residents, local groups, landowners, businesses and statutory bodies, as it seeks to develop the next stage of the Enfield Local Plan.   
1.11 The draft plan has a hybrid nature with strong consultation elements designed to seek 
people’s views on the spatial planning challenges the Borough faces and the range of 
policy options being considered.  It also contains the Council’s preferred policy options.  In some instances, the preferred policies are fully formed whilst in others the policies are more indicative in nature.  For the latter it is considered essential that input from stakeholders is obtained before the policy can be developed to its final form.   
1.12 The document also contains a series of questions at the end of each explanatory section to help people engage with the options and choices being presented.  These questions are also intended to help people more easily formulate their responses to the consultation.    Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
7 How has this plan been prepared?  
1.13 The draft plan has been prepared to be consistent with national policy set out by 
government in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF).  It has also taken 
account of the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG), which provides further guidance 
about national policy and its implementation. Other legal frameworks, including the 
European Habitats Directive are also relevant to the plan making process.  
1.14 The plan has also been prepared in light of the New London Plan which was adopted 
in March  2021 and emerging North London Waste Plan. 
1.15 Local plans are required to be based on adequate, up-to-date and proportionate 
evidence.  A comprehensive evidence base is being developed to support and inform 
the ELP strategy and policies.  The evidence base for the ELP is available on the Council’s website and forms part of the suite of documents that the C ouncil is 
consulting upon. 
1.16  The ELP must be accompanied by sustainability appraisal/strategic environmental 
assessm ent (SA/SEA) that considers the impact of policies on the community, the 
economy and the environment.  An integrated approach to SA/SEA, Equalities Impact Assessment (EqIA), Health Impact Assessment (HIA) and Community Safety Impact 
Assessment (CSIA) is being undertaken, which seeks to maximise the positive impacts of the local plan policies and minimise and mitigate potential adverse effects.  The 
Council has also undertaken a Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA) which 
assesses the likely impacts of local plan policies on the integrity of national and 
European designated sites.  
1.17 The draft plan has been informed by and builds upon, the previous Regulation 18 Issues and Options consultation and the responses received.   
Relationship with other plans  and strat egies 
1.18 Once adopted the new ELP will replace in entirety the following development plan and 
supplementary planning documents: 
•Core Strategy (2010)
•Development Management Document (2014)
•Edmonton Leeside Area Action Plan (2020)
•North East Enfield Area Action Plan (2016)
•North Circular Area Action Plan (2014)
1.19 This ELP is informed by the Council’s strategic visions and plans including the Corporate Plan and the following: 
•Housing and Growth Strategy
•Housing, homeless and tenancy strategies
•Economic Developm ent Strategy
•Culture Connects
•Climate Action Pl
an
•Bl
ue and Green Strategy
•Poverty and inequality
•Others
i
t is based on a collection of research and information documents called evidenc e
base.Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
8 
 1.20 England and Wales operate a ‘plan-led’ planning system. This means that the 
developmen t plan is the first consideration in determining planning applications. This  
Local Plan also sets out allocated sites for development in the Borough across the 
plan period and provides an up-to-d ate framework for local communities who are 
preparing Neighbourhood Plans. Neighbourhood Forums can create Neighbourhood 
Plans to set out a local vision and planning policies for a designated neighbourhood 
area. 
1.21 Neighbourhood Plans must be consistent with national policies and the strategic 
policies o f the Local Plan. Once adopted they will form part of the statutory 
development plan and be a key consideration in the determination of planning 
applications in their area.  
Duty to co -operate 
1.22 The Localism Act (2011), subsequent regulations and the NPPF place a statutory duty 
on local planning authorities to cooperate with each other, and other bodies, when 
preparing, or supporting the preparation of policies which address strategic matters 
and on areas of common interest. This includes initiatives such as joint working on the 
Functional Economic Market Area Assessment, Green Belt and Metropolitan Open 
Land Assessment, Gypsy and Travellers Needs Assessment, Burial Needs 
Assessment and work with other statutory undertakers, major highway improvement 
schemes such as Junction 25 of the M25 and other transport issues such as the four 
tracking of the West Anglia Mainline and Crossrail 2. This process has helped shaped 
and inform policy development, and helped develop an appropriate evidence base for 
the emerging Local Plan. 
1.23 It is important to recognise that the duty to cooperate is a continuous process of 
reviewing policy and accompanying justification and the potential impacts of policy on 
neighbouring authorities and agencies. The Duty continues throughout all stages of the 
plan making process . The challenges facing the Borough are complex and there is not 
often an easy solution. However, by working with partners and stakeholders, the 
Council has produced a positive pl an for the future. The strategic vision and the 
policies included in this plan will address the challenges and set out a spatial strategy 
to deliver the Borough’s strategic priorities . 
1.24 A Duty to Cooperate Compliance Statement will accompany the next version of the 
plan and will be updated before it is submitted to the Secretary of State with the Local 
Plan alongside other supporting documents. The statement sets out the bodies 
engaged under the Duty during the preparation of the ELP, the strategic issues that 
have been given consideration and the outcomes that have informed policy 
preparation.  
Evidence base  
1.25 The NPPF requires the local planning authority to base the development of the plan’s 
policies on up to date and relevant evidence. Since preparation of the plan, the Council 
has continued to develop the ELP’s evidence base. The ELP’s evidence is comprised 
of documents that have informed the plan and new evidence which has helped identify 
the Borough’s objectively assessed needs. The ELP’s evidence base is set out in 
Appendix A and links to them  are available at: 
https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/evidence-base/      
  Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
9 Monitoring  
1.26 It is important to assess whether the ELP is meeting its aims and objectives.  It is  also 
important to have appropriate mechanisms in place to enable the C ouncil to take 
action if the Plan is not delivering on its policy commitments.  A series of monitoring 
indicators are included in Appendix B to help achieve this.   
1.27 Policy performance will be reported on through the Council’s Authorities Monitoring Report (AMR).  Where policies are failing to deliver necessary actions will be identified.  This may include an early review of the ELP. 
List of policies 
1.28 The NPPF1 set out that Local Plans should identify and distinguish strategic policies 
from other non-strategic policies. All policies in within the ELP including the site allocations are strategic, except for the non-strategic policies identified in Table 1.1 . 
Table 1.1: Table of policies 
Name of policy Strategic ? 
SP SS1: Spatial strategy  Yes 
SP SS2: Making good places Yes 
SP PL1: Enfield Town  Yes 
SP PL2: Southbury  Yes 
SP PL3: Edmonton Green Yes 
SP PL4: Angel Edmonton Yes 
SP PL5: Meridian Water Yes 
SP PL6: Southgate  Yes 
SP PL7: New Southgate Yes 
SP PL8: Rural Enfield ‘ London National Park City ’  Yes 
SP PL9: Crews Hill Yes 
SP PL10: Chase Park  Yes 
SP SE1: Responding to the climate emergency  Yes 
DM SE2: Sustainable design and construction  No 
DM SE3: Whole -life carbon and circular economy No 
DM SE4: Reducing energy demand No 
DM SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon energy supply No 
DM SE6: Renewable energy development No 
DM SE7: Climate change adapt ation and managing heat risk No 
DM SE8: Managing flood risk  No 
DM SE9: Protection and improvement of watercourses No 
DM SE10: Sustainable drainage systems No 
SP SC1: Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s diverse 
communities  Yes 
SP SC2: Protecting and enhanc ing social and community infrastructure No 
SP BG1: Enfield’s blue and green infrastructure network Yes 
SP BG2: Protecting nature conservation sites Yes 
SP BG3: Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and offsetting Yes 
SP BG4: Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land  Yes 
SP BG5: Green Belt and edges of the countryside/urban areas Yes 
DM BG6: Protecting open space No 
DM BG7: Watercourses No 
DM BG8: Urban greening and biophilic principles No 
1 Paragraph 21 of the NPPF Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
10 Name of policy Strategic ? 
DM BG9: Allotments and community food production  No 
DM BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces  No 
DM BG11: Blue and green infrastructure plans No 
SP DE1: Delivering a well -designed, high quality and resilient 
environment  Yes 
DM DE2: Design process and design review panel No 
DM DE3: Inclusive design No 
SP DE4: Putting heritage at the centre of  place making  Yes 
DM DE5: Strategic and local views  No 
DM DE6: Tall buildings No 
DM DE7: Creating liveable, inclusive and quality public realm       No 
DM DE8: Design of business premises No 
DM DE9: Shopfronts and advertisement  No 
DM DE10: Conserving and enhancing heritage assets  No 
DM DE11: Landscape design  No 
DM DE12: Civic and public developments  No 
DM DE13: Housing standards and design No 
DM DE14: External amenity standards  No 
DM DE15: Residential extensions  No 
SP H1: Housing development sites Yes 
SP H2: Affordable housing Yes 
DM H3: Housing mix and type  No 
DM H4: Small sites and small housing development No 
DM H5: Supported and specialist housing  No 
DM H6: Community  led housing No 
DM H7: Build to rent  No 
DM H8: Large scale purpose built shared housing No 
DM H9: Student accommodation  No 
DM H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation  No 
SP E1: Employment and growth  Yes 
SP E2: Promoting inclusive business and job growth Yes 
SP E3: Protecting employmen t locations and managing change  Yes 
SP E4: Supporting offices Yes 
SP E5: Transforming Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites  Yes 
DM E6: Redevelopment of non -designated industrial sites No 
DM E7: Providing for workspaces No 
DM E8: Local jobs, skills and local procurement No 
DM E9: Fostering  a successful evening and night time economy No 
DM E10: Creating a smart and digitally connected borough No 
SP TC1: Promoting town centres Yes 
SP TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres Yes 
DM TC3: Floorspace above commercial premises   No 
DM TC4: Markets No 
DM TC5: Meanwhile uses No 
DM TC6: Managing the  clustering of town centre uses  No 
DM RE1: Character of the Green Belt and open countryside   No 
DM RE2: Improving access to the countryside and green corridors No 
SP RE3: Supporting the rural economy Yes 
DM RE4: Farm diversification and rural employment No 
SP CL1: Promoting culture and creativity Yes 
DM CL2: Leisure and tourism No 
DM CL3: Visitor accommodation No Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
11 Name of policy Strategic ? 
SP CL4: Promoting sporting excellence Yes 
DM CL 5: Sport , open space  and recreation  No 
DM CL6: Protecting and attracting public houses No 
SP T1: Promoting sustainable transport  Yes 
DM T 2: Making ac tive travel attractive the natural c hoice No 
DM ENV1: Local environmental protection No 
SP D1: Securing contributions to mitiga te the impact of development   Yes 
DM D2: Masterplans to achi eve comprehensive development  No 
DM D3: Infrastructure and phasing No 
DM D4: Monitoring and review  No 
How to read this plan  
1.29 Strategic policies are contained in dark green boxes and Dev elopment Management 
Policies are set out in a lighter shade of green. 
1.30 The key diagram in chapter 2 illustrates broad locations identified for strategic 
development within the Borough over the plan period. The symbols on the key diagram are indicative and do not represent precise locations or sites. More detailed diagrammatic information is illustrated on the Policies Map.  
1.31 A draft Policies Map is published alongside the ELP that identifies areas for protection, strategic sites and strategic infrastructure, and sets out the areas which specific policies apply.  
Next steps  
1.32 Once consultation on this draft plan has finished the C ouncil will consider all of the 
comments received and use them to help inform its decision making on the next stage of the plan preparation process.  This is likely to be preparation of the final draft plan that will eventually be submitted to the Secretary of State for independent examination. 
1.33 The current suite of adopted policies in the Core Strategy, Development Management 
Document and the Area Action Plans will continue to apply until the ELP is adopted.  Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
12 
 2. Good growth in Enfield 
2.1 Spatial portrait  
 
Figure 2.1: The London Borough of Enfield  
 
Context  
2.1.1  Enfield is an outer London Borough in north London and is home to approximately 
333,794 people and 130,000 households. It is a diverse place, which has welcomed 
communities from across the world. In particular, it has large Turkish, Greek and 
Cypriot popul ations. The Borough covers an area of 8219 hectares (82.2 square 
kilometres, or 31.7 square miles). Enfield is represented by three MPs and one GLA 
member. Enfield council’s 63 councillors represent 21 wards. 
2.1.2  Enfield sits entirely within the M25, north of the River Thames. Central London is 
approximately 12 miles to the south. Enfield shares boundaries with three other 
London Boroughs: Waltham Forest to the east, Haringey to the south and Barnet to 
the west. Enfield adjoins the County of Hertfordshire to the north. 
  
Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
13 Connectivity  
2.1.3 Enfield lies on the West Anglia Mainline to London Liverpool Street on a section of the 
track that is identified to benefit from Four -Tracking and from Crossrail 2 investment. 
Enfield also includes sections of the London Underground Piccadilly Line including 
stations at Cockfosters, Arnos Grove and Oakwood, which will benefit from increased capacity from new trains and signalling upgrades by the early 2020s. Five train lines pass through the Borough, including the Piccadilly ( London Underground Line) Line 
connecting to London Heathrow Airport. London Kings Cross, Moorgate and Liverpool 
Street, outward to Welwyn Garden City, Hertford North, Hertford East, Letchworth and Stevenage.  
2.1.4 Enfield is further served by a number of Transport for London bus  routes . Walking and 
cycling routes permeate the Borough and are currently being improved as part of the Healthy Streets and Cycle Enfield programmes. However, the road and rail network present barriers to walking and cycling – the A10 Great Cambridge Road and A1010 
Hertford Road impede east-west movement, and the North Circular Road ( A406) and 
M25 make it difficult to walk into and out of the Borough. 
Natural and built environments 
2.1.5 Approximately one third of Enfield is designated Green Belt. The rural parts of Enfield 
accommodates a diverse range of activities, including farming, golf courses parks and woodland (including areas of Ancient Woodland). Notable attractions include Enfield 
Chase (a former royal hunting ground and deer park), Capel Manor and the registered 
gardens of Trent Park, Forty Hall and Myddelton House. Enfield also lies within close proximity to nationally or internationally important nature conservation sites, including the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation (SAC), Lee Valley (Special Protection 
Area) and Broxbourne Woods (National Nature Reserve). The Enfield Chase Restoration programme is creating large areas of restored publicly accessible 
woodland and is set to expand. Parts of the Borough also form part of the Lee Valley 
Regional Park, a natural resource of national importance. There are opportunities to improve the environmental quality of the urban edge, bringing green space into urban area and maximising the potential for people to interface with nature.  
2.1.6 Enfield has more than 100km of watercourses – more than any other London borough. 
Its rich blue network includes an extensive network of canals (River Lea Navigation Canal), rivers (River Lee), reservoirs (William Girling and King George V) and lakes. The River Lee’s tributaries – Salmons Brook, Turkey Brook and Pymmes Brook – run 
through the Borough, converging in the east, bringing flood risk to areas of Edmonton and Meridian Water. However, there are opportunities to improve the sustainable management of watercourses, as well as their visibility and accessibility.  
2.1.7 Enfield developed from a number of historic towns and villages along trading and transport routes. Enfield Town grew as a prosperous market town, while Ponders End and Edmonton grew on the London to Cambridge road. The River Lee was an important focus for trading and later industrial activity and forms a natural barrier to the east. Enfield’s historic centres have grown and developed mixed-use character of 
retail, employment, community and leisure activities. Enfield’s town centres remain the 
focus of commercial and civic life, with Enfield Town, Palmers Green, Southgate, Angel Edmonton and Edmonton Green serving as important hubs. The twentieth century saw substantial suburban development, capitalising on improvements in public transport. This brought archetypal ‘Metroland’ development, with generous gardens 
and shopping parades, to many parts of the Borough. Enfield has 22 conservation 
areas, which range from distinctive urban neighbourhoods to expansive historic parks, 
and a number of listed buildings.  Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
14 
 Community 
2.1.8  Enfield’s residents are younger than the London average and like other London 
Boroughs, are proudly diverse. Enfield has the largest proportion of Greek and Turkish 
speaking people in the countr y and 195 languages and dialects are spoken by school 
pupils who live in Enfield. Life expectancy is increasing, though there are higher rates 
of diabetes and obesity than the national average. Enfield as a whole is the ninth most 
deprived London borough, though this overall assessment masks significant disparities 
within the Borough. Ten areas rank within the 10% most deprived neighbourhoods in 
England, all of which lie within the east of the borough. Median incomes in the most 
affluent neighbourhoods are more than four times those of the least affluent. 
2.1.9  The Dugdale Centre, Millfield Theatre and the Chickenshed Theatre are cornerstones 
of Enfield’s cultural life, and the Borough’s rich heritage of creativity offers a strong 
base for the growth of culture and the creative industries. Sporting and leisure facilities 
serve local communities throughout the Borough, with Hotspur Way Training Ground 
drawing in professionals from further afield.  
Economic prosperity  
2.1.10  Enfield’s thriving economy is underpinned by small  businesses. There are 13,275 
businesses registered in Enfield (as at 2019), of which 93% employ fewer than 10 
people. Enfield’s industrial strengths are evident in the extent of regionally significant 
and locally important employment sites, which together  accommodate over 22,000 
workers over 247 hectares. Brimsdown is the second largest industrial estate in 
London, and is home to firms such as Warburtons, Amazon and Johnson Matthey. The 
knowledge and creative economy is growing –  Metaswitch recently expanded their 
presence in Enfield Town, and Troubadour Theatres have opened a new film studio 
complex in Meridian Water. 
Challenges and opportunities  
2.1.11  In looking to the future, the Borough faces challenges. Man-made climate change is 
transforming the Borough, raising real risks of flooding and overheating. The 
biodiversity crisis threatens valuable species and habitats.  
2.1.12  Changing consumer references mean that our centres might not be the retail -focused 
hubs they once were and the Covid-19 pandemic has changed the way we work, shop 
and socialise.  
2.1.13  The housing crisis is affecting all of us . Median house prices in Enfield have risen from 
£114,000 in 2000 to £319,000 in 2019 this is  a rise of nearly 250%. The median house 
in Enfield now costs more than 13 times the annual earnings of an Enfield resident, 
with harmful consequences in terms of lack of choice and overcrowding. This means 
that people who grew up in the Borough can’t necessarily afford to stay and start a 
family here.  
2.1.14  Enfield also is a place of spatial disparities –  the east contains some of the most 
deprived neighbourhoods in the country and many communities lack access to quality 
public parks and open spaces. Poor housing and employment opportunities hold back 
too many Enfield residents from ac hieving their full potential.   
2.1.15  However, in seeking to provide new homes and jobs the Borough also faces 
challenges. Growth is never just a ‘numbers game’ and good placemaking is needed 
to ensure that the valued qualities , uniqueness  and distinctiveness of Enfield’s 
neighbourhoods are celebrated.  
2.1.16  Enfield can reduce the emissions associated with buildings and transport to become a 
carbon neutral borough. The Borough can tackle the effects of climate change and Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
15 become more resilient. There are opportunities to enhance biodiversity and make the 
most of natural assets. By improving blue and green networks Enfield can make the 
most of opportunities to experience nature, becoming the gateway to a National Park 
City. 
2.1.17 High streets can be transformed into multifunctional hubs, with an improved cultural offer. There is scope to grow a more diverse economy, supplementing longstanding strengths with job opportunities in film and TV and green industries, building on our strategic position close to central London and in the UK Innovation Corridor.  
2.1.18 By building attractive walkable communities Enfield can become a healthier place with a good quality of life. And by increasing the supply of new homes the Borough can address the housing crisis, providing options for residents regardless of income, age and ability. Fundamentally, growth can help to level up the Borough, reducing disparities between east and west and provide opportunities for all.  Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
16 Figur
e 2.2: Challenges in Enfield 
Chapter 2  
Good growth in Enfield 
17 2.2 Key spatial issues 
2.2.1 The key challenges and opportunities summarised above have led to the 
identification of a series of key issues for the ELP to address. The challenge for the 
ELP is to manage future growth to ensure that development takes place in a sustainable manner that supports the local economy and provides new homes for local people ; whilst safeguarding and enhancing, where possible, the valuable 
natural and built assets of the Borough.  
•How to tackle the climate emergency, ensuring the Local Plan makes a full and
effective contribution towards achieving the objectives set out in the Council’s
Climate Action Plan?
•How to accommodate the development Enfield needs, without adversely
impacting upon existing built character, and the natural and historic environment?
•How to increase new housing delivery to meet local needs (in particular, the needto provide for more affordable housing)?
•How to strike the right balance between meeting development needs throughintensification within urban areas and allowing the limited release of Green Beltland?
•How to ensure the delivery of high-quality development throughout the Borough,that embraces biophilic design principles and is informed by effective communityengagement?
•How to address the disparities in the Borough, especially between east and west,ensuring all residents have good access to the community facilities and areas of
open space needed to live a good life?
•How to support the development needs of new and existing businesses,encourage sustainable economic growth and create new job opportunities  for
local residents?
•How to create safe and attractive routes for pedestrians and cyclists so thatwalking and cycling becomes the natural choice for most journeys?
•How to manage and support our town centres, so that they can effectivelyrespond to changing retail trends and thrive as multi -functional hubs?
•How to protect and enhance the wealth of blue and green spaces in the Boroughand improve access to these areas for all?
Questions 
1.Are there key aspects of the Borough that the C ouncil has not captured in the spatial
portrait?
2.Are there any key opportunities and challenges facing the Borough that the Council hasnot identified?
3.Are there any key spatial issues that have not been considered?Chapter 2  
Spatial vision and objectives 
18 2.3 Spatial vision and objectives 
Introduction  
2.3.1 The vision and strategic objectives underpin the Enfield Local Plan 2039.  They have 
evolved from those set out in the Draft Issues and Options Plan consulted on in 
2018/19 and are based on the priorities set out in the C orporate Plan and wider 
Council strategies, as well as visioning work undertaken with elected Members and the 
wider community in early 2021.  
2.3.2 The vision sets out what Enfield will be by 2039 and is underpinned by four guiding 
themes with further detail provided by 20 strategic objectives  Table 2.1. The plan is 
built on the vision and objectives and they act as a golden thread running through the 
draft policies.   
Vision 
By 2039 Enfield will be a place of growing opportunity for future generations : a green lung 
of London and a place where new homes and jobs help all our communities thrive. 
Housing growth will be accommodated across the Borough, ensuring delivery of a mix of 
housing types and tenures that meet the needs of existing and new residents. 
Employment floorspace will be delivered in town centres, existing employment areas and 
new locations in the north and east of the borough, building upon the Borough’s existing economic strengths and supporting the growth of new economic sectors.  
East-west disparities will be reduced by delivering high quality new infrastructure, an uplift 
in employment floorspace and environmental improvements.  Across the borough, we will 
use biophilic design principles to ensure that opportunities are maximised to knit new development into improved blue-green networks.  
We will be:  
A nurturing place – A place that provides people with the ingredients for a good life. By  
accommodating growth throughout the borough, we will ensure the delivery of high quality 
and affordable homes supported by jobs, community facilities and excellent education, 
leisure and cultural opportunities . Growth will be used to address spatial disparities and 
create opportunities to deliver better outcomes for all.  
A deeply green place – A place where enhanced green open spaces and waterways 
permeate through the urban fabric from the wild places in the rural north, providing access 
for all to nature on their doorstep. Improved biodiversity, greener urban environments and 
better air and water quality will deliver places where residents lives enriched with nature. We will successfully respond to the climate crisis through effective mitigation and adaptation, delivering sustainable buildings and transport options, and effectively managed flood risk. We will be a Borough that is carbon neutral. 
The workshop of London – A place where new spaces for logistics and manufacturing 
will support job growth, capitalising on Enfield’s strategic position in the UK Innovation Corridor. New employment floorspace will be delivered in town centres and existing and 
new industrial locations, where improved links to the borough’s green networks will create attractive places for business growth. A range of workspaces will be delivered to meet the 
needs of a diverse economy, including spaces for homeworking, start-ups , SMEs and the 
creative and maker economy. Enfield’s hot house of cr eativity will be harnessed to enrich 
our industrial heartlands and diversify our town centres .  Chapter 2  
Spatial vision and objectives 
19 A distinct and leading part of London  – A place of safe growing  neighbourhoods wh ose 
valuable character, heritage and natural environments  are celebrated, managing new 
development to sustain beautiful places . By ensuring that growth is supported by 
infrastructure and improved blue and green networks, new developments will enhance 
both town and country. We will be a  place that leads London in access to nature, 
intergenerational communities and quality of life.    
Table 2.1:
 Strategic objectives 
Strategic objectives 
A nurturing place 
1. To address unequal access to jobs and opportunities by protecting 
employment floorspace and promoting the development of new workspaces. 
To tackle spatial disparities by building more quality homes, delivering an uplift in infrastructure to support growth being planned for – including social 
infrastructure and improving environments in the east.  
2. To reduce health inequalities by requiring Health Impact Assessments as 
part of significant development proposals. To use good design to create 
walkable connected communities, supporting active and socially connected 
lives, helping to deliver on the priorities of the Enfield Joint Health and 
Wellbeing Strategy. 
3. To increase the supply of housing to ensure that more people can access good quality homes
2.  To protect family housing and support the delivery of 
new family homes to help ensure that people who grew up in the borough will 
have the opportunity to remain. 
4. To provide a variety of housing options to meet the needs of everyone, 
regardless of income, age and ability. To maximise the supply of affordable 
housing, by resisting the loss of affordable homes and securing 50% of all 
new homes as genuinely affordable. To deliver wheelchair accessible and 
supported housing, and support developments that seek to meet the needs  
of specific communities, including older people, disabled and vulnerable 
people, students, and Gypsies and Travellers. 
5. To ensure the delivery of a joined-up, liveable and inclusive public realm network by requiring development to improve its connectivity, legibility, 
permeability, accessibility and visual appearance. To make walking and 
cycling the natural choice by embedding the healthy streets approach into new developments.  
6. To deliver active travel routes to make it easy to get around safely and 
sustainably, and support improvements to the public transport network  
2 As a minimum, this plan will support the delivery of the London Plan’s ten- year net housing target.  Chapter 2  
Spatial vision and objectives 
20 Strategic objectives 
(including safeguarding land for Crossrail 2) .  To strengthen east -west links 
through new routes and access improvements.  
Deeply green place 
7. To maximise opportunities to experience greenery and the natural world by 
delivering tree lined streets and improved biodiversity and exceeding urban 
greening factor targets set out in the London Plan. To use biophilic design 
principles to  link up urban Enfield (including Edmonton, Ponders End, 
Southbury, Brimsdown and Southgate) to wider natural networks across the 
borough. 
8. To tackle the climate emergency head-on by ensuring that all major 
development is zero carbon, evidenced through detailed energy 
assessments.  To support renewable and low -carbon energy generation, 
including through connection to decentralised energy networks.  
9. To support the objectives of the North London Waste Plan by managing 
waste further up the waste hierarchy. To safeguard air and water quality and 
manage sources of noise and pollution in line with the agent of change 
principle. 
10. To mitigate the effects of global heating and a changing climate by requiring developments to effectively manage heat risk, incorporate sustainable 
drainage and support measures to sustainably manage flood risk, including 
through optimisation of the blue-green network. 
11. To protect and enhance the River Lee and Turkey Brook, Salmons Brook 
and Pymmes Brook through de-culverting, naturalisation, restoration and the 
creation of new wetlands. To protect the Green Belt and Metropolitan Open 
Land and local open spaces and encourage improvements to quality and 
accessibility to meet the needs of a growing population. 
12. To deliver green infrastructure improvements, including accessible new woodland, rewilded river corridors and new parks and open spaces to 
support growth. To facilitate the creation of a major green infrastructure 
corridor in the north of the borough, supporting Enfield’s role as a gateway to London as a National Park City. 
The workshop of London 
13. To deliver an uplift in employment floorspace to meet the needs of businesses. To capitalise on rising demand for logistics and manufacturing by focusing growth in Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally Significant Industrial Sites and the provision of new sites in appropriate locations.  
14. To celebrate and make the most of our industrial heartlands, protecting 
floorspace capacity in employment areas and encouraging industrial 
intensification. To ensure new development  maximise s the blue -green Chapter 2  
Spatial vision and objectives 
21 Strategic objectives 
connectivity of employment areas, contributing to positive placemaking to 
attract businesses and investment. 
15. To support new office development in Enfield Town, the district centres and 
Meridian Water.  To encourage the delivery of workspaces of a range of sizes and configurations to provide the spaces that small to medium enterprises need to thrive, including flexible and affordable workspaces, and co-working options close to residential communities. 
16. To diversify town centres, enabling them to serve as growing and vibrant 
hubs with quality public spaces providing an attractive setting for civic 
activities, shopping, leisure, culture and social interaction, supplemented by 
local centres and parades which provide amenities and servic es within easy 
reach of where people live. 
A distinct and leading part of London 
17. To strengthen the rural parts of Enfield as a leading destination in the London 
National Park City – a place for people to come and experience nature, with 
opportunities to walk and cycle through connected habitats of rewilded 
corridors and experience the highlights of historic and leisure attractions. To 
support the varied qualities of the r ural parts of Enfiel d, including food 
growing, nature recovery, thriving economic contributor  and landscape value. 
18. To protect existing community facilities and ensure that new homes are supported by high quality infrastructure, including education, health, sports, cultural facilities and digital infrastructure, creating safe green attractive 
neighbourhoods with a good quality of life. To work with partners to ensure essential facilities will be within easy reach of where people live, and can be properly funded through planning contributions, alongside wider sources of infrastructure funding.  
19. To focus growth and investment to the Borough’s major and district centres 
(Enfield Town, Angel Edmonton, Edmonton Green, Palmers Green, 
Southgate) to support the delivery of new homes, jobs, leisure and cultural 
facilities. To work with partners to deliver a cultural renaissance in Enfield.  
20. To draw on the valuable character and heritage of Enfield’s communities in managing growth. To use place-based policies to put local distinctiveness at the heart of placemaking and manage proposals for tall buildings to ensure that new development can be sensitively accommodated. To ensure that 
designated heritage assets and views (strategic and local) are protected and 
enhanced.  Strategic Policy  
SP SS1: Spatial strategy  
22 
 2.4 Enfield’s spatial strategy  
2.4.1  The spatial strategy sets the strategic direction for the plan by identifying how growth 
will be distributed across the Borough over the plan period.  The London Plan seeks 
to promote good growth in London by building strong inclusive communities, making 
the best use of land, creating a healthy city, delivering homes, growing a good 
economy and increasing efficiency and climate change resilience. I t is necessary to 
ensure that the Borough’s future growth is pursued and planned in the most 
sustainable way through a set of overarching policy principles set out in the ELP. 
This includes:  
• Maintaining a good balance between economic, social and environmental 
objectives;  
• Creating liveable places for people to live, study, work and visit; and  
• Reducing the borough’s carbon footprint and creating resilient and adaptive 
environments in this time of ‘climate emergency’.  
2.4.2  The Council ’s preferred spatial strategy is outlined in SS1: Spatial S trategy  and in 
the Figure 2.1 .  It seeks to provide a sustainable spatial response which balances 
the need for ambitious levels of growth with a desire to ensure that it is socially and 
economically inclusive and environmentally sustainable.  P rotection and 
enhancement of Enfield’s valu ed characteristics, assets and identities is a 
cornerstone of the approach.  
Strategic Policy SP SS1: Spatial Strategy   
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  SS1 Spatial strategy   
1. The Council ’s overarching spatial strategy is to provide for sustainable growth with 
supporting infrastructure across the Borough whilst facilitating nature recovery and 
improvements to green and blue spaces and access to them.   
2. Provision will be made for at least 25,000 new homes up to 2039 with a large 
proportion of the Borough’s future development needs provided by the four  main 
placemaking areas of Meridian Water, Southbury, Crews Hill and Chase Park.    
3. High quality , well designed development that enhanc es urban greening will occur 
across the urban area with particular focus on town centres and transport nodes. 
Redevelopment of brownfield land, vacant and underused buildings for new housing 
and employment uses and use of smaller sites across the urban area will be 
prioritised.  Tall building development will only occur  where it is exemplar y in quality 
and in appropriate urban locations.  
4. Enfield Town, Meridian Water, Edmonton Green, Southbury, Southgate, New 
Southgate and Angel Edmonton will be major urban foci of high quality growth, 
accommodating a range of employment, retail, leisure, housing, community  and 
cultural uses and enhanced public realm to support their roles as vibrant centres.  The 
centres will also act as green focal points in the wider green and blue network with 
green infrastructure providing a strong framework for their development.  Strategic Policy 
SP SS1: Spatial strategy 
23 5.Existing residential neighbourhoods will be the focus of smaller scale developments
and improvements to connectivity, local environmental improvements, as well as
improvements to local infrastructure and services.
6.Meridian Water will be the borough’s largest residential -led mixed use developm ent
pr
oviding transformational change of brownfield land.  New housing-led developm ent
w
ill focus on land west of the River Lee in this plan period to support its role within th e
Lee V
alley and north London. Further mixed use development of the East Bank is
anticipated post 2039.  Higher intensity development will be encouraged withi n and
near
 to the Meridian Water station to make the most of sustainable transport links .
7.C
rews Hill will be regenerated and extended to form a sustainable rural gateway
settlement providing access to countryside activities and the surrounding mosaic  of
gr
een and blue spaces and networks. Delivery of the Crews Hill gateway settlem ent
w
ill extend beyond this plan peri od.
8.C
hase Park will provide a deeply green extension to the urban area accommodating
residential uses , facilitating improved access to the countryside and drawi ng the
r
ewilding areas of Enfield Chase into  the urban areas.  Delivery of Chase Park will
extend beyond this plan peri od.
9.E
mployment needs will be met through the intensification of existing industrial areas ,
and new
 sites in urban and rural locations.  A new logistics hub close to Junction 24 of
the M
25 will provide for a significant amount of the Borough’s employment needs i n
the pl
an period.  Cross boundary expansion of the hub may provide for additional
employment needs bey ond 2039.
10.E
mployment areas will see transformation of their environmental quality and amenities
to make them attractive, welcoming and healthy places in which to work and visit– and
bec
ome more sensitively integrated with the wider neighbourhoods within which they
sit.
11.S
mall sites on the edge of the urban area near Hadley Wood, Forty Hall and Juncti on
25 of the M
25 will provide for additional housing and employment developm ent.
12.R
ural areas will largely be managed for ambitious nature recovery and rewilding and a
m
osaic of sustainable countryside uses including food production, forestry, eco-
tourism , recreation, education, leisure, sporting excellence and natural burial.  Rural
development will be managed to exponentially improve the quality, accessibility  and
s
ustainability of rural areas for the benefit of all.
13.The Green Belt will be protected from inappropriate development in line wi th
G
overnment policy.Strategic Policy  
SP SS1: Spatial strategy  
24 
 Figure 2.3: Key diagram   
 
 Figure 2. 1: Key diagram   Strategic Policy 
SP SS1: Spatial strategy 
25 Explanatory text  
2.4.3 Enfield will have many different types of growth requirements to accommodate over 
the period to 2039 – housing, employment, recreation/leisure, nature recovery and 
biodiversity, climate change adaptation and mitigation measures, infrastructure, 
burial needs and infrastructure to name a few.   
2.4.4 Enfield faces significant and unique challenges in establishing its housing growth requirements and a range of quantum options have been developed to address this uncertainty ranging from 17,000 to 55,000 additional new homes.  Details of how the 
housing quantum options have been derived is set out in detail in the Housing Topic Paper 2021. When combined with other land use needs these have created the following three growth options : 
•Option 1:  Baseline growth by accommodating 17,000 new homes with som
e
other
 land uses, including limited nature recovery and green and bl ue
i
nfrastructure investm ent.
•O
ption 2: Medium growth by accommodating 25,000 new homes with a full
range of land uses, including extensive nature recovery and green and bl ue
i
nfrastructure investm ent.
•O
ption 3:  High growth by accommodating 55,000 new homes with a full r ange of
l
and uses  including some nature recovery and green and blue infrastructur e
i
nvestm ent.
2.4.5 Options were generated to consider how each of these growth options could be distributed across the borough.  In developing the options, consideration was given to the requirements of the NPPF and the London Plan.  Use of brownfield land, as well 
as highly  accessible locations, such as town centres, areas around stations (tube and 
rail) given the highest priority for accommodating growth.  The opportunity areas of 
the Lee Valley and New Southgate were also identified as locations to focus development.   
2.4.6 The range of spatial strategy options identified are set out in Table 2.2, along with an 
assessment of their pros and cons and whether or not they became the preferred option.  Details of how the seven spatial strategy options were generated, their key 
charac teristics, and assessments, as well as how the decision-making on the 
preferred option was arrived at is set out in the Enfield Growth Topic Paper, 2021.  Strategic Policy 
SP SS1: Spatial strategy 
(options)  
26 Table 2.2:
 Spatial strategy options 
Option  Key details  Pros and Cons Preferred 
Option?  
1 Baseline growth  
•Based on approximately 17,000
homes
•Delivered in seven urban areas
•No SIL releas e.
•No Green Belt releases
•Some re -wilding developm ent
and designation of Tottenham
Hotspur Football Club (THFC)
as sporting excellence zone
•No future proofing
•Short term focusPros:  
Degree of compliance with London Plan housing policies
No Green Belt or S trategic Industrial Location (SIL)  release
Cons:
Will not address housing crisis
Other land use requirements not met or only partially met
Limited provision for family and affordable accommodati on.
Many housing units  will be  flats and in tall buildings
Poor viability
Will not lev er in significant infrastructure and unable to afford to invest i n
green/blue infrastructure
Plan will be found unsoundNo 
2 Medium Growth 1  
•Based on approximately 25,000
hom
es
•Largely delivered in urban ar ea
•s
even urban placemaking areas
and two rural placemakin g
ar
eas
•No SIL releas e.
•Some Green Belt releasesPros:  
Meets much of housing requirem ent.
O
ther land use requirements met in full, or close to full
Provides for family and affordable accommodation at scal e.
P
ositive viability
Will lever in significant infrastructure and can afford to invest in green/blue
infrastructur e.
N
o SIL release
Positive enhancements to existing employment areasYes  Strategic Policy 
SP SS1: Spatial strategy 
(options)  
27 Option  Key details  Pros and Cons Preferred 
Option?  
•‘Zoning’ approach to mos t of
rural areas to facilita te
dev
elopment of multi layer ed
m
osaic of sustainable rural l and
us
es and creation of National
Park city destination area.
•Future proofing and long -term
planningCons: 
Requires Green Belt release
Risk could be found unsound
3 Medium Growth 2  
•Based on c. 25,000 homes
•Delivered in urban ar ea
•Limited SIL release at Har bet
Road, Meridian Water Eas t
Bank .
•No Green Belt releases
•Some re -wilding developm ent
and designation of THFC as
sporting excellence zone
•Long term planningPros:  
No Green Belt release s
Provides for some family and affordable accommodati on.
Cons:
Other land use requirements not met or only partially met
Housing requirement not met in full
Most housing units will be small and many in tall buildings
Will lever in some infrastructure but largely in the east of the borough .
Very limited ability to invest in green/blue infrastructur e.
Viability poor
Difficulty in securing SIL release under London Plan policy
Plan is likely to be found unsoundNo 
4 High Growth 
•Based on c. 55,000 homes
•Largely delivered in urban ar ea
•7 ur
ban placemaking areas  and
2 r
ural placemaking areas
•Some SIL releas e.P ros: 
Very high levels of growth would bring investment and some benefits  to
E
nfield
C
ons: 
Contrary to London Plan policy and S ecretary of State directionsNo  Strategic Policy  
SP SS1: Spatial strategy  
(options)  
28 
 Option  Key details  Pros and Cons Preferred 
Option?  
• Some Green Belt releases  
• Some re -wilding development 
and designation of Tottenham 
Hotspurs Football Club as 
sporting excellence zone 
• Long term planning  Requires Green Belt release at scale  
 Requires SIL release at scale  
 Many  housing units will be small and many in tall buildings  
 Will lever in some infrastructure  
 Limited ability to invest in green/blue infrastructure.  
 Likely to exceed environmental capacity  
 Will be found unsound  
5 Seeking to accommodate 
majority of development outside 
borough Pros:  
 Limited growth impacts on Borough 
Cons:  
 No willing partners  
 Borough likely to suffer decline or stagnation and unable to lever in 
improvements  
 Plan w ill be found unsound 
 No 
6 Majority of development 
accommodated east of the A10 Pros:  
 Limited impacts on western areas  
Cons:  
 Limited sites –  would need more SIL  
 Capacity of eastern areas likely to be exceeded 
 Stagnation of western areas  
 Inability to invest in green/blue infrastructure.  
 Will not meet need for family housing or deliver significant affordable 
housing  
 Poor viability  
 Inability to address inequality and east /west imbalances  No  Strategic Policy 
SP SS1: Spatial strategy 
(options)  
29 Option  Key details  Pros and Cons Preferred 
Option?  
Plan w ill be found unsound
7 Majority of development 
accommodated west of the A10 Pros:  
Industrial land protected
Positive viability
Cons:
Limited sites – would need more Green Belt
Capacity of western areas likely to be exceeded
Stagnation/decline of eastern areas
Inability to invest in green/blue infrastructure across borough.
Inability to address inequality and east /west imbalances
Plan will be found unsoundNo Strategic Policy  
SP SS2: Making good places  
30 
  
2.4.7  From Table 2.2 it can be seen that option 2 –  the spatial strategy based on ‘Medium 
growth’ with Green Belt released is identified as the preferred spatial strategy. The 
Borough faces a complex and difficult choices in relation to its approach to the spatial 
distribution of growth.  Option 2 is considered to deliver the vision and strategic 
objectives, corporate priorities whilst also providing for an ambitious programme of 
development and allowing a visionary long term approach to the delivery of 
environmental, economic and social enhancements across the Borough.   
 
 Strategic Policy 
SP SS2: Making good places
31   Strategic Policy SP SS2: Making Good Places  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP SS2 Making good places 
1.All development should positively contribute towards sustainable developm ent that
enhanc
es the Borough’s character and contribute to the places in which they ar e
l
ocated.
2.A
ll development, regardless of scale will be expec ted to:
a.be of hi
gh-quality design and make a positive contribution to creating a high-quality
environment that respects and enhances its landscape, townscape and/or heri tage
c
ontext; and
b.be i
nclusive and accessible, making a positive contribution to the lives of Enfield’s
communities .
3.Lar
ger scale developments (of 50 homes or more or 500sqm for non-residential uses)
must:
a. dem
onstrate how it contributes to the vision for the placemaking area it is loc ated
w
ithin;
b.m
ake the best use of land, integrating a mix of uses where appropriate to cr eate
v
ibrant and lively places; and
c.c
reate healthy places which promote active and healthy l ifestyles .
4.D
evelopment proposals mus t:
a.c
ontribute to the provision of social, green and blue, transport and utility
infrastructure to support communities, including on-site provision where there is
evidenc e of need;
b.pr
omote and support the Borough’s rich heritage and cultural assets, contributi ng
to the c
reation and maintenance of local distinctiveness and demonstrate how this
has been achiev ed; and
c.enhanc
e local wildlife and biodiversity, and actively include opportunities for natur e
r
ecovery .
5. The C
ouncil will ensure that development is planned and implemented i n a
c
oordinated way in the identified placemaking areas, guided by Supplementary
Planning Documents (SPD), Area Investment Plans, Masterplans and/or planni ng
br
iefs where appropriate. Pending the preparation of and adoption of Masterplan SPDs
for the identified placemaking areas  and Borough-wide design guide , proposals for
major development will be considered on the basis of good growth principles  and
pol
icies included in this plan and the London Pl an.
6.In s
mall areas or clusters of sites below 100 units, the development of broad concep t
pl
ans or masterplans prepared with  stakeholder groups and developers will  be
s
upported. The approval process for such plans will be mainly via a Supplementary
Planning Document (SPD) legislation.Strategic Policy  
SP SS2: Making good places  
32 
 Explanation  
2.4.8  The NPPF recognises that creating high quality places is fundamental to what the 
planning and development process should achieve. The London Plan also puts ‘good 
growth’ at the heart of its strategy –  seeking to promote and deliver a better, more 
inclusive form of growth on behalf of all Londoners.  
2.4.9  The Council is committed to meeting its growth needs, whilst balancing this with the 
need to create high quality, well -functioning places, with distinctive, local identities. 
The Borough has varying unique qualities and characteristics across it, ranging from 
higher density more urban locations with a vibrant mix of uses, to heritage filled town 
centres, to more rural and natural landscapes. Together these c reate a unique 
identity for the b orough. Together, the characteristics of these places make up the 
distinct identity of the Borough, and have evolved gradually over many years. Good 
growth should build on an area’ s existing qualities and assets, embedding these into 
the areas future identity.  
2.4.10  Enfield is made up of diverse communities. Its neighbourhoods, town centres, green 
and blue spaces, schools, workplaces, community centres and other important local 
places give the Borough its cultural character and create its future. Proposals should 
ensure the creation of an accessible, safe and secure environment for all potential 
users (including the elderly, children and those with a health conditions or 
impairment) to help achieve the vision of creating a place that provides the 
ingredients of a good life for all.  
2.4.11  Opportunities to provide green infrastructure should be taken. The aim should be to 
link proposed new developments with their surroundings, enhance biodiversity and 
create hi gh quality private and public space.  
2.4.12  Applications for larger developments, proposals within c onservation areas and those 
which require listed building consent will need to be accompanied by a Design and 
Access Statement. This should demonstrate how the pl acemaking principles set out 
in this policy have been incorporated and how the development will be accessed by 
all users.  
2.4.13  Within the placemaking areas, the Council intends to prepare Masterplan SPDs to 
guide and coordinate development. The purpose of a Masterplan is to ensure that 
sites come forward in a coherent manner as good town planning and contribute to 
the overall vision and objectives for the area, as developed through the consultation 
process. When prepared and adopted, such guidance will be given weight as a 
material consideration in determining planning applications.   
2.4.14  Prior to the preparation of Masterplan SPDs, it is expected that some sites may come 
forward for redevelopment. This policy therefore welcomes collaborative working 
where necessary  in bringing forward such sites for redevelopment through an agreed 
design concept plan, phasing strategy or masterplan.   
2.4.15  The role of Planning Briefs will be particularly important in bridging the gap between 
the development plan and a planning applicatio n. They will be used to promote the 
development of nearby sites, address a particular site constraint or opportunity and 
give further guidance on the interpretation of the development plan policies and 
principles set out in the Plan.  
  Strategic Policy 
SP SS2: Making good places
33 2.4.16 The design policies  of this plan, along with a range of thematic policies and principles 
will be used to inform the preparation of Masterplan SPDs , Planning Briefs  and 
Borough-wide design guide . Through consultation work on their preparation, local 
communities will have further opportunities to help shape proposals for local areas 
and neighbourhoods.  
2.4.17 The Council will also work with landowners and developers to enable the preparation 
of ‘stakeholder masterplans’ for sites above the thresholds set out in Part 6 of the 
policy . The stakeholder masterplanning process formalises good practice in relation 
to pre-application discussions, by requiring developers of larger sites to engage with 
the Council, local communities  and other stakeholders at an early stage in the 
development process.  
2.4.18 The stakeholder masterplanning process and output should be proportionate to the scale of the planned development and likely complexity of the issues needing to be addressed. Larger, more complex proposals will require a more involved process, engaging a wider range of stakeholders and local interest groups; considering a 
wider range of issues and site options; and the final stakeholder masterplan 
document providing a fuller framework for the preparation and submission of the subsequent planning application.  
2.4.19 The main stages of the stakeholder masterplanning process will be engagement between the Council and stakeholders on key issues, priorities and development 
options; preparation of the draft stakeholder masterplan document; consultation on the draft document; consideration of the consultation responses; and preparation of the final stakeholder masterplan document for approval by the Council.  
2.4.20 The Council will work with applicants  to agree the most appropriate scope and form 
for the stakeholder masterplan document, with a view to ensuring that the process adds value from a placemaking perspective. 
Have your say on… Chapter 2  
1.Do you consider the C ouncil has selected the right spatial strategy option as its preferr ed
option?
•If y
es, please explain why you think this.
•If not, which spatial strategy option do you think the C ouncil should adopt.
Please explain why you think this.
2.Are there any changes you would suggest to the proposed key diagram?
3.Are there any changes you would suggest to the proposed Spatial Strategy policy
wordi ng?
4.H
as the Council missed any other spatial strategy options?Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021  
Chapter 3  
 
34 
 3. Places  
Introduction  
3.1 Delivering sustainable places is an important aspect of spatial planning to address 
the needs and priorities of the Borough and deliver long term benefits to people and 
communities across the Borough and beyond. Successful place making is critical to 
creating attractive, well connected, well -functioning and more liveable communities 
and ensuring development responds posi tively to the characteristics of the Borough. 
3.2 Policy SP SS1  sets out the overall strategy of how and where growth will be 
distributed across the Borough. This section provides more detail on how the 
different areas of the Borough will accommodate this grow th in line with the principles 
of sustainable development.  
3.3 To assist people with understanding and appreciating Enfield’s local distinctiveness 
and to establish place-based priorities for guiding investment and sensitively 
managing new development, this part of the Local Plan is organised around ten 
placemaking areas. Each area will play an important role in supporting the delivery of 
the Borough’s spatial strategy, helping to accommodate growth that meets local 
needs including genuinely affordable housing, new workspace and supporting 
infrastructure. To set out clear expectations and ensure that development is 
sensitively integrated into our neighbourhoods, the Local Plan sets out a clear 
placemaking  vision and requirements for each area. These should be used to inform 
investment decisions and guide development proposals.  
3.4 Our understanding of these places and associated character areas has allowed a 
strategy for growth and intensification to be developed for different parts of the 
Borough. Within this fram ework, some locations can support a greater intensity of 
growth. A Character of Growth study , that forms part of the evidence base for the 
plan, has identified areas where they are appropriate for their character to change or 
to evolve, which will be assis ted by each placemaking policy.  
3.5 Each of the place making policies focus on areas of growth and regeneration in the 
Borough, utilising opportunities where increased capacity and density presents 
significant opportunities to enhance places and bring benefit s to local communities.  
3.6 Each of the place making policies direct development to the most accessible and 
well-connected places, focusing on town centres first, making the most efficient use 
of existing infrastructure including public transport walking and cycling networks. In 
line with the overarching objectives of the plan to create a deeply green place, the 
place making policies promote greener and healthier places that can help improve 
quality of life.  
3.7 By promoting choice (in housing, travel, work and l ifestyle) the place making policies 
foster resilience and adaptability. Each place making policy considers context and 
character, assess performance and identifies key issues and influences. A place 
specific vision and placemaking policy is set out . Site allocations, to include specific 
considerations and requirements, will be highlighted. The place making policies 
should not be considered in isolation as they build from the broader policy foundation 
related to the plan as a whole. 
3.8 The parts of the Borough not covered by place making policies will still experience 
change, but it is  not expected to be at the same scale as the defined areas. Borough-
wide policies will apply where proposals come forward in these parts of the Borough Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 
Chapter 3 
35
 (as well as Borough-wide design guide and relevant Conservation Area Appraisals  
and Management Plans (CAAMPs) . 
3.9 Within each placemaking area, site allocations have been identified as particularly 
important for delivery. These will accommodate new homes and jobs alongside 
necessary infrastructure, such as open space, community and cultural uses, and health and education facilities.  
3.10 The placemaking policies set out the more detailed requirements for placemaking 
areas, to deliver against the Plan’s strategic objectives. When determining planning 
applications, consideration of principles applied to site allocations will be important, subject to an up-to-date assessment of need and the agreed viability position of the 
scheme. This approach will ensure that site allocations remain deliverable. T he 
place-making areas are shown in Figure 3.1.  Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021  
Chapter 3  
 
36 
 Figure 3.1: Place making areas  
Enfield Town 
37
 3.11 Each site allocation include s development and design requirements as well as 
necessary infrastructure requirements , such as new and enhanced open space, 
street improvements following healthy street principles  health and education facilities. 
These will establish land use principles and design guidelines for  the key 
development sites. These sites have been included within the Local Plan because 
they are considered necessary to support delivery of the vision for the Borough. Site 
allocations will only include development considerations and design requirements 
that are specific to the site. All sites will be subject to the placemaking policy and 
Local Plan Policies which should be read in conjunction with the site allocations.  
3.12 Like the Borough-wide policies, the place-making policies have been prepared in the context of the NPPF and the London Plan. There are a wide range of other corporate initiatives and strategies, including those related to development and regeneration, transport, housing, education, cultural development and climate change that have also influenced the evolution of these policies, which need to be interpreted in the context of the broad policy framework and the Plan as a whole. 
3.13 There are ten proposed placemaking areas. The placemaking policies begin from 
Enfield Town at the heart of the Borough, and Southbury where there are ambitious 
aspirations for growth that is well connected to Enfield’s  town centres . The next 
three policies (Policies PL3-5) address the aspirations for growth in the three Edmonton wards, where there are substantial council -led development projects that 
seek to improve the quality of life for residents in the most deprived part of the 
Borough. Following this, policies PL6-7 set out aspirations for how growth might be 
accommodated in key locations within the west of the Borough . The last three 
policies (policies PL8-10) set out the vision and ambition for the rural north of the Borough. The policies in this section of the plan are as follows :  
•Strategic Policy SP PL1: Enfield Town
•S
trategic Policy SP  PL2: Southbury
•S
trategic Policy SP PL3: Edmonton Green
•S
trategic Policy SP PL4: Angel Edmonton
•S
trategic Policy SP PL5: Meridian Water
•S
trategic Policy SP PL6: Southgate
•S
trategic Policy SP PL7:  New Southgate
•S
trategic Policy SP PL8: Rural Enfield – a leading destination in London’s
National Park City
•S
trategic Policy SP PL9: Crews Hill
•S
trategic Policy SP PL10: Chase Park
Have your say… 
3.14 In relation to the proposed place making areas: 
1.Have we included all appropriate placemaking areas in the urban ar ea to
ac
commodate grow th?
2.Are there any proposed placemaking areas we have proposed that you believ e
s
hould not be incl uded?Enfield Town 
38
 3.1 Enfield Town  
Context and Characteristics 
3.1.1 Enfield Town is the cultural hub of the Borough as well as its primary shopping, 
commercial and administrative centre. Despite being absorbed into the urban area of 
Greater London, Enfield Town retains the character of the market town from which it originated. It is designated as one of London’s Major Centres in the London Plan and 
serves the entire Borough and beyond. The placemaking area also includes parts of 
Enfield Chase, Enfield Playing Fields, Chase Green and Bush Hill Golf Course. 
3.1.2 Most of the town is designated as a conservation area which boasts many attractive 
old buildings and a market square. Numerous green spaces such as Town Park and Chase Green and the New River Loop run through and around the town centre. The town centre includes a market square, a historic parish church, civic buildings and the attractive historic areas around Gentlemen’s Row and Enfield Grammar School to the north of the town centre. The area to the south of the main high street includes two large multi -storey car parks and retail development.  
3.1.3 Enfield Town benefits from good strategic connections, with the A110 running through the heart of the town centre Enfield also contains two train stations, Enfield 
Town and Enfield Chase, which provide access to London’s Liverpool Street and Moorgate stations to the south, and Welwyn Garden City and Stevenage to the north. 
Enfield Town Place making  Vision  
Enfield Town will be a twenty -first century market town. It will continue to be the focus of 
the Borough’s civic, entertainment, leisure, commercial  and retail activity, but the centre 
will have evolved to also include a wider mix of uses, including new homes , with new built 
form that responds positively to existing surroundings . Access to nearby green spaces 
and watercourses will continue to be excellent, with new street improvements and public 
realm projects drawing these qualities into the heart of the area and improving the 
attractiveness of active travel to and through the area. It will become a leading destination 
for culture and entertainment, acting as an inclusive cultural centre supported by an 
evening and night-time economy.  Enfield Town 
39
 Figure 3.2: Enfield Town placemaking vision 
Strategic Policy  
SP PL1: Enfield Town  
 
40 
 Strategic Policy SP PL1: Enfield Town  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL1 Enfield Town  
To realise the placemaking vision, development in Enfield Town must:  
1. contribute to a coordinated process of town centre regeneration that responds 
positively to the unique context and characteristics, reinforcing its role as the 
Borough’s major centre and principal civic and cultural hub. The Council will prepare 
an updated Enfield Town masterplan SPD, alongside preparation of a sustainable 
placemaking strategy (also in the form of an SPD)  to support the delivery of the 
placemaking vision for Enfield Town. Development in this area must be brought 
forward in accordance with a planned and coordinated approach for this area as set 
out in adopted and emerging SPDs.  
2. contribute to deliver ing a mix of uses, including new housing, varied retail, cultural and 
commu nity offer alongside office and residential development to diversify the centre 
and improve resilience, whilst ensuring that the centre’s predominant civic, commercial 
and cultural role is maintained and enhanced.  
3. demonstrate how it will assist with secur ing the centre’s long- term vitality and viability. 
This may include demonstrating how non-residential spaces can be flexibly adapted in 
the long term to respond to changing needs.  
4. demonstrate how it has r esponded appropriately to the components of histori c and 
cultural heritage that form Enfield Town’s identity. This includes the market square, 
area around Gentleman’s row and the Parish Church and green and blue features 
such as Town Park and New River. Any developments adjoining the market square 
will be required to provide active frontages onto this space.  
5. contribute to enhancing the public realm to make walking and cycling significantly 
more accessible, safer and attractive environment. Development will be expected to 
contribute towards improvements to the public realm surrounding Enfield Town and 
Enfield Chase stations.  
6. facilitate or contribute to clear and coordinated green and blue enhancements through 
street improvements and public realm improvements across the placemaking area. All 
development must also contribute to enhancing nearby open spaces and 
watercourses to create a more attractive environment surrounding the major centre.  
7. retain or re-provide existing workspace and deliver net increases wherever possible. A 
broad range of workspace typologies will be supported within the centre and its 
immediate surrounds, with priority given to office floorspace and flexible workspace. 
Provision of workspace suitable for small businesses, will be strongly encouraged, 
particularly where the space is designed to support the cultural industries. 
8. contribute to reversing the inward-looking nature of elements of the town centre, 
creating new street-based routes through it, increasing the prominence of entrances  
and reducing the prominence of servicing and inactiv e frontages .   
9. tall buildings and other high-density developments will be concentrated around the 
railway stations , other key gateways  and parts of the retail core and London Road. 
Within Enfield Town ‘tall buildings’ will be assessed in line with Policy D M DE6: Tall 
buildings  and Figure 7.4 (and any updating successors) . Strategic Policy 
SP PL1: Enfield Town  
41
 10.be in accordance with a sustainable placemaking strategy  set out in Figure 3.2 , whic h
w
ill be informed by a review of safety and lighting of the walking/cycling routes, i n
or
der to create an inclusive environment that can support an evening and night tim e
ec
onomy that is  welcoming to all .
Explanation 
3.1.4 The key role Enfield Town plays within the Borough will continue. Enfield Town has a 
significant variety of shopping, cultural and leisure facilities. The community and cultural facilities in the vicinity will be leveraged to create a destination.  
3.1.5 A number of key development sites have been identified as likely to come forward in 
the plan period. As such, a coordinated framework providing further guidance may be 
appropriate to guide the overarching strategy for development in this area.  
3.1.6 This placemaking area contains five site allocations:  
•SA1: St Anne’s Catholic High School for girls
•SA2: Palace Gardens shopping centr e
•S
A3: 100 Church Street
•SA4: Enfield Town station and the former Enfield Arms, Genotin R oad
•SA5
: Enfield Civic Centr e
•S
A6: Southbury Road superstore
•SA7: Oak House, 43 Baker Str eet
3.1.7 Providing a more varied mix of uses in these developments will help ensure long 
term vitality. The evening and night-time economy and cultural offer could be impro ved and therefore development that supports further diversification will be 
supported. Likewise, the introduction of additional employment and housing opportunities will support the vitality of the centre and add to the centre’s resilience.  
3.1.8 Enfield Town has a unique character. Whilst the centre will evolve to accommodate 
growth, it will need to balance this with retaining a distinct identity, which is drawn 
from its cultural, heritage and natural assets. T o deliver ‘good growth’, development 
should respond sensitively to these. This will include revealing, celebrating, restoring and telling Enfield’s story including in relation to the market square, the area around 
Gentleman’s row and the Parish Church and green and blue features such as Town Park and New River.  The open spaces around the town centre offer opportunities for 
a range of leisure and recreational activities and provide valued habitat for flora and fauna. Promoting this characteristic should be a central part of any development proposals that arise.  
3.1.9 All development will have to contribute towards public realm and open space improvements. Improvements to the public realm will include:  
•enhancing access between the town centre and Town Park
;
•the r
enewal of the Enfield Town station building and public realm ;
•the need to c reate a positive sense of arrival at Enfield Town and Enfield Chas e
s
tations ;
•enhanc
ing the public realm and general pedestrian environment in the area ; and
•inv
estigating improvements to road junctions and circulation, including alterations
to the gyratory system and improving facilities and the environment at all crossi ng
poi
nts.Strategic Policy  
SP PL1: Enfield Town  
 
42 
 3.1.10  Improvements to open space will include:  
• enhancements to Enfield Town Park and Chase Green;  
• grey to green corridors along key gateways into the town centre ( through the use 
of meadows, S ustainable Urban Drainage Systems  etc.);  
• activation of the library green and integration of adjacent spaces and 
developments; 
• improvement to existing entrances to Enfield Town park;  
• enhancing and increasing the prominence of the Enfield Loop including the 
incorporation of east-west cycle links ;    
• expanding and connecting wildlife corridors and/or creating green links between 
open spaces to provide corridors for wildlife; and 
• increasing the prominence of the New R iver Walk.  
3.1.11  Connectivity to central London is an asset for Enfield Town. As gateways to this area, 
the two railway stations also contribute to the sense of arrival for visitors. The 
environment around Enfield Town station is currently very poor and will benefit from 
enhancement. Improvements to this area will be a focus to create a safer , more 
accessible and inclusive and more pleasant pedestrian environment.  
3.1.12  Traffic dominates the appearance of the town centre and the gyratory creates the 
feeling of an i sland site. The gyratory and narrow pavement widths could be 
improved to address safety concerns and create a more pleasant, pedestrian-
focussed environment. This will assist with creation of a healthy and liveable place 
that prioritises well -being. 
3.1.13  In order to accommodate growth there will be an increase in the number of tall 
buildings . The appropriateness of siting of proposed tall buildings will be assessed 
taking into consideration the findings of the Character of Growth Study  and any 
updating successor . The design response will be assessed considering how 
proposals recognise its historic quality and realise the potential to create a gateway 
into the town centre and the Borough as a whole.  
Have your say on Enfield Town…  
3.1.14  In relation to the proposed Enfield Town placemaking area:  
1. Does the vision for Enfield Town set out an appropriate vision for its future? If not, 
what components do you think should be changed or are missing?  
2. Will the proposed Enfield Town placemaking policy help to adequately deliver the 
aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes, omissions or 
additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision?  
 
 
 Southbury  
43
 3.2 Southbury 
Context and characteristics 
3.2.1 Southbury is located approximately one mile to the east of Enfield Town, on the 
western side of the A10 (Great Cambridge Road). It lies on a strategic east-west 
connection in the Borough from Enfield Town to the Lee Valley.  
3.2.2 The area is occupied by retail parks and industrial parks. The retail park serves a 
fairly large catchment – covering most of the Borough. The frontages onto Great 
Cambridge Road offer a high degree of visibility, therefore attracting high land values 
for retail. The industrial park covers approximately 50ha and serves a very large 
catchment. It contains a mix of employment uses including warehouses, manufacturing space as well as some offices. Most of these are in good condition.  
3.2.3 The area is characterised by large format retail and industrial warehousing/sheds. 
The public realm is of a generally poor quality and has scope for improvement. The surrounding area beyond is characterised by suburban terraced and semi -detached 
housing.  
3.2.4 The Southbury area is situated well in relation to transport connections. Southbury station, to the east with trains to London Liverpool Street serves the area. The A10 
provides good north-south connectivity and has a number of bus routes to Waltham 
Cross and Turnpike Lane. Southbury Road is also well served by buses to other parts of the Borough. Cycling routes around the area are incomplete or of poor 
quality.   
Southbury Place making  Vision  
Southbury will act as a key gateway in to the Lee Valley, Ponders End and Enfield Town. 
New residential -led mixed use development will be introduced including some taller 
buildings that will mark the area’s role as a gateway to Enfield. It will have transformed 
into a coherent, exemplary, high-density, mixed -use quarter containing pocket parks and 
high quality public realm with new street trees and planting that offer a highly attractive 
environment to live and work in. Intelligent landscape design will improve air quality and 
reduce noise pollution from the A10. Intensification and co-location within the Great 
Cambridge Road Strategic Industrial Location will provide good local employment 
opportunities and renewed employment floorspace, together with the proposed SIL 
extension areas. Southbury  
44
 Figure 3.3: Southbury placemaking vision 
Strategic Policy 
SP PL2: Southbury  
45
 Strategic Policy SP2: Southbury 
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL2 Southbury 
To realise the placemaking vision set out in Figure 3.3, development in Southbury must: 
1.be delivered through a holistic masterplanned and comprehensive approach. T he
Co
uncil will prepare a spatial framework or masterplan for Southbury, to be adopted as
an SPD, alongside preparation of a bespoke public realm design guide/code to
s
upport delivery of the placemaking vision for Southbury. Development in this ar ea
m
ust be brought forward in accordance with a planned and coordinated approach for
this area as set out in adopted and emerging SPDs .
2.pr
ovide an appropriate mix of uses with potential for creation of a new local centr e.
The quantum
 of non-residential floorspace delivered on each site should lead to no net
l
oss, unless it can be demonstrated this is not viable. This should be achieved by
offsetting any r eduction in retail floorspace by provision of appropriate employment,
leisure uses , community and cultural facil ities.
3.dem
onstrate how individual elements of the development will contribute to maki ng a
good pl
ace (in line with policy SP SS2: Making good places ), in particular how it will :
a.l
ead to an appropriate phased release of the retail park ;
b. c
reate a coherently planned and appropriate distribution of scale and massi ng of
bui
lt form ;
c.c
reate urban blocks that provide a street network (now and in the future) that will
i
ntegrate well with surrounding residential areas;
d. ensure active frontages are located along key routes  through and around the site
(such as Southbury Road and the A10) to promote active travel ;
e. or
ientate blocks to minimise the negative noise and air quality impacts of the A 10
on the publ
ic realm  as well as within buildings themselves. Single aspect homes or
balconies facing the A10 will be resisted; and
f.ens
ure tall building aid legibility and the heights of new buildings rel ate
appr
opriately to future surrounding developmen t.
4.dem
onstrate how they will improve the pedestrian environment along the A10 through
pr
ovision of a green buffer and facilitate delivery of a new cycle lane in both directions
of the A10 Great Cambridge Road ;
5.dem
onstrate that the design of high-density development is of exemplary quality in
or
der to be considered acceptable. T he principle of appropriately sited tall buildings -
of a suitable scale - in this location will be acceptable to help accommodate growth in
l
ine with Policy DE6: Tall buildings and Figure 7.4 and any updating successors .
6.contr
ibute to improvements to the public realm and townscape particularly along Gr eat
C
ambridge Road and Southbury Road. Financial contributions will be sought. Specific
priorities include improving safety and security of the station environment, installi ng
new
 crossing points, pedestrian/cycle routes and signage, planting new street trees
and upgrading existing station entrances / forecourts. Developments in the direc t
v
icinity of the station should assist towards enhancing the visual presenc e of the
s
tation within the wider ar ea.
7.deliver or contribute towards new pocket park s and contribute towards improv ed
accessibility and enhancements to nearby open spaces.Strategic Policy  
SP PL2: Southbury  
 
46 
 Explanation  
3.2.5  Southbury has an existing retail park that is situated in an out- of-town location. There 
is an opportunity for this typology to be updated to reflect modern needs and to 
intensify the use of this land. Likewise, the introduction of additional employment and 
housing opportunities will support the vitality of the non-residential uses creating a 
new local centre and add to this new centre’s resilience. There is significant 
opportunity for diversification of the mix of uses offered be supported. 
3.2.6  The surrounding areas suffer from lack of good access to high quality open spaces 
and there is poor connectivity between Ponders End to the east and Enfield Town. 
Southbury road is a key junction between these and redevelopment can enhance this 
connection between Ponders End and Enfield Town.  
3.2.7  A number of key development sites have been identified as likely to come forward in 
the plan period. As such, a coordinated framework providing further guidance may be 
appropriate to guide the overarching strategy for  development in this area.  
3.2.8  This placemaking area contains five  site allocations:   
• SA8: Sainsburys Crown Road 
• SA9: Colosseum Retail Park  
• SA10: Morrisons, Southbury Road  
• SA11: Southbury Leisure Park  
• SA12: Tesco Superstore, Ponders End Area  
 
3.2.9  There will be a considerable increase in the number of tall buildings, which would be 
considered as anything above 15-storeys. The appropriateness of siting of proposed 
tall buildings will be assessed taking into consideration the findings of the Borough’s 
Character of Growth study  (and any updating successors)  and the impact on heritage 
assets. Significant opportunity exists along Southbury Road and the area around 
Southbury Station. Mitigation such as enhanced public realm and creation of or 
contribution towards creati on of a new pocket park will be required in order to make 
these impacts acceptable and evidence must be provided to show the differing levels 
of harm. 
3.2.10  Connectivity to central London is an asset, however the frequency of train services 
could be increased to make the area more desirable as a place to live and work. The 
area immediately around the station will benefit from enhancement.  
Have your say on Southbury…   
3.2.11  In relation to the proposed Southbury placemaking area:  
1. Does the vision for Southbury set out an appropriate vision for the future of this 
place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or are missing?  
2. Will the proposed placemaking policy for Southbury help to adequately deliver the 
aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes, omissions or 
additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision?  
 Edmonton Green 
47
 3.3 Edmonton Green  
Context and Characteristics 
3.3.1 Edmonton Green is situated in the south of the Borough. It is one of the Borough’s 
district centres. Edmonton Green shopping centre and the surface car parking 
associated with this placemaking area occupies a large proportion of the centre. To 
the west and further south along Fore Street there is also a row of independent 
shops, cafes and amenities that serve the local community.  
3.3.2 The area is mixed in character with development from a range of periods but is 
dominated by the late 1960’s/early 1970’s shopping centre and the three tall buildings within it . The inward facing shopping centre means the roads around it feel 
lacking in life. The Green running along Fore Street and the mature trees within it  
also contribute positively to the local character.  
3.3.3 Some of the most significant buildings in Edmonton are the tall buildings that rise out of the shopping centre (Grampian, Mendip and Pennine House). These are out of 
scale in comparison to the rest of the area but serve as useful landmarks  for the 
district centre. 
3.3.4 The area is centred around the junction between Fore Street, Hertford Road and 
Church Street and is served by Edmonton Green Station which offers Overground 
services to London Liverpool Street station to the south and Enfield Town and Hertford North, to the north. A large bus station is also located at this junction with 
buses to many other parts of the Borough and beyond. The environment around the train and bus station feels traffic dominated due to the proximity to the major roads. Edmonton Green has a variety of shopping, community  and leisure faci lities, 
including the Council’s Leisure Centre and Library .  
Edmonton Green Place making  Vision  
Edmonton Green will be a revitalised district centre with an outward looking high-street. 
The market will to be the focal point of the renewed district centre. Around the market 
there will be a more diverse mix of commercial, cultural, leisure and night-time activities 
together with a large number of new homes supporting new community -led facilities and 
open spaces. Distinctive features such nearby greenspaces will be retained and 
enhanced. It will have benefitted from improvements to the railway line serving the area 
and have improved connections to Angel Edmonton and Meridian Water and the Lee 
Valley Regional Park. The street design will create a pleasant environment for 
pedestrians, with easy crossings at the War Memorial junction. Edmonton Green 
 
48 
 Figure 3.4: Edmonton Green placemaking vision  
 
Strategic Policy 
SP PL 4: Angel Edmonton 
49
 Strategic Policy SP PL3: Edmonton Green 
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL3 Edmonton Green  
To realise the place vision set out in Figure 3.4, development must: 
1.contribute to a coordinated process of regeneration that responds positively to itsunique context and characteristics, reinforcing its role as a district centre. The Council
will use planning tools, such as preparation of a detailed, design codes  and
sustainable place making strategies to support the delivery of the Local Pl
an to
s
upplement this policy. Major development in this area must be brought forward i n
ac
cordance with a masterplan for this area.
2.contribute to creating a revitalised town centre, by ensuring that a significant amount o f
new
 development is directed to the district centre. This will include an intensified ran ge
of ac
tivities and uses to support existing and new communities such as high-quality
housing, workspace, town centre and community uses and supporting infrastructure.
3.provide more coherent and outward looking high- streets creating new street-bas ed
r
outes which increase the prominence of entrances and reducing the prominenc e of
s
ervicing and inactive frontages. Development should successfully stitch back into th e
s
urrounding context and enhance the pedestrian and cycle network in line wi th the
as
pirations set out in Figure 3.4.
4.pr
ovide a more diverse mix of commercial, community, cultural, leisure and night-time
activities together with a large number and range of additional homes supporting newcommunity -led facilities, jobs, public realm improvements and revitalised open spaces
.
U
ses that support sustaining an evening and night-time economy will be supported.
5.ensure that a covered market continues to act as the focal point of a revitalised hig h
s
treet based shopping area; the market may be reloc ated.
6.dem
onstrate how it has responded appropriately to the components of historic  and
c
ultural heritage that form Edmonton Green’s identity. Distinctive features such as th e
near
by greenspaces should be retained and enhanc ed. Proposals will be expec ted to
c
ontribute to removing the Fore Street and Church Street conservation areas from  the
H
istoric England register of Heritage at Risk and enhancing those at The Crescent an d
M
ontagu Road Cemeteries .
7.P
roposals for tall buildings in the area will only be acceptable in those locations
identified as being appropriate for tall buildings having regard to the requirements  of
P
olicy DM DE6: Tall buildings  and Figure 7.4 and any updating successor .
8.Proposals for new employment generating development should be concentrated withinthe district centre. This may include introducing a wider range of job opportunities, a
nd
l
eisure and food and beverage opportunities to diversify the centre and improv e
r
esilience. Opportunities should also be taken to deliver new and improve d
w
orkspaces through the intensification of sites and along with improving the quality  of
ex
isting employment spaces .
9.P
roposals will be expected to contribute to enhancing the public realm to mak e
w
alking and cycling safer and more accessible and attractive. This will incl ude
i
mprovements :
a.between buildings, the shopping centre and railway line through the introducti on of
urban greening and the creation of lively street culture and safe environment;Strategic Policy  
SP PL 4: Angel Edmonton  
50 
 b. around Edmonton Green station, including the sense of arrival as well as creating 
a distinctive arrival point into the town centre, with greater public transport and 
cycle access and promoting car -free developments; and  
c. wider links to Angel Edmonton and M eridian Water and the Lee Valley Regional 
Park. 
10. Infrastructure required to support sustainable development includes:  
a. the potential to remove the current roundabout and connect the war memorial 
island to the station or concourse to provide safer more direc t connections and 
more useable open space; 
b. improvements to bus services and connections to ensure good public transport 
access. The Council will also work with the TfL and others to upgrade access and 
capacity at Edmonton Green Station; and 
c. the integration of sustainable urban drainage (SuDS)  measures and urban 
greening into the public realm as well as buildings, to reduce flood risk, ensure a 
significant net gain in biodiversity and reduc e the heat island effect. The Council 
will support the introduction of rain gardens, swales and other sustainable urban 
drainage features as well as opportunities to deculvert Salmons Brook, reinforcing 
the role of Edmonton Green as an important community asset for the B orough. 
11. Proposals should be designed to exemplary environmental standards and play a large 
role in making Edmonton more resilient to climate change and greener . Major 
development will be expected to provide connect to and if possible extend the existing, 
or planned future heat network on or in proximity to their site. Minor developments 
should optimise opportunities to connect to existing heat networks.  
12. Opportunities to enhance the environment around the railway arches through 
regeneration will be supported. 
 
Explanation  
3.3.5  Redevelopment should seek to rej uvenate and strengthen the role of Edmonton 
Green as an important district centre by transforming the tired and inward-looking 
shopping centre into an outward facing, better connected, safer and greener piece of 
town based on high-quality new streets and s paces. This will require a diversification 
of main town centre uses.  
3.3.6  The introduction of a greater mix of uses will support the vitality and viability of the 
district centre and add to its resilience. Whilst retail uses which play a valuable role to 
the existing community should still form a large and important part of the mix, the 
continuing shift to on-line shopping and decline of bricks and mortar retail means that 
there is a need to introduce additional reasons to visit and spend time in the town 
centr e – including rejuvenated community services, offices and workspaces, leisure 
activities, more places to eat and drink and an improved public realm to meet and 
socialise. The increased density should be supported by provision of appropriate 
levels of community and cultural facilities which can also contribute to the centre’s 
resilience. The covered market is a valuable local asset that helps give Edmonton its  
unique identity and so must be retained. The evening and night-time economy could 
also be improved to transform the area into a place that has activity throughout a 
greater part of the day.  
3.3.7  The mix of homes that is delivered in this area will seek to serve local need and 
complement the existing dwelling and tenure mix. 
3.3.8  As a district centre with excellent transport links, the character of Edmonton will 
change significantly to provide more homes, and facilities to serve the wider area and Strategic Policy 
SP PL 4: Angel Edmonton 
51
 a wider range of job opportunities for local people. This will include an increase in the 
number of tall buildings. Given the existing tall buildings, the mixed-use nature, being 
served by a railway station, and the strategic location of Edmonton on the route 
between other nearby centres this is considered to be an appropriate location for  tall 
buildings to assist with housing delivery. Tall buildings, where appropriate, should also help to deliver much needed new homes and more generous and well -designed 
public realm to improve the pedestrian experience. 
3.3.9 Redevelopment provides an opportunity to create new active frontages and improve permeability across the shopping centre site – connecting existing street and routes, 
which will help activate this part of the town centre throughout the day and improve the pedestrian experience, alongside public realm improvements. The public realm 
and nearby open spaces could be improved to create a more pleasant, pedestrian-focussed environment.  
3.3.10 The Salmons Brook is a hidden asset that has great potential to contribute to the 
placemaking vision for the area and uncover part of the area’s past through 
redevelopment, tying it back to the site’s history and bringing a more heritage-led approach to the character of the district centre, whilst building in climate resilience in a public realm that creates a pleasant and distinctive environment. 
3.3.11 Redevelopment will also provide the opportunity to encourage a modal shift in the area through reduction of car parking and improvements to walking, cycling and public transport infrastructure.  
Have your say on Edmonton Gree n…  
3.3.12 In relation to the proposed Edmonton Green placemaking area: 
1.Does the vision for Edmonton Green set out an appropriate vision for the futur e of
thi
s place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or ar e
m
issing?
2.Will the proposed placemaking policy for Edmonton Green help to adequately
deliver the aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes ,
om
issions or additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision ?Strategic Policy 
SP PL 4: Angel Edmonton 
52
 3.4 Angel Edmonton  
Context and Characteristics 
3.4.1 Angel Edmonton is situated in the south of the Borough. It is one of the Borough’s 
district centres offering a range of shops and amenities that serve the needs of the 
local community located along Fore Street. The A406 North Circular Road to the 
north poses as a si gnificant physical constraint.  
3.4.2 The area is mixed in character - beyond the high street, the surrounding residential 
areas are mainly comprised of low rise suburban terraced housing interspersed with taller modernist blocks within council estates, as well as recent higher density developments such as Highmead on Fore Street.  
3.4.3 Fore Street runs through the heart of Angel Edmonton, connecting to Edmonton Green district centre to the north and Tottenham to the south. Silver Street station 
provides  direct services to London Liverpool Street station to the south and Enfield 
Town and Hertford North, to the north. A number of buses along this road also provide access to other parts of the Borough and beyond. Silver Street station is 
remote from the main high street and accessed by crossing the A406. The level changes and pedestrian railings act as a barrier to movement across the Stirling Way further exacerbating this issue. The station could be better integrated with the area 
with new and enhanced walking routes and public realm improvements to create a 
more pleasant, pedestrian-focussed environment. 
Angel Edmonton Place making  Vision  
Angel Edmonton H igh Street will be revitalised through community -led initiatives and new 
community facilities, schools and sports and recreational uses. New connections will be 
made across the North Circular Road to minimise the impact of traffic flows and clean air 
measures will reduce the reliance on motorised transport. Active travel will be the primary 
means of movement with attractive opportunities for this both on upgraded streets and on 
principal routes and connected streets. New rapid transport and green active travel 
corridors will link the new neighbourhood at Meridian Water to Edmonton Green and 
Angel  Edmonton. Upton and Raynham, the Shires Estate and Joyce Avenue and Snells 
Park, will have been transformed into high-quality mixed tenure neighbourhoods. They will 
act as exemplars of sustainability and place making. Strategic Policy 
SP PL 4: Angel Edmonton 
53
 Figure 3.5: Angel Edmonton placemaking vision 
Strategic Policy  
SP PL 4: Angel Edmonton  
54 
 Strategic Policy SP PL4: Angel Edmonton  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL4 Angel Edmonton 
To realise the place vision set out in Figure 3.5, development must:  
1. contribute to a coordinated process of regeneration that responds positively to the 
unique context and characteristics.  
2. provide new spaces for small business, culture and community uses. Proposals in 
close proximity to the high street must also explore opportunities to provide non-
residential spaces.  
3. contribute to creating a thriving mixed-use place offering a range of housing 
typologies, which may include dense forms of residential development. Development 
along the high street should reinforce and create a coherent route along Fore Street. 
Proposals elsewhere must respect the predominantly lower -rise character of the area. 
Tall buildings will only be accepted in appropriat e locations as set out in Policy DM 
DE6 Tall buildings  and Figure 7.4 (and any updating successor) .  
4. provide employment uses that contribute towards the creation of a wide range of new 
jobs. Provision of affordable workspace and creative studios in this area will be 
supported.  
5. contribute to improvements to the blue and green infrastructure network through 
linkages to surrounding green spaces and waterways. Access to Pymmes Park should 
be improved with better security, access arrangement and play space. Contributions 
will be sought towards this.  
6. contribute to Sustainable Urban Drainage enhancements in the wider neighbourhood 
as part of an overall action plan. Opportunities to de-culvert Pymmes Brook should be 
explored.  
7. contribute towards and/or facilitate  improv ing connections between Silver Street 
Station and Fore Street including markers for intuitive wayfinding, a variety of public 
realm spaces which are pedestrian and cycle friendly integrated with existing street 
and movement patterns.  
8. contribute towards d eliver ing improvements to the walking and cycling environment 
through the implementation of cycleways and enhancing the pedestrian environment 
to encourage uptake of active travel. New cycle and green routes east and west from 
North Middlesex University Hospital to Meridian Water will be supported.  
9. contribute to improving the crossing facilities and arrangements of the North Circular 
Road to prioritise active travel and to better connect both sides of the road.  
10. reduce the reliance on on-street and surface car parks, working towards car -free 
development in line with public transport improvements. 
11. contribute to improvements to the environment along the North Circular Road through 
tree planting, wild meadows and other public realm works and appropriately scaled 
development that directly addresses the road, while protecting the health and 
wellbeing of int ended occupants.  Strategic Policy 
SP PL 4: Angel Edmonton 
55
 Explanation 
3.4.4 Redevelopment should seek to revitalise the high street and its role as an important 
district centre. The function and success of the district centre should be maintained while diversifying and improving the offer to build resilience. This will include encouraging a wider range of uses along the high street. Some provision of 
workspace in this location, such as a mix of affordable workspace and creative studios will also help contribute to the high streets vitality.  
3.4.5 As an area with large housing estates which are planned for renewal it will be capable of delivering a large number of new homes. The mix of homes that is delivered in this area will seek to serve local need and complement the existing housing mix.  
3.4.6 Alongside this there is likely to be a significant uplift in proposed heights and densities. To maximise the opportunity for growth, well -designed taller buildings in 
the right locations will be accepted. Given the existence of existing tall buildings, the 
mixed -use nature of the high street, and the strategic location on Fore Street which 
serves as a main route between other important destinations, and given the railway 
station this is considered to be an appropriate location for some tall buildings to assist with housing delivery.  
3.4.7 Angel Edmonton currently experiences relatively high crime and anti -social 
behaviour, particularly on the council -owned estates. Development needs to address 
these issues through, in part, good design that encourages passive surveillance of the street and reduced opportunities for crime. 
3.4.8 Access to surrounding green spaces and waterways is poor. Development must 
contribute to improving these links and maximising the contribution that these assets 
can make to people’s quality of life. The Pymmes Brook is a hidden asset that has potential to contribute to the place-making vision for the area and should be integrated and enhanced.  
3.4.9 In general, there is great scope to improve the quality of the public realm to improve the pedestrian experience. 
Have your say on Angel Edmonton… 
3.4.10 In relation to the proposed Angel Edmonton placemaking area: 
1.Does the vision for Angel Edmonton set out an appropriate vision for the futur e of
thi
s place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or ar e
m
issing?
2.Will the proposed placemaking policy for Angel Edmonton help to adequately
deliver the aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes ,
om
issions or additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision ?Strategic Policy 
SP PL5: Meridian Water 
56
 3.5 Meridian Water  
Context and Characteristics 
3.5.1 Meridian Water is situated in the south-eastern corner of the Borough. It is an under -
utilised industrial and retail site, immediately south of the North Circular Road and 
located between Edmonton, Tottenham, and Walthamstow in North London. Being 
sited directly adjacent to the North Circular  Road provides good strategic road 
connectivity to other parts of London and beyond. Whilst t he strategic road network  is 
a key factor behind the success of the industrial and retail land uses. the roads also divide the area, reducing connectivity and making navigation difficult. Large areas of land, including two former gasholder sites, are inaccessible and help to further divide the area. Electricity pylons and the North Circular Road flyover are dominant visual 
elements within the area.  
3.5.2 The existing character of Meridian Water is largely defined by the area’s industrial heritage. It sits within the extensive green Lee Valley with a number of interesting 
and currently under used waterways such as the River  Lee, the Lee River 
Navigation, Pymmes Brook and Salmons Brook. 
3.5.3 The new Meridian Water railway station opened in summer 2019 replacing the previous Angel Road station. It is anticipated that four  million people will use it 
annually. The station provides step free access to Meridian Way.  
3.5.4 The area contains retail in the form of large box retail outlets  and is currently a major 
employment area. Its eastern boundary incorporates the waterways and open spaces of the Lee Valley Regional Park and there is the potential for improved leisure facilities Banbury Reservoir working closely with the London Boroughs of H aringey 
and Waltham Forest. 
Meridian Water Place making  Vision  
Meridian Water will have emerged as a mixed- use community, where beautiful 
neighbourhoods are enlivened by a rich mix of growing industries. The distinctive 
character of this new place will be drawn from the rich industrial, ecological and 
agricultural heritage of the placemaking area. The waterways will form the backbone of 
the new neighbourhoods, creating a new network of public walkways that connect with 
new parklands  and existing open spaces such as Kenninghall Open Space. The new 
neighbourhood will encourage residents to lead active and healthy lifestyles and offer 
views across and excellent accessibility to the Lee Valley Regional Park. It will be a place 
where Enfield residents and Londoners can afford to live, providing opportunity for 
everyone.  
Meridian Water will continue to be a place of innovation and industry that has adapted and 
evolved to modern needs, delivering new jobs and opportunities on a scale which will 
transform the Borough’s employment base. Major employers, start-ups and meanwhile 
uses will have been attracted to the area and there will be a burgeoning economy for 
makers and creators.  
Meridian Water will be a model for sustainable neighbourhoods with exceptional 
environmental credentials, creating a carbon positive, environment positive, and zero 
waste development. Strategic Policy 
SP PL5: Meridian Water 
57
 Figure 3.6: Meridian Water placemaking vision 
Strategic Policy  
SP PL5: Meridian Water  
58 
 Strategic Policy SP PL5: Meridian Water  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL5 Meridian Water  
To realise the place vision set out in Figure 3.6, development must:  
1. deliver comprehensive,  residential -led mixed -use development that optimises  the site’s 
potential , in line with the existing planned transport improvements. To ensure that 
development in the Meridian Water placemaking area comes forward in a strategic 
and comprehensive manner, planning permission for individual phases must conform 
with a masterplan for the whole pl acemaking area that is supported by the Council . 
Land on the “east bank”  i.e. Harbet Road Industrial Estate (beyond the proposed site 
allocation, which is currently designated as SIL) may be safeguarded for future plan 
periods to ensure that future aspirations are not undermined through planning consent 
on this land in the plan period.  
2. facilitate creation of a new large local centre for the Borough. This will be supported by 
a wide range of complimentary uses. Retail uses will be strongly encouraged fronting 
on to the Central Spine, around the station and in adjoining public squares; and 
fronting on to the River Lee Valley Navigation. Development within the new local 
centre must also create new space for small business, culture and community uses . 
Office space may be appropriate within close proximity to the train station. There may 
be further scope for this elsewhere across the area as public transport accessibility 
improves over the duration of the Plan period.   
3. deliver a sufficient quantum of high-quality, multifunctional open space to support 
dense development, through the provision of a network of green corridors and public 
open spaces. Each phase of development must meet the 30% open public space 
target as a minimu m and seek to deliver the maximum open space possible. Where 
this is not possible it should be demonstrated why this cannot be achieved.  
4. maximise the experience, activation and ecological potential of the existing waterways 
through naturalisation and ecol ogical enhancements where possible. Development 
should contribute towards river restoration works, including naturalisation of the 
riverbanks and off-site flood attenuation basins/conveyance channels to divert surface 
water run-off where this cannot be del ivered on site. Key public spaces should be 
located strategically along the waterfronts.  
5. deliver a net gain in biodiversity  in line with Policy BG3 . Planting must be consistent 
with the habitats and character of the Lee Valley Regional Park and must be 
composed of a diverse range of native species in accordance with the Lee Valley 
Biodiversity Action Plan (and any updating successor) , whilst also ensuring species 
choice is resilient to climate change.  
6. create development that is seamlessly woven into the sur rounding context with an 
appropriate massing strategy that the context of a predominantly suburban low -rise 
character of the area, with the planned transformation of the area and the change that 
will bring.  
7. deliver a range of alternative housing products to increase the quantum and pace of 
delivery. The Council  will support appropriate and high quality ‘build to rent’ schemes 
as an element of the provision of private housing in line with Policy H7. The need for 
co-living, older person’s accommodation and s tudent accommodation should also be 
explored.  Strategic Policy 
SP PL5: Meridian Water 
59
 8.deliver new open spaces on either side of the North Circular Road (A406), A10 (Gre at
C
ambridge Road) and roadside improvements (e.g. underpass treatment and bridges).
9.facilitate and contribute towards enhancement of the existing network of routes, i n
par
ticular Leeside Road, Glover Drive and Angel Edmonton Road, all of which will
provide primary connections.  Development should also deliver new strategic
connections from Meridian Water to key destinations (such as Edmonton Green, Nort h
M
iddlesex Hospital and Angel Edmonton) and neighbouring Boroughs (vi a the Lee
V
alley Regional Park) to overcome physical severance.
10.contribute to improving and enhancing physical infrastructure, including improvements
to rail and bus provision, active travel, new routes across the site to improv e
ac
cessibility and connectivity (e.g. east-west routes to Banbury Reservoir) and fl ood
m
itigation infrastructure.
11.explore opportunities for delivery of water sports facilities along the L ee Valley
Navigation canal should be considered and are encouraged .
12.mak
e a significant, positive contribution to both physical and social infrastructure. This
will include delivery of a new primary school and a new health centre as a minimum.
13.contribute towards generating a mix of high-quality permanent jobs , jobs thr ough
m
eanwhile uses, and construction jobs. No less than 25% will be from local labour. T o
del
iver the permanent jobs development should provide a mix of employment spaces
in appropriate locations . Meanwhile uses, particularly those which contri bute to the
so
cio-economic and cultural vision for the placemaking area will be encour aged.
14.del
iver high quality, varied play, which reinforces the local character. This should be
provided through a combination of designated and informal playable space. Doorst ep
pl
ay must be provided within individual plots .
15.offer
 a clearly delineated centre, which may take the form of a Central east-west spin e
thr
ough the area. This should be connected to a variety of public realm spaces
including pocket gardens and squares, which are pedestrian friendly .
16.pr
imary routes through the area must form a key route for essential infrastructur e,
i
ncluding high speed broadband, decentralised energy, gas and electricity networks
and other infrastructure. Development proposals that include land within the central
spine corridor must demonstrate how the central spine will act as the trunk route for
servicing and subterranean infrastructure and show how the design will minimise
disruption from future maintenance and road works.
Explanation 
3.5.5 Meridian Water offers huge opportunity for transformational change, uniquely positioned as a gateway into the Lee Valley Regional Park. Meridian Water has the opportunity to be a progressive large -scale regeneration project, that achieves the 
highest standards in placemaking, and to be an exemplar development with 
sustainability at its heart. The scale of development envisaged is such that it will 
enable Meridian Water to determine its own character and density, whilst securing 
good quality residential environments and public realm.  Strategic Policy  
SP PL5: Meridian Water  
60 
 3.5.6  To overcome existing constraints and unlock Meridian Water’s growth potential, a 
comprehensive masterplanned approach is required across the entire site, with a 
focus on developing high quality places. Development here has the potential to 
deliver an exciting new neighbourhood during the current local plan period and the 
next. The aspiration is for the whole Meridian Water placemaking area to deli ver 
10,000 homes and 6,000 permanent jobs, 1, 000 jobs through meanwhile uses and 
1000 jobs from construction over 25 years. The Harbet Road Industrial Estate is 
designated as SIL covering the eastern parts of the placemaking area that are 
envisaged to be unlocked to accommodate growth in the next plan period will require 
review of this Local Plan or development of the next Local Plan.  
3.5.7  The Council as the majority landowner has  set ambitious targets for the development 
of a new Town Centre, new homes and jobs across a broad range of industries. 
Proposals will be structured around a progressive approach to sustainability, with low 
carbon, circular economy, biodiversity, enhancement of waterways and provision of 
exceptional new open spaces that connect the site to the Lee Valley National Park 
(LVNP) as a central focus.  
3.5.8  Directing some non-residential uses to specific locations within Meridian Water will 
help to establish the hierarchy of the new neighbourhood. Encouraging a mix of 
retail, commercial and comm unity uses will help to sustain a vibrant new centre. 
Traditional town centre and high streets are struggling to remain economically viable 
so development that incorporates workspace, maker space, leisure, civic uses, 
alongside retail food and beverage wil l generate the level of activity and draw a wider 
range of people to the area that in turn supports businesses and the growing 
community. Diversity in the commercial offer will encourage a rich urban centre at 
Meridian Water that is an attractive destinati on for the local community and visitors 
from further afield.  
3.5.9  For high-density accommodation to be acceptable in this location, in an area that 
already suffers from low levels of accessibility to green space, it will be necessary for 
adequate levels of open space to be provided. A web of parks, swales, canals and 
water ways will enhance the quality and unique character of Meridian Water. 
3.5.10  Clustering tall buildings into appropriate key locations will ensure that their impact is 
managed and not widespread. Spec ific locations will be deemed suitable (through 
future plan iterations and detailed masterplanning work) for additional height as there 
are the benefits to be gained from creating landmarks that aid in navigation, mark 
destinations, define key areas of pub lic realm and contribute to a varied urban 
landscape.  
3.5.11  Appropriately located sports facilities can provide invaluable social space for older 
children and teenagers, help to alleviate antisocial behaviour, reduce levels of crime 
and can enrich the urban landscape.  
3.5.12  In order to create a new modern neighbourhood, smart and digital technologies 
should be seamlessly integrated into the neighbourhood enabling residents to thrive, 
stimulating the local economy, improving everyday experiences and improving 
efficient use of resources. 
  Strategic Policy 
SP PL5: Meridian Water 
61
 Have your say on Meridian Water… 
3.5.13 In relation to the proposed Meridian Water placemaking area: 
1.Does the vision for Meridian Water set out an appropriate vision for the futur e of
thi
s place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or ar e
m
issing?
2.Will the proposed placemaking policy for Meridian Water help to adequately
deliver the aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes ,
om
issions or additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision?Strategic Policy 
SP PL6: Southgate 
62
 3.6 Southgate  
Context and Characteristics 
3.6.1 Southgate is one of the Borough’s four district centres. It is in the south- western part 
of the Borough close to the boundary with the London Borough of Barnet, meaning 
that a significant proportion of its catchment is in Barnet as well as Enfield. It contains 
a mix of uses with a retail centre as well as some larger office buildings and a large leisure centre. Southgate is well performing with one of the highest levels of 
occupancies in the Borough, serving a wide catchment area.  
3.6.2 The character of this area is closely associated with the development of the Piccadilly line in the early twentieth century. However, the streetscape here includes relatively 
little greenery and civic space. The area is centred around the tube station which is 
on the Piccadilly tube line. The tube and bus station are listed, offering a very 
distinctive, strong focal point within the area. The surrounding residential areas are largely characterised by suburban housing. 
Southgate Place making  Vision  
Southgate will be a thriving district centre that has a unique character derived from the 
listed tube station building and other heritage assets. It will act as a community and 
cultural hub, building on strong transport connections. Away from the high street the area 
will maintain a residential character. The distinctive quality of parks and open spaces will 
be sustained and enhanced with improved accessibility for all users.  
Existing a nd new clusters of small to medium office spaces will take advantage of good 
links to central London. It will have grown into an established cluster, making use of 
underused or vacant shop units and consolidating existing office use through.  Strategic Policy 
SP PL6: Southgate 
63
 Figure 3.7: Southgate placemaking vision 
Strategic Policy  
SP PL6: Southgate  
64 
 Strategic Policy SP PL6: Southgate  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL6 Southgate 
To realise the place vision set out in Figure 3.7, development:  
1. must contribute to a coordinated process of town centre renewal that responds 
positively to the unique context and characteristics. The C ouncil will prepare a spatial 
framework , to be adopted as an SPD, to support the delivery of the placemaking vision 
for Southgate. Development in this area must be brought forward in accordance with a 
planned and coordinated approach for this area as set out in relevant adopted and 
emerging SPD s.  
2. should deliver new homes including through high density development that also 
preserve key views of the station. This may include tall buildings only in acceptable 
locations as identified in policy DM DE 6 Tall buildings  and Figure 7.4 (and any 
updating successor) . 
3. must be shaped by the distinctive character and heritage in the area, having particular 
regard to: 
a. the listed tube station of outstanding national significance and its surroundings;  
b. interwar shopping parades; 
c. historic high streets;  
d. distinctive suburban housing; and  
e. a concentration of office buildings around the district centre.  
4. should provide an expanded or intensified district centre by supporting proposals for 
small creative business and business start-ups, encouraging meanwhile and 
temporary use of vacant shop units and small office spaces around the high street to 
foster growth and sustain employment.  
5. should support a growing ev ening and night-time economy. Change of use to non-
town centre uses will not normally be permitted unless appropriate evidence can be 
provided to demonstrate why this is acceptable.  
6. should create an improved sense of place by the station acting as a multi -modal hub. 
The Council  will work in partnership with key stakeholders (including TfL) and 
landowners to devise a cohesive public realm strategy . This will include reviewing 
transport infrastructure and junctions around the historic tube station. The strategy will 
be focussed around the station to improve the sense of arrival and around the 
shopping parades to create a more pedestrian friendly environment. Development 
must  contribute towards enhancing the pedestrian environment and reduce the 
reliance on surface car parks, working towards car -lite development. 
7. should enhance and improve access to distinctive parks and open spaces in the 
vicinity including but not limited to: Arnos Park, Minchenden Oak Garden, Southgate, 
Grovelands Park and Ivy Road Recreatio n    
 
  Strategic Policy 
SP PL6: Southgate 
65
 Explanation 
3.6.3 Whilst Southgate is a district centre with potential for increased densities and heights, 
this will need to be balanced against the need for proposals to sensitively consider the historic environment around the listed station building. The heritage value of the area defines the place quality and therefore all developments that come forward in 
the area must make a positive contribution to this to avoid detracting from the overall 
quality of place.  
3.6.4 Southgate is a district centre, but there is an opportunity to enhance the vitality of the high street including the evening and night-time economy and access to the public realm including connectivity to nearby green spaces. The district centre also acts as a good office location and this will be enhanced. In order to support the vibrancy of the centre opportunities to improve the car dominated nature of the area around the 
station will be explored. The tube station offers an opportunity to increase densities in 
the area to deliver additional residential accommodation. The appropriateness of siting of proposed tall buildings will be assessed taking into consideration the findings of the Borough’s Character of Growth Study (and any updating successor) and the impact on heritage assets.  
3.6.5 There are several large surface level car parks associated with supermarkets, which offer an opportunity to intensify the use of this land. The introduction of additional 
employment and housing opportunities will support the vitality of the non-residential 
uses adding to this centre’s resilience.  
3.6.6 In order to support active travel and improve the use of public transport the pedestrian environment around the tube and bus station should be enhanced. This will also help to support the vitality of the district centre.  
3.6.7 Connectivity to the surrounding green spaces could be improved, including providing valued habitat for flora and fauna.  
Have your say on Southgate…  
3.6.8 In relation to the proposed Southgate placemaking area: 
1.Does the vision for Southgate set out an appropriate vision for the future of this
place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or are missi ng?
2.Will the proposed placemaking policy for Southgate help to adequately deliver  the
as
pirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes, omissions or
additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision ?New Southgate  
66 
  
3.7 New Southgate  
Context and Characteristics  
3.7.1  New Southgate is in the south west of Enfield on the border with the London 
Boroughs of Haringey (to the south) and Barnet (to the west). The area is a mix of 
residential and industrial land including the New Southgate Industrial Estate, the 
gasholder, the Builders Depot (blue building) and Travis Perkins. The area also has 
local shopping parades at Arnos Grove and New Southgate (Friern Barnet Road) 
which are designated local centres. Arnos Grove underground station (Piccadilly 
Line) and New Southgate rail station are located in the area and provide very good 
access to central London. 
3.7.2  The Nor th Circular Road acts as a barrier to movement at the southern part of the 
area. Poor quality buildings are located to the south of the Ladderswood estate and 
the Western Gateway site. In some places, Victorian architecture and traditional 
street patterns create an attractive neighbourhood. However, places like Bowes 
Road library and New Southgate Station are not well connected to each other and 
the rest of New Southgate. While there are some small open green spaces in the 
area, they are underused and could be improved and made to feel safer and more 
attractive for residents.  
New Southgate Place making  Vision  
New Southgate will act as a new enhanced gateway to the B orough which is well 
connected to the rest of the Borough. It will offer an exemplary quality  development on its 
western edge with housing alongside modern employment space and enhanced 
community facilities. The shopping areas at New Southgate and Arnos Grove stations will 
be revitalised by new development and more attractive shopping and station 
environments. 
 New Southgate 
67
 Figure 3.8: New Southgate placemaking vision 
Strategic Policy  
SP PL7: New Southgate  
68 
 Strategic Policy SP PL7:  New Southgate  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL7 New Southgate 
To realise the place vision set out in Figure 3.8, development in New Southgate must:  
1. deliver a comprehensive, masterplanned approach, in particular  around the western 
gateway sites (Gasholder, Topps Tiles and Homebase) , to ensure an appropriate 
distribution of green and open spaces, non-residential uses and height and density. 
The Council will use planning tools, including preparation of masterplans, design 
codes, sust ainable place making strategies to support the delivery of the Local Plan . 
Development in this area must be brought forward in accordance with a planned and 
coordinated approach for this area.  
2. demonstrate how individual proposals will contribute to the vis ion of the wider area 
including how placement of tall buildings aids with legibility and how proposed heights 
will relate appropriately to future surrounding development.   
3. create  a thriving mixed- use place through dense forms of residential development 
offering a range of housing typologies. Tall buildings in selected locations where 
buildings can act as key markers will be supported in line with Policy DM DE6  on Tall 
buildings  and Figure 7.4 (and any updating successors) .  
4. contribute towards i mprov ing links along key routes to the train and tube station such 
as Palmers Road, High Road and Station Road. The potential for the creation of active 
routes will be explored. Contribution towards improvements to the public realm and 
townscape particularly along the large roads bounding the area (i.e. Bowes road, A406 
and Station Road) will be sought.   
5. contribute towards delivering improvements to community facilities . Improvements to 
shops and other services will also be encourages. These should be focused around a 
new hub of facilities around Grove Road open space. Arnos Pool and Bowes Road 
Library have been identified as facilities which could be improved, subject to funding.  
6. contribute towards e nhance existing local open spaces as well as towards river 
restoration projects within Arnos Park. Improvements in parks should include 
enhanced lighting and seating, as well as improved play opportunities for all ages. A 
new play park for young children is suggested in High Road open space.  
7. contribute to enhancing the public realm to make walking and cycling significantly 
more accessible, safer and attractive environment. Development will be expected to 
contribute towards improvements to enhancing the public realm around Southgate 
station.  
8. opportunities to enhance the environment around the railway arches through 
regeneration will be supported.  
 
 
  Strategic Policy 
SP PL7: New Southgate 
69
 Explanation 
3.7.3 There are limited opportunities for large scale development in this area. H owever 
where this exists on the western gateway, developers must bring forward 
development in a coordinated manner in order to ensure that the potential of the sites here can be maximised. Maximising development potential may include tall buildings, 
and appropriate locations for these will be guided by the character of growth study  
(and any updating successor)  and identified in the Figure 3.8. 
3.7.4 The area suffers from a lack of good community facilities and one of the key benefits 
from growth should be an improvement to the facilities for the benefit of existing residents as well as new residents.  
3.7.5 The area is dominated by vehicular traffic and public realm enhancements to reduce the effects of this will help to reduce this. Moreover, the area has limited connectivity to large green spaces. The small local open spaces within the area itself should be enhanced as well as Arnos Grove Park to the north of the area, to help improve the quality of life for residents.  
Have your say on New Southgate…  
3.7.6 In relation to the proposed New Southgate placemaking area: 
1.Does the vision for New Southgate set out an appropriate vision for the futur e of
thi
s place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or ar e
m
issing?
2.Wi
ll the proposed placemaking policy for New Southgate help to adequately
deliver the aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes ,
om
issions or additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision ?
3.The N
ew Southgate placemaking area contains a series of proposed si te
al
locations. Are the site allocations proposed appropriate? If not, please s et out
w
hy you do not consider them to be appropriate. Are there any further sites withi n
the N
ew Southgate placemaking area which have not been included, which ar e
k
nown to be available1 for housing, employment, or a mix of uses – that you think
should be included within the pl an?
1 Refer to PPG definition of ‘availability’. Rural Enfield –   
a leading destination in the London National Park City  
70 
 3.8 Rural Enfield –  a leading destination in the London National 
Park City  
Context and Characteristics  
3.8.1  The northern area of the Borough lies at the gateway into London, acting as an 
interface between urban London and the open countryside of rural Hertfordshire. The 
area largely has an open rural character with traces remaining of the former royal 
hunting ground, the Chase, field boundaries and substantial parkland from former 
grand estates, as well as many parks and rural and semi -rural open spaces.  
3.8.2  Much of Enfield’s heritage derives from its connections and routes created in and out 
of London from the more rural counties to the north, and across from east to west. The 
historic built environment reflects these connections, from the navigable waterways, 
the grand estates and landscapes located on the outer reaches of a day’s ride from the 
capital through to modest suburban housing built around the tube stations. The 
borough has many north -south connections coming in and out of London and these 
routes have formed the focus for historic development in the Borough. North-s outh 
transport connections act as physical barriers contributing to e ast-w est severance in 
the Borough.  
3.8.3  Extensive areas of open space and water space are of significant amenity, heritage, 
cultural and environmental value. Local waterways include Turkey and Salmons 
Brooks. Historic agriculture and market gardening uses are reflected in surviving 
agricultural uses and garden centres in the north west of the Borough, contributing to 
Enfield’s higher than average food-growing provision. 
 
Rural Enfield Place making  Vision  
By 2039, the arc of open spaces and woodland around Enfield Chase and Lee Valley 
Regional Park will be transformed into the leading outdoor countryside destination in North 
London and surrounding area, serving as a unique and exemplar place within London’s  
“National Park City”.  On the doorstep of the city’s urban communities, a mosaic of 
sustainable and highly accessible rural activities including local food production, forestry, 
re-wilding, eco-tourism , sporting activities, natural burial, countryside education, and 
recreation will enhance the landscape and enable all to benefit from access to wildlife -rich 
blue-green spaces, clean air, local food production and world-class sporting facilities, 
achieving the largest environmental and health and wellbeing gains in London. 
Community involvement and sustainable green enterprises will enable the local rural 
economy to thrive contributing to significant landscape improvements, jobs, investment 
and renewal. Rural Enfield will drive deep into the surrounding ur ban communities 
providing better connections to the countryside and bring nature into the heart of the urban 
fabric.  
 
 
  Rural Enfield – 
a leading destination in the London National Park City 
71
 Figure 3.9: Rural Enfield placemaking vision
Strategic Policy  
SP PL8: Rural Enfield –  
a leading destination in the London National Park City  
72 
 Strategic Policy SP PL8: Rural Enfield – a leading destination in 
London’s National Park City  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL8 Rural Enfield –  a leading destination in London’s 
National Park City 
1. The open character of this area (as shown on the Policies Map and key diagram) will 
be protected and enhanced in line with Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land 
policies. New development should be designed to sensitively integrate physi cally and 
visually with Enfield Chase and the Lee Valley Regional Park, particularly in relation to 
open skylines, key entrance points, strategic views and valued landscapes.  
2. The Council will support proposals which contribute positively to the delivery of the 
unique Rural Enfield destination within the London National Park city.  Proposals will 
include, but not be limited to:  
a. Enfield Chase re-wilding programme –  1,000 ha of proposed woodland and open 
space as part of a major nature recovery network  
b. a new  cultural gateway hub at Enfield Chase, including a new visitor centre 
(subject to compliance with part 1 of this policy ) and public art installations, in the 
form of sculptures, in a parkland setting; 
c. flood risk mitigation to reduce the impact of developm ent downstream (including 
sustainable drainage systems and wetland creation); 
d. new or improved walking and cycle routes between key railway stations, town 
centres and cultural attractions (e.g. Green Loop) and along watercourses (e.g. 
Lee Navigation and New  River);  
e. much needed natural burial space to meet future needs of the Borough’s 
population, which offers good transport links to existing residents, especially from 
Crews Hill station;  
f. food growing areas and gardens, especially where they connect with or f orm part 
of existing clusters of food production, such as Crews Hill, Capel Manor and Forty 
Hall;  
g. new eco-tourism  and recreational, sport and leisure activities, such as bird -
watching, wild swimming, mountain biking, camping and natural play features; 
h. Improved hubs  of sporting excellence at Tottenham Hotspur training ground and 
Ponders End; 
i. the sensitive restoration of historic parks and gardens at Trent Park, Forty Hall and 
Myddelton House through positive management; 
j. conversion of publicly -owned farmland into sustainable agricultural/forestry and 
horticultural units whilst also providing for enhanced public access linking to 
surrounding rural and urban areas and  
k. biodiversity offsetting (including rewilding of river corridors).  
 Strategic Policy 
SP PL8: Rural Enfield – 
a leading destination in the London National Park City 
73
 Explanation 
3.8.4 Situated at a key gateway into London, at its northern most point, the National Park 
City designation (as shown on the Policies Map and key diagram) forms an attractive green landscape in the urban-rural fringe that extends from Trent Park and Whitewebbs Park in the west to Lee Valley Regional Park in the east, featuring major 
river corridors, lakes, historic parks and reservoirs. It makes up around a third of the 
Borough’s land area and includes two of the largest open spaces in London: Enfield Chase and Lee Valley Regional Park.  
3.8.5 The Lee Valley Regional Park, situated along the banks of the river Lee and navigation canal, consists of a range of linear parks, routes, nature reserves/wetlands, water sport facilities and play spaces, which connect Enfield to Hertfordshire, Essex and Central London. 
3.8.6 Enfield Chase, the former royal hunting ground of Tudor and Stuart monarchs, consists of a mixture of ancient woodland, farmland and high-quality  landscapes, such 
as historic parks and gardens and nature conservation sites, offering panoramic views over London.  
3.8.7 The policy aims to transform the arc of open spaces around the edge of the Borough’s urban area as a whole into a world-leading outdoor cultural and leisure destination, linking disparate landscapes, improving east-west connectivity and landscape quality whilst acting as a stepping-stone to facilitate the movement of wildlife and bring about nature recovery.  This will further strengthen Enfield’s identity as one of London’s 
leading gr een Boroughs with a rich cultural heritage, helping to transform the Borough 
to deliver a lifetime of opportunities for everyone.  
3.8.8 The designation is not strictly a national park but recognises that the C ouncil has 
ambitions to bring many sustainable rural activities together to create a unique and exemplar y destination location within the London National Park  City.  It will be an 
partnership-led approach to the delivery of strategic green spaces in London, recognising the contribution of its world-class parks and open spaces to people’s 
quality of life and well -being.  The policy is based on, but extends, the principles of 
London National Park City (as set out in the Mayor of London’s Environment Strategy 
and Blue and Green Strategy) .   
3.8.9 The National Park City designation has the potential to achieve a net increase of 25% 
green cover in Enfield, contributing to significant carbon sequestration, exceeding the Mayor of London’s targets and achieving one of the highest net gain outcomes in the UK. In doing so, it will go a long way to mitigating the impacts of recreational pressure and air pollution on nature conservation sites of international importance, such as Epping Forest.  
3.8.10 Strategic routes criss -cross the area (e.g. London Loop) but parts of the urban-rural 
fringe are not inaccessible to a wide cross -section of the public, especially from urban 
communities. There are significant opportunities to improve strategic links to the Lee Valley Regional Park and Enfield Chase from key growth areas (e.g. Meridian Water, Edmonton, Enfield Town and Ponders End) through the provision of new public accessible greenspace and new/improved active travel routes.     
3.8.11 A major programme of tree planting and rewildling is well underway around Enfield Chase. Future expansion of this programme offers potential to convert significant 
tracks of farmland into publicly accessible landscape (including woodland and 
parkland) extending over 1,000 hectares. In doing so, it would become one of the only rewilding projects in close proximity to a large city in the UK.     Strategic Policy  
SP PL8: Rural Enfield –  
a leading destination in the London National Park City  
74 
 3.8.12  In order to achieve this vision, we will seek contributions from nearby developments 
and other sources of funding such as grants and loans to facilitate the delivery of the 
interventions set out in the policy above.  
Have your say on Rural Enfield…  
1. Do you support the designation of Rural Enfield as a leading transformative destination 
within London National Park City?  
2. Do you feel the policy covers the right area of the Borough?  If not, what changes would 
you make?  
3. Do you feel  the policy could be improved?  
4. Do the vision or policy miss any significant matters? 
 
 Crews Hill 
75
 3.9 Crews Hill  
Context and Characteristics 
3.9.1 The Crews Hill area sits on higher ground surrounded on all  sides by valleys, the 
topography slopes away in all directions. Within these valleys the Turkey Brook runs 
south along the western edge of the area and turning east along the southern edge 
of the area. Cuffley Brook runs south along the eastern edge of the area joining with Turkey Brook to continue east.  
3.9.2 Existing development within the Crews Hill area, the railway line and road access is 
orientated north to south  along the ridge of the land which forms Crews Hill. Due to 
the land falling in all directions away from any existing built form and publicly accessible locations such as the station, there are views to the east, west and south 
from different locations around the area. Development comprises number of sites 
predominantly in use for horticulture/ garden centres/ nurseries, storage of building supplies etc with occasional residential properties all of which have come about in a piece meal fashion.  
3.9.3 Road access to the area is of limited capacity and there is no defined hierarchy to 
access throughout the area. Due to topography, access and surrounding landscape character the Crews Hill area exists as distinct from other built form in the north of the 
Borough. The Turkey Brook valley running from west to east between Gordon Hill 
and Crews Hill reinforces the separation of the area from built form to the north of the Borough with much of the space in and around the valley accessible to the public (Hilly Fields) and incorporating Cycle route 12, the majority of which is a traffic free 
route extending to the east of the Borough. 
Crews Hill Place making  Vision  
Crews Hill will become an important gateway to north Enfield’s part of the ‘London 
National Park  City’, providing access to re-wilded landscapes, sustainable eco-tourism, 
sport and recreation for the Borough’s residents and visitors from further afield. 
Development here will facilitate sustainable connections to the rest of the Borough and 
wider region along an east-west green corridor following the route of the London Loop. 
Building on the area’s horticultural and agricultural history, Crews Hill will offer a healthy 
and inclusive environment supported by access to green space and nature. Residential -
led redevelopment of brownfield sites will integrate with the area’s horticultural and food-
producing industries, creating a unique identity and function, with residents contributing a 
range of skills, and benefitting from education, training and employment opportunities 
close to home, reducing the need to commute to work. Crews Hill  
76 
 Figure 3.10: Crews Hill concept plan  
 
  
Strategic Policy 
SP PL9: Crews Hill 
77
 Strategic Policy SP PL9: Crews Hill 
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL9 Crews Hill 
To realise the place vision set out in Figure 3.10, development in the Crews Hill area must 
adhere to the following place-making principles:  
1.The boundary of the placemaking area includes sufficient land to deliver mor e
dev
elopment beyond 2039 to enable the creation of a new sustainable community.
Sites anticipated to come forward in the next plan period will be removed from  the
G
reen Belt as shown on the Policies Map. These sites will be protected from
development other than that which is necessary in relation to the operation of existinguses, change of use to alternative open land uses or temporary uses. An
y
dev
elopment in land beyond the site allocation must not prejudice the possibility  of
l
ong term development in the wider placemaking area. The status of this land will only
change through a review of the L ocal Plan.
2.To ensure that development in the Crews Hill placemaking area comes forward i n a
s
trategic and comprehensive manner, planning permission on the allocated sites will
only be granted following the approval by the Council of a comprehensive masterplan(in the form of an SPD), for the area as a whole. Development in this area mus
t be
br
ought forward in accordance with a planned and coordinated approach for this area
as set out in adopted and emerging SPDs.
Distinctiveness in the Landscape 
3.Development at Crews Hill should predominantly be limited to the core ‘Hill’ ar ea,
del
ineated by the surrounding brooks to the west, south (Turkey Brook) and eas t
(
Cuffley Brook) of the area as shown on the concept plan at Figure 3.10.
4.D
evelopment character across the development area will respond to the surroundi ng
l
andscape character, including that of the Theoba lds Estate South Area of Special
Character. Development should facilitate improved physical and visual links to  the
r
estored and rewilded Enfield Chase landscape to the west and the National Park City
to the north west. Land to the south of the Crews Hill built up area can suppor t
hor
ticultural and food producing land uses and reinforce the separation o f
dev
elopment from Gordon Hill to the south. To the east, development form and scale
should respect the sensitive and more intimate nature of the landscape of
Whitewebbs.
Character Responsive to Context 
5.Development at Crews Hill should build on the area’s existing identity, separated from
other built forms in the north of the Borough by its topography, access and surroundin g
l
andscape character.  The limits of development should not extend beyond the brooks
to the west or east or beyond existing built form to the south.
6.The context of varied and utilitarian glasshouse building form and horticultural land us e
s
hould inform innovation in architecture and public realm such as through the potential
for covered public spaces, winter  gardens and glass house space for every hom e,
c
reating a unique lifestyle related to the identity of the plac e.
7.Development should take a consolidated and compact urban form in order to ensur e a
sustainable form of development where new residents are within easy reac h of, andStrategic Policy 
SP PL9: Crews Hill 
78
 connected to, the railway station and existing an d proposed green and blue 
infrastructure networks.  
Sustainable Movement and Connectivity 
8.Development at Crews Hill should improve the functionality and connectivity  of the
eas
t-west green corridors across the north of the Borough in order to minimise the
reliance of the development on vehicular access .
9.E
xisting east-west links should be improved and all opportunities to create, and mak e
v
iable, new links across the railway line be explored through strategic land assembly ,
phas
ing and more detailed masterplanning work. A greater intensity of development at
C
rews Hill may be appropriate where it is able to deliver new or improved links across
the railway as well as facilitating additional stopping train services at Crews Hill station
to enhance the area’s sustainability and its role as a gateway to the rural north forvisitors and tourists
.
10.N
otwithstanding the requirement for improvements to walking and cyclin g, the
dev
elopment will need to address limitations in the capacity of the existing r oad
netw
ork, particularly in accessing land to the west of the railway and including the road
passing under the railway near  Crews Hill station .
M
ix of People and Activity 
11.Development should create a mixed and inclusive community, by providing a diversityof employment opportunities, housing sizes, types and tenures and environments
.
U
pskilling and specialist skills and knowledge in horticulture, land sciences , food
pr
oduction and the arts associated with food and the culture of food and growing c an
under
pin the unique identity and function of Crews Hill in the landscape. Retenti on of
ex
isting rural uses  is considered important, including equestrian and horticulture uses ,
w
hich should be re-provided in suitable alternative locations if existing sites prov e
uns
uitable for retention. This will deliver a sustainable development, distinct from  the
m
ajority of the built form of Enfield Borough where opportunities for living, working an d
l
eisure provide for the day to day needs of the majority of residents.
Accessibility and variety of Open Space 
12.The design and layout of development should incorporate a variety of typologies  of
open s
pace in order to respond positively to the surrounding landsc ape.
13.In or
der to maximise the sustainability of the area, development should provi de
oppor
tunities for convenient and safe active travel. Cycle and pedestrian priority
streets and routes should permeate all development areas and should connec t to
ex
isting and proposed surrounding strategic routes.
14.In order to support its emergence as a gateway to the London National Park City  and
the gr
een and rural north of Enfield for new and existing residents of the Borough,
dev
elopment at Crews Hill should incorporate high quality public realm and green links
to the surrounding designated landscapes, for example Enfield Chase, and the
N
ational Cycle Network route 12 as shown on the Concept Framework Plan at Figur e
3.10
.
Accessibility and variety of Facilities & Services 
15.Development at Crews Hill should deliver a variety of facilities and services suitable to
the s
cale of new community to meet the day to day needs of its residents. Facilities
and services should be located so as prioritise active and sustainable travel to them
from all parts of the developm ent.Strategic Policy 
SP PL9: Crews Hill 
79
 16.Mixed use development should be focused on the area around the station and al ong
the c
orridor of the existing road under the railway. This location would also suppor t
C
rews Hill’s potential to serve as a gateway for visitors to the destination landscapes
in the wider area through the provision of leisure, eco-tourism and education facilities
and activities.  Alternative locations may be considered acceptable subjec t to the
pr
oportion of development either side of the railway and improvements to or delivery  of
new
 railway crossings.
Climate Change adaptation and resilience, and the wider environment 
17.Development proposals should facilitate a shift towards a net zero carbon future, wi th
innov
ations in local horticulture, supply chain and support for household and
c
ommunity growing, facilitating people to produce or buy their food locally. New homes
and facilities should be connected to the Energetik heat network  (and any updati ng
su
ccessor) . The heat network can also enable the provision of affordable  and
s
ustainable heated growing space.
18.Development and associated green infrastructure should contribute to the delivery  of
s
trategic flood mitigation, contributing to the performance of downstream locations
across the Borough. New development should be designed to have the capacity  and
m
eans of retaining storm runoff which would otherwise be dealt with at on si te
l
ocations downstream and in more constrained urban infill locations.
19.Establishing a functional flood plain and diversity of habitats along the Salmons ,
Tur
key and Cuffley Brooks as well as along other smaller watercourses and in other
green spaces in the area, can increase the ecological potential of the area and serv e
as
 a Borough-wide resourc e.
20.Appropriate noise mitigation from the M25 for development to the north of the Crews
Hill area should be considered, such as bunding (subject to other landscape and visualsensitivities) or setbacks in order to protect sensitive uses, such as schools, nurseries
and publicly accessible open space. The design of all residential properties shoul
d
m
itigate the blight of motorway noise in their layout, design and location of outsi de
space.
Explanation 
3.9.4 Development at Crews Hill has potential to deliver an expanded community during 
the current local plan period and the next. The parts of the placemaking area that are 
expected to come forward in the next plan period are proposed to be removed from 
the Green Belt designation as part of this Local Plan to ensure that G reen Belt 
boundaries will last beyond the end of the local plan period. This is in accordance with national planning policies which states the intention for G reen Belt boundaries to 
have permanence in the long term. However, this land will continue to be 
safeguarded from development during the plan period through the London National 
Park City designation. Although development will not generally be appropriate within this designation, it is recognised that not all development will prejudice its function. It will therefore, be appropriate to permit development required in connection with established uses, or change of use to an alternative open land use or to temporary uses which would not prejudice the possibility of development after the plan is 
reviewed, nor is detrimental to the character of the site and its surroundings. Strategic Policy  
SP PL9: Crews Hill  
80 
 3.9.5  The vision for a sustainable settlement at Crews Hill is rooted in the existing identity 
and function of Crews Hill as a dis tinctive part of Enfield, and of London. Connected 
to the landscape around it, Crews Hill can become home to a community of people 
living healthy and sustainable lifestyles. Crews Hill is strategically positioned to 
become a key link in joining up the north of the Borough, yet separated from the built 
form of the rest of the Borough and therefore able to retain a distinct character. The 
legacy of horticultural and agricultural enterprise in the area can be the basis of a 
home-grown  expertise fit for purpose  in a place emerging in the face of a climate 
crisis.  
3.9.6  The strategic allocation of land for development is limited by the brooks around the 
hill, the permanence and physical prominence of these landscape features and 
natural boundaries created in the lands cape help define the distinctiveness of the 
settlement within the landscape. Development, east and west of the railway respects 
the contrasting aspect and outlook to the landform and of the surrounding 
landscapes and recognises the opportunity for different responses.  
3.9.7  To the south ern part of the allocation is limited to the boundary of the Clay Hill 
conservation area which reflects the changing character of landscape and built 
development to the south of the area and maintains the perceptual separation 
betw een the built north edge of Enfield at Gordon Hill and the new settlement form at 
Crews Hill. The development at Crews Hill is positioned to connect east to west with 
existing connections across or under the railway by road, track or footpath providing 
opportunities to improve east-west  connectivity. Green links extend from the heart of 
area out into the wider landscape. These multi -functional corridors, extend habitats, 
make access to open space easy and extremely close to homes and workplaces, 
and provide sustainable travel opportunities to the wider Borough and in particular in 
an east-west  direction.  
3.9.8  Building and public realm typologies can make the most of the precedent for large 
glass houses related to the horticultural and market garden history. New a rchitecture 
which allows communities to grow their own food and a Borough supply chain that 
assists local growers with the economies of scale offered by Borough wide provision 
can create an identity and function for this new place which is rooted in its past and 
builds upon the skills and enterprise already present. The availability of land indicates 
a supply of brownfield development over the plan period with further phases of 
development in the next plan period.  
Have your say on Crews Hill….  
3.9.9  In relation to the proposed Crews Hill placemaking area:  
1. Does the vision for Crews Hill set out an appropriate vision for the future of this 
place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or are missing?  
2. Will the proposed placemaking polic y for Crews Hill help to adequately deliver the 
aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes, omissions or 
additions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision?  
 Chase Park 
81
 3.10  Chase Park   
Context and Characteristics 
3.10.1 Chase Park is an area that sits immediately adjacent to the existing suburban edge 
of north west Enfield. It is approximately 2.5km  north west of Enfield Town, which is 
the Borough’s primary shopping area and a major  employment centre. The 
surrounding area is mostly residential streets, although there are also a range of community facilities such as shops and schools, and Chase Farm Hospital – a major 
local medical facility – which is located on the north-eastern edge of the area.  As 
well as being a key healthcare facility, the hospital is a major employment location.  The area comprises typical urban-edge landscape, with extensive areas of pasture and some areas of trees and planting. There are several active recreational facilities 
in close proximity and he landscape is also well used by locals for informal recreation 
such as dog walking. 
3.10.2 The urban edge of Enfield around the Chase Park  area comprises typical 1930s 
suburban homes - a mixture of detached and semi -detac hed properties with large 
rear and often front, gardens.  There are some infill developments that are more recent – such as small clusters of 1960s -70s terraces.  The housing is generally of 
good quality, the majority of houses having large plots and private gardens. The area 
is relatively well served by public transport, with three stations within an 
approximately 30-minute walk, and two further stations within a 45-minute walk. It also has regular bus services running through and around the area. National  Cycle 
Route 12 runs to the north, but there is a break in provision as it passes.  There are a few schools within approximately 1.5km of the area, local medical facilities and local retail parades in Enfield Chase and Oakwood. 
3.10.3 The topography of the area is defined by the two watercourses which run through it – 
the Salmons Brook and the Merryhills Brook. These form localised valleys which give the area a broadly flat character, but with elevated land in the middle distance.  To the east the area is enclosed by the hill which The Ridgeway runs along the ridge of, 
and to the west there is another area of taller land, which roughly follows the route of Cockfosters Road.  The landscape is generally laid to pasture and forms part of a larger contiguous area of arable farmland which stretches to the M25 and beyond.  
The area closest to the urban edge is dominated by recreation and pasture use, 
while further out it is more agricultural. There are several large areas of woodland, 
some of which are fragments of Enfield Chase.  There are also several golf courses in the area, and other recreational facilities at Trent Park, which create distinctive landscape patterns and forms.  Chase Park  
82 
 Chase Park Place making  Vision  
 
Chase Park will become an exemplar development which, through careful attention to its 
townscape and landscape setting, density and high-quality design, creates a new 
neighbourhood that positively addresses the relationship between the existing urban area 
and its rural landscape setting.  Shaped by the brooks, woodlands and green spaces that 
define the area, and its relationship to the adjoining historic landscape at Trent Park, 
Chase Park will provide a mixture of homes supporting people through all stages of their 
lives. Provision of doorstep workspaces and links to existing employers such as Chase 
Farm hospital to the north will prov ide employment opportunities for new and existing 
residents. Located on the main east-west route through the Borough to Enfield Town, with 
access to Oakwood, Enfield Chase and Gordon Hill stations, the National Cycle Network 
and London Loop, Chase Park wil l facilitate access to the rural landscape and London 
National Park City initiative in north west Enfield, prioritising active travel modes and 
benefitting the health and well -being of residents and visitors alike. It will provide 
opportunities to link the wild places within the site and in Enfield Chase to the north, down 
into the urban areas to the south –  extending green and blue infrastructure networks, 
improving their quality and access to nature, benefitting existing residents in the Borough 
and new r esidents alike.  
 
  Chase Park 
83
 Figure 3.11: Chase Park concept plan 
Strategic Policy  
SP PL10: Chase Park  
84 
 Strategic Policy SP PL10: Chase Park  
 DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  PL10 Chase Park  
To realise the place vision set out Figure 3.11 development in the Crews Hill area must 
adhere to the following place-making principles:  
1. The boundary of the placemaking area includes sufficient land to deliver more 
development beyond 2039 to enable the creation of a new sustainable development. 
Sites anticipated to come forward in the next plan period will be removed from the 
Green Belt as shown on the Policies Map. These sites will be protected from 
development other than that which is necessary in relation to the operation of existing 
uses, change of use to alternative open land uses or temporary uses. Any 
development in land beyond the site allocation must not prejudi ce the possibility of 
long term development in the wider placemaking area. The status of this land will only 
change through a review of the L ocal Plan.  
2. To ensure that development in the Chase Park placemaking area comes forward in a 
strategic and comprehensive manner, planning permission on the allocated sites will 
only be granted following the approval by the Council of a comprehensive masterplan 
(in the form of an SPD) , for the area as a whole. Development in this area must be 
brought forward in accordanc e with a planned and coordinated approach for this area 
as set out in adopted and emerging SPDs.  
Distinctiveness in the Landscape  
3. Development should front onto the Green Belt and have a positive relationship with 
the wider landscape, including the restored Enfield Chase and the London National 
Park City “north west Enfield”.  The landscape setting of Chase Park should be 
defined by the brooks, woodland and green spaces, as shown on the Concept 
Framework Plan Figure 3.11.  
4. Development should front onto the open space of Trent Park to the west, creating a 
positive and sensitive relationship with the historic landscape.   
Character Responsive to Context  
3. Development at Chase Park will have a distinctive character, delivered at all scales of 
design, for example through its layout, form, range of building typologies, materials, 
landscape design and green infrastructure.  
4. The design of new development should acknowledge the townscape of the 1930’s 
residential context but make more efficient use of land with a higher density, 
sustainable urban form which reflects its suburban locati on.  
5. Development along the eastern and western edges of the development must positively 
respond to the landscape and watercourses which form the edge of the site, while 
development along the southern edge of the area which abuts existing residential 
areas will need to carefully mediate the change in density between the existing 1930’s 
suburbs and the new higher density development within Chase Park itself 
6. Development along the Enfield Road frontage should act as a gateway into the wider 
Chase Park development, while development along the Merryhills Brook should 
respond to the important blue -green function of the watercourse.     Strategic Policy 
SP PL10: Chase Park 
85
 7.To the north of the main Chase Park area, higher density development close to Chas e
Far
m Hospital will support the delivery of a range of types and tenures of new homes
in an area which has excellent walking and cycling connections to employm ent
oppor
tunities .
S
ustainable Movement &  Connectivity 
5.Development must maximise opportunities for sustainable and active travel . The
des
ign, form and layout of transport infrastructure must create a place where walkin g,
c
ycling and use of public transport is the natural choic e.
6.The dev
elopment should provide new green links to facilitate movement betw een the
ex
isting and new communities, and to Trent Park as a publicly accessible landscape .
D
evelopment should close the gap in the missing link in wider routes such as
National Cycle Network route 12 and the link between the Enfield Chase landsc ape
and i
ts namesake station, as shown on the Concept Framework Plan at Figure 3.11.
Mix of People and Activity 
7.The development should create a place which provides opportunities for livi ng,
w
orking and relaxing within the local neighbourhood, creating an inclusive community
and delivering a mix of dwelling sizes, tenures and types to support people through all
stages of lif e.
8.P
rovision of specialist housing for older people should be considered along the A 110
E
nfield Road corridor, where improvements to existing footways along the road will
be required in order to create an attractive environment for walking, cycling and othernon-polluting wheeled transport.
9.The design and layout of the public realm, community spaces, buildings and facilitiesshould create opportunities for people to interact with their neighbours
.
10.D
evelopment in this location will be required to provide a school and health facilities ,
as
 well as other social infrastructure, in line with evidence of need.
Accessibility and variety of Open Space 
11.Development should deliver a suitable mix of public and private spaces, whils t
ac
knowledging the wider open space setting of Trent Park and the London National
Park City initiative in north west Enfield, providing an abundance of opportunities  to
enj
oy the nature and wildlife within easy reach of all homes. Development shoul d
fac
ilitate easy access to this wider landscape setting.
12.Development should facilitate the rewilding at Enfield Chase; and the naturalisatio n
and r
estoration of the river corridor along Salmons Brook in particular, thr ough
w
etland creation and flood risk alleviation to enhance the ecological potential  of the
area.
13.B
iophilic design principles should be incorporated where possible to maximise ur ban
gr
eening and integration with blue and green networks. The development mus t
i
nclude greening elements on buildings, gardens, in streets in public open spac e and
thr
ough the materials used. Sustainable urban drainage systems should be integrate d
i
nto the public realm and designed to be multi -functional, people-focussed spaces .
14.High quality play spaces at a variety of scales and sizes should be provided, whic h
r
einforce the local character. This should be provided through a combinati on of
des
ignated and informal playable space. Doorstep play must be provided withi n
individual development parcels.Strategic Policy  
SP PL10: Chase Park  
86 
 Accessibility and variety of Facilities & Services 
15. Sustainable and active travel routes should be delivered to provide easy access to 
existing local centres at Oakwood and Enfield Chase, the major centre at Enfield 
Town and the major employer at Chase Farm Hospital.   
16. Social and physical infrastructure such as community centres, shops, health and 
education facilities to support day -to-day needs should be available within an easy 
walk or cycle.  
17. The range of open spaces, employment opportunities, services and facilities within 
reach of Chase Park pr ovides an opportunity for it to be developed as an exemplar 
scheme of a place that facilitates active and sustainable lifestyles.  
 
Explanation  
3.10.4  Development at Chase Park has potential to deliver a new sustainable urban 
extension during the current local plan period and the next. The parts of the 
placemaking area that are expected to come forward in the next plan period are 
proposed to be removed from the Green Belt designation as part of this Local Plan to 
ensure that Green Belt boundaries will last beyond the end of the L ocal Plan period. 
This is in accordance with national planning policies which states the intention for 
Green Belt boundaries to have permanence in the long term. However, this land will 
continue to be safeguarded from development during the plan period through the 
National Park City designation. Although development will not generally be 
appropriate within this designation, it is recognised that not all development will 
prejudice its function. It will therefore, be appropriate to permit development required 
in connection with established uses, or change of use to an alternative open land use 
or to temporary uses which would not prejudice the possibility of development after 
the plan is reviewed, nor is detrimental to the character of the site and its 
surroundings. 
3.10.5  Chase Park offers an opportunity to deliver housing in a location which is accessible 
with good public transport connections within walking and cycling distance, and 
where there are opportunities for leisure and active lifestyles on the doorstep.   
3.10.6  The vision for Chase Park is to be a place, where vehicles do not dominate the 
streets and instead green corridors with space for cycling and walking are form the 
primary movement networks around the area, with people being able to easily access 
public transport via these routes.  While the development must be a ‘good neighbour’ 
to the existing urban edge of Enfield, it should not be shaped by these existing 
townscapes, but rather by the blue and green spaces whic h surround it on the other 
sides, and which should run through the heart of the development itself.   
Contemporary suburbs can offer high -quality family accommodation in a way that 
makes active travel –  walking and cycling – the natural choice for day to day moving 
around.   
3.10.7  In the n orthern part of the placemaking area, higher density housing can have a 
synergy with Chase Farm Hospital with facilities and accommodation related to this 
significant health and employment centre.  In the s outhern part of the al location a 
long-term phased approach can provide development in more than one plan period 
and will typically be more mixed and have areas of varying density.  
  Strategic Policy 
SP PL10: Chase Park 
87
 3.10.8 Chase Park provides a key opportunity to create a high quality and liveable new 
suburb that takes the best of the existing 1930s suburbs and combines it with a 
highly green environment where the environment is protected, conserved, and 
enhanced.  A place that can act as the gateway to the parkland landscapes of north Enfield while being a great place to live sustainably. Generous blue-green corridors provide a strong setting and support ecological corridors provide rewilding connections between the wider habitats and landscapes to the North and the exis ting 
urban area to the south and east to form a coherent network.  
Have your say on Chase Park…  
3.10.9 In relation to the proposed Chase Park placemaking area: 
1.Does the vision for Chase Park set out an appropriate vision for the future of this
place? If not, what components do you think should be changed or are missi ng?
2.Wi
ll the proposed placemaking policy for Chase Park help to adequately deliver
the aspirations set out in the vision? If not, what proposed changes, omissions oradditions are required in the policy to help deliver the vision
?Chapter 4  
Sustainable Enfield  
87 
 4. Sustainable Enfield  
Introduction  
4.1 The 2018 Inter -governmental Panel on Climate Change report has served as a timely 
reminder of the need to take action at all levels to address climate change. A  changing 
climate will have severe and enduring social, economic and environmental implications . 
Climate change is an issue of social justice. Enfield’s geography means that more 
deprived communities are affected by increased flood risk, and the instabilities 
associated with a changing climate are likely to disproportionally affect those with fewer 
resources to effectively respond.  
4.2 In 2019, Enfield Council signed a climate emergency pledge which committed the 
Council to becom e a carbon neutral organisation by 2030.  In 2020, the C ouncil adopted 
the Climate Action Plan, which sets the ambition for Enfield to be a carbon neutral 
borough by 2040. In order to deliver on this ambition, this chapter sets requirements to 
address the energy implications of new development, reduce waste, and support 
effective adaptation to a c hanging climate.  
4.3 The policies in this chapter focus on key aspects of sustainability and supporting the 
transition to net zero carbon development. However, the need to create a sustainable 
future for Enfield underpins the plan as a whole and many of the w ider policies in this 
plan are crucial to delivering this –  not least those relating to sustainable transport, 
compact mixed-use communities, the public realm and blue and green infrastructure 
enhancement. Taken together, this policy framework is crucial to delivering sustainable 
places fit for the challenges of the twenty first century . 
 
  Strategic Policy 
SE1: Responding to the climate emergency  
88 4.1 Strategic Policy SP SE1: Responding to the climate emergency   
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  SE1 Responding to the climate emergency 
The Council will work with partners to: 
1.use all planning tools available to meet the 2040 net zero carbon boro ugh
c
ommitments set out in the Climate Action Plan1;
2.enc
ourage innovative approaches to tackling climate change, reducing air pollution,
managing flood risk and promoting sustainable infrastructur e;
3.r
equire high -quality and verifiable low energy development which maximises on-site
renewable energy generati on;
4.pr
ioritise heat decarbonisation, with no new gas connections, ensuring all heating an d
hot w
ater to be provided through low  carbon sources ;
5.ens
ure where appropriate development supports the expansion and decarbonisation
of the Borough’s heat network ;
6.ens
ure development is  designed for resilience in  a changing climate, supporting future
adaptabi
lity and mitigate the risk of o verheating (including through consideri ng the
or
ientation of buildings and using trees for shading) ;
7.r
educe flood risk (including through the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems) ,
i
mprove wastewater infrastructure in line with the C ouncil’s Infrastructure Deliver y
Pl
an;
8.r
equire developments to embed design and operation that is aligned with sustainabl e
w
aste management in operation, the minimisation of waste and the uplift of recycli ng
tar
gets; and
9.em
bed circular economy approach to building design and construction to reduc e
w
aste, support reuse and minimise embodied carbon, prioritising retrofit first.
Explanation 
4.1.1 This overarching policy seeks to ensure that all new developments (including non-
residential development) contribute to a reduction of carbon emissions. Enfield’s 
Climate Action Plan 2 sets out the Borough’s strategic and coordinated approach 
towards addressing climate change.  
4.1.2 The Local Plan play s an important role in helping the Borough respond to the climate 
emergency. It provides the planning framework for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation in respect of future use and management of land within Enfield. Clear 
carbon reduction targets  have been set to support this ambition and deliver energy 
efficient development in accordance with the energy hierarchy  set out in the London 
Plan. 
1 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/environment/enfield-climate-action-plan-2020-environment.pdf  
2 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/environment/enfield-climate-action-plan-2020-environment.pdf  Policy DM  
SE2: Sustaina ble design and construction  
89 
 4.2 Policy DM SE2: Sustainable design and construction     
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE2 Sustainable design and construction  
 
1. All development,  including new developments, change of use, conversions and 
refurbishments , will be required to submit a sustainable design and construction 
statement. The statement should set out how sustainable design principles have been 
integrated into a design-led approach, including the consideration of the construction 
and operational phases of development. The statement should be proportionate to the 
nature and scale of development proposed with a sufficient level of detail to 
demonstrate that the relevant policy requirements have been satisfied.  
2. Major residential development of ten or more  dwellings are required to work towards 
achieving Home Quality Mark (HQM) 4.5* with a minimum certification level of 4* .  
3. Non-residential development with a combined gross floorspace of 1, 000 square 
metres floorspace or more must work towards achieving Building Research 
Establishment Environmental Assessment Method (BREEAM ) ‘outstanding’ with a 
minimum certification level of ‘excellent’. 
Explanation  
4.2.1  This policy sets out our approach to ensuring that sustainable design and 
construction principles inform new development.  Part 1 of the policy  relates to all new 
developments and requires a proportionate sustainable design and construction 
statement as part of planning applications. For major developments the sustainable 
design and construction statement should refer and/or complement other detailed 
statements including:  
• energy use, operational and whole-life carbon emissions and reporting, as set out 
in the energy strategy (see policies SE4, SE5 and SE7);  
• landscape design and urban greening – demonstrate an integrated approach to 
hard and soft landscape design which maximises ur ban greening, soft 
landscaping and sustainable drainage measures; 
• air quality , as set out in the air quality impact assessment (see policy ENV1);   
• integrated water management and sustai nable drainage, see policy SE10, and  
• waste reduction, adaptive reuse and whole life carbon emissions, as set out in 
the circular economy statement (see policy SE3 ). 
4.2.2  Minor developments should include proportionate information on the key areas set 
out above. This information could form part of a design and access statement. Part 2  
of the policy  relates to major domestic developments and sets aspirations and 
minimum requirements using the HQM assessment framework. Part 3 relates to non-
domestic development and sets aspirations and minimum requirements using the 
BREEAM assessment framework. Developments may be able to use alternative 
assessment frameworks where these have been approved by the local planning 
authority.  
4.2.3  Metrics , targets and standards set out in following policies (SE3, SE4 and SE5) 
should inform and,  if necessary, take precedence over the HQM and BREEAM 
standards set out here.  Policy DM 
SE3: Whole -life carbon and circular economy  
90 4.3 Policy DM SE3: Whole -life carbon and circular economy 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE3 Whole-life carbon and circular economy 
1.All major development proposals will be required to meet objectives  set out below
through the provision of a circular economy statement. Proposals should:
a.prioritise reuse and retrofit of existing buildings wherever possible befor e
c
onsidering the design of new buildings
b.minimise environmental impact of materials by reusing materials on-site wher e
pos
sible, and specifying sustainability -sourced, low impact and re-use or recycl ed
m
aterials
c.design for durability and flexibility. Demonstrate how the design and constructi on of
the dev
elopment enables buildings and their constituent materials, components
and products to be disassembled and reused at the end of their useful li fe;
d.ev
idence where, so far as is possible, the circular economy has been prom oted
thr
ough leasing or rental arrangements for building systems, products an d
m
aterials ; and
e.dem
onstrate how circular economy principles have informed the design a nd
i
mplementation of energy (including heating and cooling), water and was te
i
nfrastructure.
2.Major development proposals are required to calculate whole life-cycle car bon
em
issions through a nationally recognised w hole life cycle carbon assessment, in line
with London Plan Policy SI 2, or subsequent successor policies and associ ated
gui
dance. Developments  should demonstrate actions taken to reduce life-cycle carb on
em
issions  with the aim of achieving the targets set out in Table 4.1 , or higher futur e
s
tandards set by national or regional policy.
Table 4.1: Whole life cycle carbon targets 
1st January 2023 (or 
Local Plan Adopted)  1st January 2025  1st January 2030  
Domestic  <600 kgCO 2e/m2 <450 kgCO 2e/m2 <300 kgCO 2e/m2 
Non-Domestic  <800 kgCO 2e/m2 <650 kgCO 2e/m2 <500 kgCO 2e/m2 
Explanation 
4.3.1 Up to a fifth of carbon emissions associated with UK building stock comes from 
embodied emissions associated with new builds. Embodied emissions are defined in paragraph 9.2.11 of the London Plan. Even as buildings become more energy efficient, significant emissions are associated with embodied carbon – this source 
can represent 40-70% of whole life carbon emissions of a low carbon building.
3   
4.3.2 To address this challenge and reduce whole life cycle carbon emissions, this policy seeks to ensure that new development addresses core circular economy principles in a circular economy statement (Part 1). Major developments should evidence how they have taken actions with the aim of meeting the targets set out in Table 4.1  of the 
policy . 
3 LETI (2020) Climate Emergency Design Guide Policy DM  
SE4: Reducing energy demand  
91 
 4.4 Policy DM SE4: Reducing energy demand            
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE4 Reducing energy demand      
1. All developments (resulting in the creation of one or more dwellings or 500 sq.m. or 
more non-residential gross internal area (GIA), including new build, change of use, 
conversions and major refurbishments) should deliver a high level of energy efficiency, 
in alignment with ‘Be Lean’ stage of the energy hierarchy and demonstrate a space 
heating demand, to meet the targets set out in Table 4.2: 
Table 4.2: Space heating demand targets  
 1st January 2023 
(or Local Plan 
Adopted ) 1st January 2025  1st January 2030  
All developments  30 kWh/m2/yr  20 kWh/m2/yr  15 kWh/m2/yr  
2. All developments (resulting in the creation of one  or more dwellings or 500sqm or 
more non-residential GIA, including new build, change of use, conversions and major 
refurbishments)  should meet the targets out set in Table 4.3:  
Table 4.3: Operational energy use targets 
 1st January 2023 
(or Local Plan 
Adopted ) 1st January 2025  1st January 2030  
Domestic buildings  105 kWh/m2/yr 70 kWh/m2/yr 35 kW h/m2/yr 
Non-domestic 
buildings  170 kWh/m2/yr 110 kWh/m2/yr 55 kWh/m2/yr 
3. Developments that demonstrate meeting Passivhaus equivalent certification, or 
subsequent replacement systems, will have demonstrated compliance with this policy. 
4. Major developments ( resulting in the creation of ten or more dwellings or 1,000sqm or 
more non-residential GIA, including new build, change of use, conversions and major 
refurbishments) are required evaluate the operational energy use using realistic 
information on the intended use, occupancy, and operation of the building to minimise 
any performance gap. They shall demonstrate this through compliance with the above 
targets using a design for performance methodology such as Passivhaus PHPP4 or 
CIBSE5 TM54 Operational Energy or  any updating successors. 
5. All major developments shall monitor and report on energy use for five years after 
occupation.  
 
  
                                                 
4 Passive House Planning Package  
5 Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers  Policy DM 
SE4: Reducing energy demand  
92 Explanation 
4.4.1 In order to effectively address the carbon emissions of buildings it is important to 
minimise in -use energy consumption. Energy consumption should be evidenced 
through the provision of an energy statement. Part 1 seeks to reduce space heating 
demand, while part 2 seeks to reduce operational energy use. 
4.4.2 The standards set in p art 2 relate to gross internal area (GIA), and excludes the 
contribution made by renewable energy.  
4.4.3 The ‘performance gap’ of buildings describes the disparity between anticipated 
energy use and actual performance and is an issue of concern. Parts 4 and 5 of the 
policy seeks to ensure the reporting of accurate information to inform future policy 
development. This is key to closing the performance gap. Part 5 requires major 
developments to monitor and report on energy usage in line with London Plan 
paragraph 9.2.10.  Policy DM 
SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon energy supply 
93 4.5 Policy DM SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon energy 
supply     
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE5 Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon energy supply  
1.All developments (resulting in the creation of one or more dwellings or 500sqm or
more non-residential GIA, including new build, change of use, conversions and major
refurbishments) are required to:
a.Provide an energy statement demonstrating how emissions savings hav e been
m
aximised on site at each stage of the energy hierarchy.
b.Achieve carbon reduction, as far as possible on-site meeting minimum reductions
as set out in the table below, or London Plan/subsequent national policy ,
w
hichever is higher .
2.A
ll major residential developments of ten or more dwellings and non-residential
development of 500sqm GIA or more will be net-zero carbon. A cash in lieu
contribution to meet net-zero carbon will only be considered acceptable in instanceswhere it has been clearly demonstrating that no further savings can be achieved on-site, due to site constraints or limitations. Residual regulated emissions are to be offs
et
at a r
ate in line with Table 4.4 .
Table 4.4: On-site carbon reduction targets 
Minimum on -site 
total reduction in CO2 Residual 
emissions carbon offset fund 
contribution  
Major residential development of ten or 
more dwellings (including new build, change of use, conversions and major refurbishments)  Net-zero with 
minimum  
45% on-site reduction  Tiered offset  
Minor new build residential development of 
one or more dwellings  45% minimum on -
site reduction with £1,500 flat fee per 
dwelling  
Minor residential change of use and 
conversions resulting in the creation of one 
or more dwellings  35% minimum on -
site reduction £1,000 flat fee per 
dwelling  
Non-residential development of 500sqm 
GIA or more (including new build, change of use and major refurbishments)  Net-zero with 
minimum 45% on-site reduction Tiered offset  
3.All new developments (resulting in the creation of one or more dwellings or 500sqm or
more non-residential GIA)  are required to install low carbon heating and hot water ,
ther
e should be no on-site combustion of fossil fuel. New developments should not be
connected to the gas grid, except for in exceptional circumstances.
4.Any new energy networks should prioritise non- combustible, non- fossil fuel energy as
the primary heat source. Temporary fossil -fuel primary heat sources must only  be
installed for a maximum of five years prior to connection to an approved low car bonPolicy DM 
SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon energy supply 
94 heat source and interim emissions should be  reflected in energy statements and 
subsequent calculations and offset payments.  
5.Development proposals will be expected to address an area’s energy infrastructur e
r
equirements, as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. Developments shoul d
s
eek to connect to a decentralised energy network where the operator is willi ng to
ex
tend. All such developments shall comply with the Enfield Decentralised Energy
Networks Supplementary Planning Document and any updating successor .
6.If connection to a decentralised energy network is not possible, large-scale major
developments proposals (200 or more dwellings or 10,000sqm or more non-residential) will be expected to consider the integration of new energy networks in th
e
dev
elopment, with consideration for future connection to the boroughs heat network .
Thi
s consideration shall form part of the development proposals and take into accoun t
the s
ite’s characteristics and the existing cooling, heat and power demands  on
adj
acent sites where readily available.
7. Developments  will be expected to install on-site renewable energy equati ng to a
m
inimum of 120kWh/m2 (based on the building footprint) be met unless it c an be
c
learly demonstrated that this is not practically viable, e.g. on a heavily over s haded
s
ite or where there are conflicting spatial limitations due to the use of heat pumps.
Explanation 
4.5.1 Net-zero carbon is defined as when the amount of carbon emissions associated with 
the building’s operational energy on an annual basis is zero or negative. A net zero carbon building is highly energy efficient and powered from on-site and/or off-site renewable energy sources, with any remaining carbon balance offset.  
4.5.2 A tiered approach has been used to incentivise carbon savings on-site. Contributions should be calculated in line with Table 4.5 : 
Table 4.5: Carbon offset tiers 
4.5.3 The most up to date carbon factors must be adopted for all carbon assessments. Operational energy emissions are required to be reporting adopted standardised format following the GLA’s Energy Assessment Guidance and supporting carbon emissions reporting spreadsheet, or subsequent updates or replacements. 
4.5.4 This policy encourages the expansion of decentralised energy in the Borough. Carbon neutral development cannot entirely be achieved through building efficiency alone and use of zero and low carbon methods of energy generation is supported, including connections to decentralised energy networks. 
Policy DM  
SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon energy supply  
95 
 4.5.5  Where connection to an existi ng or future decentralised energy network is feasible 
and viable, a commitment to a connection may be secured via a legal agreement as 
part of the planning application. The Enfield Decentralised Energy Network 
Supplementary Planning Document (and any updating successor) provides more 
detailed technical design guidance relevant to commercial and residential 
developments, requiring them to connect to or contribute towards decentralised 
energy networks. Where appropriate, we will work with infrastructure provi ders to 
facilitate the provision of infrastructure (including the safeguarding of routes and 
sites) to support new and expanding decentralised energy networks. Policy DM 
SE6: Renewable energy development  
96 4.6 Policy DM SE6: Renewable energy development    
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE6 Renewable energy development    
1.Development involving renewable and low carbon energy (including micro-generati on
and s
tand-alone schemes) will be supported where i t:
a.pr
otects local amenity and include appropriate stand-off distances betwe en
tec
hnologies (e.g. wind turbines) and sensitive uses;
b.has no unacceptable adverse impacts including cumulative impacts on the buil t
and natur
al environment, having regard to its proximity to sensitive receptors
(including high quality landscapes such as river valleys, reservoirs and regionalparks, parts of the urban fringe and strategic views from the Green Belt, areas
 of
s
pecial character and areas of Metropolitan Open Land);
c.can incorporate suitable mitigation measures to minimise, offset and overcome any
adverse impacts; and
d.can reclaim the land to a suitable and safe condition and use (e.g. agriculture or
nature conservation) once it ceases to operate.
Explanation 
4.6.1 Renewable energy generation is encouraged by this policy. The generation of 
renewable energy helps to decarbonise the electricity supply, and is essential to 
delivering carbon neutral development, as the energy efficiency policies in the local 
plan can only go so far. 
4.6.2 This policy seeks to ensure that potential negative impacts can be avoided or 
effectively mitigated.  Policy DM 
SE7: Climate change adaptation and managing heat risk  
97 4.7 Policy D M SE7: Climate change adaptat ion and managing heat risk      
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE7 Climate change adaptation and managing heat risk 
1.To avoid exacerbation of the urban heat island effect, improve micro-clim ate
c
onditions and provide thermally comfortable environments, development proposals
must demonstrate how the risk of overheating will be mitigat ed.
2.D
evelopments will be required to:
a.provide adequate mitigation measures to minimise overheating includinglandscaping, tree planting and the use of blue-green infrastructure; and
b.optimise the layout, orientation, materials, technology and design of buildings
 and
s
paces to minimise any adverse impacts on internal and external temperatur e,
r
eflection, overshadowing, micro-climate and wind movement.
3.Major developments must undertake overheating assessments in line with the coolin g
hi
erarchy set out in the London Plan (or any successor plan) taking account of futur e
c
limate change. All developments are required to undertake a detailed analysis of th e
r
isk of overheating and submit evidence as outlined as set out in GLA’s Energy
Assessment Guidance and any updating successors.
a.Applicants will be expected to demonstrate how passive measures hav e been
opti
mised from the outset to reduce overheating risk (e.g. form, orientation, glazi ng
r
atio).
b.External and passive shading will be expected to form part of major proposals –
and should be demonstrated to be considered for the purpose of meeti ng
ov
erheating standards prior to active or user -reliant systems being proposed (e.g .
boos
t ventilation, internal blinds or active cooling).
c.All modelling shall also be assessed against 2050 local weather files in additi on to
the c
urrent version of local data and extreme scenarios.
d.The energy statement should include a description for considerations for futur e
r
esilience including opportunities for adaption.
Explanation 
4.7.1 Climate change will increase the severity and frequency of extreme heat events in 
the Borough. Heat risk is becoming an increasingly important issue, particularly in the 
context of a growing population and global climate change. This policy requires all new development to be designed to manage heat risk, address internal and external 
temperatures and improve human comfort.  
4.7.2 Development proposals should address the London Plan’s cooling hierarchy to 
mitigate overheating and avoid reliance on air conditioning systems. This cooling 
hierarchy includes measures such as passive ventilation, active low -carbon cooling 
systems, mechanical ventilation, energy efficient design, high ceilings, shading and green infrastructure, which can all serve to reduce internal temperatures. The use of 
blue-green infrastructure and urban greening as sustainable cooling options for both 
internal and external environments is strongly encouraged.  Policy DM 
SE7: Climate change adaptation and managing heat risk  
98 4.7.3 To properly assess risks of overheating, applicants should refer to the latest 
Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) guidance on assessing 
and mitigating the risk of overheating in new developments, including TM59 for 
domestic development and TM52 for non-domestic development. The Mayor of 
London’s Energy Planning Guidance (and any updating successor) should be 
referenced.   
4.7.4 Severe hot weather events can discourage physical and outdoor activities. Development will therefore be expected to be designed to promote a comfortable 
environment, so that shaded areas are integrated into the public realm and other 
indoor amenity spaces are cool and well -ventilated. Where necessary, a contribution 
to cooling measures for spaces and streets outside the development boundary may be appropriate, for example, to make the public realm more comfortable and 
attractive for walking and cycling in line with the healthy streets approach set out in 
the London Plan. 
4.7.5 All major development proposals will be expected to submit an energy statement. 
This should clearly set out how measures at the higher end of the cooling hierarchy 
have been considered and given priority through the design-led approach. The 
Council will resist proposals that use measures at the lower levels of the hierarchy 
unless there is evidence to demonstrate that this is necessary, for example, for reasons of technical feasibility. 
4.7.6 Whilst developers will be required to manage and mitigate heat risk, it is recognised 
that the feasibility of measures  will need to be commensurate with the nature and 
scale of development. We recognise that minor developments, and in particular householder extensions, may have limited scope to implement some measures at the 
higher end of the hierarchy. However, in all cases, developers should investigate 
potential measures and incorporate these wherever possible. The urban heat island 
effect can be mitigated through the cumulative positive impacts of smaller 
developments. For this reason, the loss of established soft landscape features 
without replacement will be resisted in all cases and new soft landscaping will be 
encouraged, wherever possible.  Policy DM 
SE8: Managing flood risk  
99 4.8 Policy DM SE8: Managing flood risk 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE8 Managing flood risk 
1.New development must avoid and reduce the risk of flooding and not increase fl ood
r
isk elsewhere. New development must:
a.assess the risk of flooding from all sources including fluvial, surface water ,
gr
oundwater, sewer and reservoir as identified in the Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment (SFRA) o r any subsequent reviews/updates of the evidence bas e on
fl
ooding;
b.be appropriate according to its flood risk vulnerability classification (as defined i n
the Tec
hnical Guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework);
c.be designed to be safe for a 1% annual exceedance probability (AEP) event wi th
the appr
opriate allowance of climate change; and
d.be appropriately located (according to the sequential test) and informed by a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA).
2.Development proposals that require a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA)
should be prepared in accordance with the latest SFRA. Feasibility of the developmen
t
s
hould ensure that all opportunities to avoid and reduce flood risk are identifi ed and
m
aximised; this should include early engagement with the L ead Local Flood Authority
(LLFA).
3.All new development at risk of flooding must:
a.preserve overland flood and flow routes, where applicable;
b.ensure no net loss of flood storage on site for both fluvial and surface water fl ood
r
isk, or in exceptional circumstances, provide adequate offsite compensatory
storage;
c.demonstrate that it will be safe throughout its lifetime, taking into account  the
v
ulnerability of its users, which includes the provision of flood warni ng
ar
rangements and e vacuation plans;
d.maintain or provide new or upgraded flood infrastructure at a sufficient standar d of
pr
otection and/or provide a financial contribution towards measures which reduc e
and m
itigate against flood risk ;
e.i
ncorporate flood resilient and flood resistant design measures  where there is
residual risk ;
f.apply appropriate construction techniques to limit potential  disturbance to natural
groundwater flows (for example, where basements or deep strip foundations ar e
pr
oposed), such as the use of drainage measures or pile d foundations ;
g.w
here the development is for essential infrastructure, the measures must  ensur e
that the s
ite is designed to remain operational when floods occur;
h.manage surface water as part of all development to reduce run-off thr ough
s
ustainable drainage systems ; and
i.prevent the loss of permeable surfaces/areas of soft landscaping and maximis e
the us
e of blue-green infrastructure as potential sources of flood storage.
4.Where applicable, evidence should be provided so that we can assess whether  the
r
equirements of the sequential test of sites across the Borough have been m et and,
w
here an exception test is required, demonstrate that:
a.the development would provide wider sustainability benefits to the community  that
outweigh flood risk ;Policy DM 
SE8: Managing flood risk  
100 b.the development is on  developable previously developed land or, if this not the
case, that there are no reasonable alternative sites on developable previously -
developed land; and
c.the development will be safe without increasing flood risk elsewhere, and, wher e
pos
sible, will reduce flood risk overall.
5.Developments that are subject to or result in unacceptable levels of flood risk on sit e
or
 increase flood risk to third parties will not be permitted due to being deemed unsafe .
Thi
s includes changes of use (to more vulnerable uses), householder developments
(such as extensions, basements and retaining walls) and redevelopment of brownfiel d
s
ites. In some cases, permitted development rights may be removed as described in
the SFRA. P roposals will be refused which provide an unacceptable standar d of
s
afety .
6.D
evelopments in proximity to culverts and watercourses must have a minimum of 8
metre set back (unless otherwise agreed with the Environment Agency, LLFA, Thames
Water and the Canal and River Trust) with a means to facilitate river  naturalisation,
ecological enhancements and de-culverting, which improves maintenance of l and
dr
ainage, enhances local amenity and improves the ecological function of river
corridors.
7.Development must assess, protect and improve groundwater quality, parti cularly
where it occurs within an inner source protection zone (as shown on the Policies Map)
or on sites where historic contamination is likely to present a significant risk  to
gr
oundwater.
Explanation 
4.8.1 The number of properties at risk of flooding is high compared to most other local 
authorities, due to the large network of watercourses in Enfield, which form a key part of 
its landscape. These watercourses drain from the western part of the B orough to the 
River Lee that flows down the eastern part of the borough, which was historically an area 
of marshland. The underlying pattern of geology and the effects of urbanisation mean that Enfield is susceptible to fluvial, surface water and groundwater flooding.  
4.8.2 Although groundwater flooding is considered to be low relative to fluvial and surface 
water flooding, large parts of the borough experience localised groundwater flooding, 
which can be exacerbated by the development of basement levels. Therefore, groundwater flood risk assessments will be required where basement levels are proposed, as set out in the SFRA.   
4.8.3 Enfield’s drainage system consists of separate surface water and foul water drainage systems and as well as large open watercourses and drainage ditches. Most surface 
water outfalls into the nearest watercourse. Consequently, a range of flood risk solutions 
are required to manage flooding from all types of sources and ensure Enfield’s residents and workers are not faced with unacceptable risks of disruption.  
4.8.4 New development should be located appropriately  to avoid risks of flooding from all 
sources as directed by the SFRA and NPPF. The policy criteria above will also ensure developments reduce the causes of flooding.  
4.8.5 Developments must prepare a site- specific FRA in line with the guidance set out in the 
SFRA. In some cases, developments that are located in flood zone 1 may be subject to 
the 1- in-100 year plus climate change flood extent. The assessment of flood risk should 
also include the risk of blockages in culverts and overland flow routes.  
4.8.6 Applying the sequential test and exception tests will help to direct development to the lowest risk areas unless there is a clear justification for an alternative higher risk location. Policy DM  
SE8: Managing flood risk  
101 
 Development in areas subject to flood risk will only be acceptable provided the 
development is safe throughout its lifetime, it provides wider sustainability benefits that 
outweigh flood risk, and there are no reasonable alternative sites on developable land. 
Where climate change is expected to increase flood risk in developed land, opportunities 
to relocate development must be sought, in line with the NPPF.  
4.8.7  Where the sequential test shows that there are no suitable available alternative sites in 
lower flood risk areas and development is required, the most vulnerable elements of a 
development should be located in the lowest risk parts of the site.  
4.8.8  To be classed as ‘safe’, the development must:  
• provide a dry access route above the 100- year plus climate change flood level or, 
where appropriate modelled data exists, an access route within the “very low hazard” 
area of the floodplain6 to and from any residential development should be provided; 
and  
• set finished floor levels at least 300mm (fluvial) or 150mm (surface water) above the 
1% AEP plus climate change flood level. To achieve this without increasing flood risk 
elsewhere, it must be shown that there will be no net loss of flood storage and that 
overland flow routes will not be obstructed. For this reason, basement levels will not 
be permitted in areas subject to fluvial and surface water f lood risk.  
4.8.9  Flood resilience is a design measure that reduces the damage to buildings from flooding. 
Examples of flood resilient design measures include raising electrical circuits and other 
services and using appropriate floor and wall coverings. Flood res istance measures aim 
to prevent flood waters from entering properties, examples include fitting flood- proof air 
brick covers, closed cell insulation and non- return valves to drainage systems.  
4.8.10  The flood mitigation measures employed must have to regard to any specific measures 
identified in SFRA (levels 1 and 2), Local Flood Risk Management Strategy and the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
4.8.11  In some cases, developments may be located in sensitive catchment areas or may be 
subject to residual flood risk. In these cases, a financial contribution will be requested 
towards offsite flood mitigation measures in line with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan and 
SFRA.  
4.8.12  Development proposals should provide a sustainable drainage strategy to demonstrate 
how it meets the require ments of policy DM SE10 and that the risk of flooding will not be 
increased as a result of the development. In some cases, it may not be possible to meet 
the criteria for safe development.  This may be considered acceptable, as an exception to 
the normal r ules, for developments that involve the change of use of existing buildings 
where there are no viable alternatives available.  In this situation an evacuation plan must 
be prepared to demonstrate the following:  
• A safe access route in the “very low hazard” area of the floodplain (as defined by 
FD2320) will be available no longer than 24 hours after the onset of the flooding for a 
1 in 100- year plus climate change event.  
• An access route within the “danger for some” or “danger for most” area of the 
floodplain (as defined by FD2320) is available to and from the development.  
• Appropriate flood resistance and resilience measures have been employed  
• A safe, dry refuge area is available at all times (for example, if the ground floor is 
classified as unsafe, the refuge area should be on an upper floor).  
 
                                                 
6 Environment Agency’s Flood Risk Asses sment Guidance for New Development R&D Technical Report FD2320)  Policy DM 
SE9: Protection and improvement of watercourse  
102 4.9 Policy DM SE9: Protection and improvement of watercourses  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE9 Protection and improvement of watercourses  
1.Development in close proximity to the Borough’s network of watercourses will  be
ex
pected to:
a.have an adequate set back from the watercourse (open or culverted) to allow for
maintenance, river restoration and habitat enhancement. The distance applied will
be determined having regard to the nature of the development and the ty pe of
w
atercourse subject to further consultation with the LLFA, E nvironment Agency ,
Tham
es Water and the Canals & River Trust ;
b.not i
nvolve the culverting or loss of any watercourse;
c.involve the de-culverting of a watercourse where it is deemed appropriate fromconsultation with the LLFA; and
d.enhance the ecological, flood risk, water quality aesthetic and amenity quality
 of
the w
atercourse and apply the objectives of the Thames River Basin Managem ent
Pl
an.
2.Development on or adjacent to watercourses must not:
a.result in deterioration in a watercourse; or
b.prevent its ability to achieve the objectives in the Thames River Basi n
M
anagement Plan.
c.Where possible, it should also implement the mitigation measures identified i n
Tham
es River Basin Management Pl an.
3.D
evelopment on any land required for current and future flood management, whic h
w
ould adversely affect the delivery of flood defence schemes, will be refused
4.Where a Water Framework Directive assessment is required to undertake some works
on or adjacent to a watercourse, the dev eloper will need to contact the Environm ent
A
gency and provide information to demonstrate that the above requirements c an be
m
et or to otherwise justify the development.
Explanation 
4.9.1 The protection of existing flood defences is important because the failure of these assets 
could have severe consequences and pose a risk to life and property. New development should therefore be set back from defences and watercourses to ensure that there is space 
and access available to allow for future maintenance. Development should also be set back 
from watercourses to preserve their settings and to minimise the risks to the development.  
4.9.2 Failure of flood risk management infrastructure, such as raised defences and culverts, can 
lead to rapid inundation of the areas benefiting from defence with unexpected and 
catastrophic results.  More sustainable practices, including the restoration of river corridors by providing more space for rivers to flow and flood naturally with a catchment based approach are therefore preferred.  
4.9.3 The naturalisation of watercourses releases the potential for additional waterflow and flood 
storage and provides amenity and biodiversity value. Development should realise 
opportunities for de- culverting existing watercourses and there will be a general presumption 
against further culverting.  Policy DM 
SE10: Sustainable drainage systems  
103 4.10 Policy DM SE10: Sustainable drainage systems 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  SE10 Sustainable drainage systems 
1.A Sustainable Drainage Strategy will be required for all developments to demonstr ate
how
 the proposed measures manage surface water as close to its source as possibl e
and fol
low the drainage hierarchy in the London Plan. All developments mus t
m
aximise the use of and, where possible, retrofit Sustainable Drainage Systems
(SuDS) which meet the following requirements:
Suitability  
2.SuDS measures should be appropriate having regard to the proposed use of site, sit e
c
onditions/context (including proximity to Source Protection Zones and potential for
contamination) and geology. In accordance with SuDS good practice guidanc e,
dev
elopm ents must aim to maximise  source control SuDS measures .
Quantity 
3.All major developments must achieve greenfield run off rates (for 1-in -1 year and 1-in -
100-year  events with the allowance of climate change or achieve Qbar if one control is
employed).
4.All ot her development should achieve as close to greenfield run off rates as possibl e
and m
ust maximise the use of SuDS, including source control SuDS measures
resulting in net improvement in water quantity and quality.
5.For developments discharging directly to watercourses, greenfield runoff rates will not
always be the optimal solution in terms of managing flood risk at catchment scale. A n
appr
opriate discharge rate must be agreed with the LLFA. Achieving greenfield r unoff
r
ates for lower order events (e.g. the 1-in-2 year event) can ensure water quality  and
other
 benefits are still achieved.
Quality  
6.All developments must have regard to best practice and follow the SuDS m anagem ent
tr
ain by providing a number of treatment phases corresponding to their polluti on
potenti
al and the environmental sensitivities of the locality. As part of the SuDS
management t rain, source control SuDS measures such as rain gardens, green roofs,
permeable surfacing etc. must be utilised across the whole site to capture the firs t
5m
m of rainfall to minimise the mobilisation of silts and contaminants .
7.Measures should be incorporated to maximise opportunities for sustainabl e
dev
elopment, improve water quality, biodiversity, local amenity and recreation value.
Functionality  
8.The system must be designed to allow for flows that exceed the design capacity  to be
s
tored on site or conveyed off-site with minimum impact. Clear ownershi p,
m
anagement and maintenance arrangements must be established.
Other  
9.Where appropriate, developments must incorporate relevant measures identified in  the
Loc
al Flood Risk Management Strategy7.
7 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/environment/flooding-information-local-flood- risk-management-strategy-2016.pdf Policy DM 
SE10: Sustainable drainage systems  
104 10.The criteria above can be demonstrated through the submission of a SuDS strategy  at
full planning application s tage.
11.Developments must consider SuDS provision in the earliest phases of the desi gn
pr
ocess as the SuDS strategy affects the layout of the development and has a direc t
effec
t on landscaping, urban greening and biodiversity.
Explanation 
4.10.1 Effective management of surface water will reduce the risk of flooding, pollution and 
other environmental damage.  
4.10.2 As all areas of the Borough are either in an area at risk of flooding or upstream of an 
area at risk of flooding, any development has the potential to increase the risk of 
flooding further down the catchment. Even minor developments, such as modifications to individual properties, contribute significantly to the overall runoff 
characteristics of a given catchment area when their cumulative effect is considered. 
Consequently, all developments must  maximise the use of SuDS, including 
previously developed sites .  
4.10.3 The Council has developed two SuDS proformas which are designed to assist developers in identifying what SuDS measures are required depending on the scale of development (see Table 4.6 ). All developments must also make every effort to 
retain and enhance permeable surfaces, flood storage and flow routes to mitigate possible increases in flood risk elsewhere. SuDS should be provided on site so that they are managed as part of that development in accordance with the drainage 
hierarchy  set out in the London Plan: 
Table 4.6: Sustainable drainage system proformas 
Guidance 
proforma  Development type  
Minor 
developments  •Householder developments (e.g. extensions, crossovers ,
minor outbuildings, change of uses)
•Minor developments up to one unit, or with a footpri nt of
less than 250m2
Other •Minor developme nts two units of more, or with a footprint of
250m2 or more8
•All major developments
8 In cases where developments of 2 or more units are likely to have a significant impact on surface water drainage, the more 
detailed proforma should be utilised Policy DM  
SE10: Sustainable drainage systems  
105 
 4.10.4  The selection of SuDS measures must be appropriate to the site and the nature of 
the proposed development and/or operations. Local geology, areas of sensitive 
groundwater supplies (e.g. Source Protection Zones) and the pollution potential of 
certain uses may constrain the ability of a site to rely on full infiltration.  However, this 
does not mean that SuDS should not be implemented –  designs that deliver the key 
benefits of SuDS, flood risk management and pollution mitigation, can be achieved 
on any type of development regardless of the ground conditions through the use of 
measures such as impermeable liners where required. Developers must use 
information on local conditions (including the SFRA, SWMP, LFRMS and information 
held by other organisations) to inform/justify their selection of SuDS measures.  
4.10.5  National, regional and local SuDS policies encourage the multiple benefits of green 
infrastructure SuDS to be realised: these include water quality, biodiversity, amenity, 
air quality and a reduction in noise pollution and the urban heat island effect –  these 
contribute to improved public health and wellbeing as well as providing wider 
environmental benefits. To facilitate delivery, make efficient use of available space, 
and maximise the overall benefits, SuDS should be integrated into landscaping 
schemes. Almost all landscaped features have the potential for above ground 
storage. Well -designed SuDS can also contribute to a developments the London 
Plan’s urban greening factor and open space requirements. 
4.10.6  To maximise SuDS performance, it is important to follow the principles of a SuDS 
management train. This term describes a series of SuDS components used in 
sequence to treat, store and control runoff. Source control SuDS measures such as 
rain gardens, green roofs and permeable paving, form part of the “treatment” 
component of the management train and should be utilised for the majority of the 
hardstanding and roof runoff. These  features should be designed to capture the first 
5mm of rainfall and improve the water quality of the runoff generated from the site. 
“Pipe -to-pond” solutions where runoff is directed straight into a storage feature 
without passing through a source control measure should be avoided, as this often 
results in polluted and silted storage features which pose management problems. 
This also means that source control SuDS measures should be utilised upstream of 
proprietary treatment measures (e.g. petrol interceptors) as a treatment component 
of the SuDS management train. Some developments may require a series of 
treatment components, corresponding to the pollution potential and environmental 
sensitivities of the site. To be effective, SuDS need to be properly mai ntained. 
Maintenance issues can be simplified by keeping SuDS above ground. Examples of 
above ground SuDS features include basins and ponds, green roofs, permeable 
surfaces, water butts and swales. By keeping such features above ground, when 
problems do oc cur, they are generally obvious and can be remedied simply using 
standard landscaping practice.  
4.10.7  There may be cases where an offsite contribution towards SuDS measures and flood 
alleviation will be required, particularly where developments fail to achieve policy 
requirements or are located in sensitive catchments.  
4.10.8  SuDS should be designed in accordance with best practice guidance such as the 
SuDS Manual, DEFRA’s Non-Statutory technical standards and Enfield’s Design and 
Evaluation Guide9.  
                                                 
9 Further guidance on drainage strategies can be found on our website at 
https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/sustainable- drainage- systems/ along with the SuDS proformas for minor and major 
developments. Chapter 4 
Have your say… 
106 Have your say on  chapter 4 … 
SE1: Responding to the climate emergency  
4.1.1 Are there any other measures that should be included in the Local Plan to help 
tackle the climate emergency ? 
SE2: Sustainable design and construction 
4.2.1 Is this the right way to support sustainable design and construction? Have we 
addressed the necessary key considerations?  
SE3: Whole- life carbon and circular economy  
4.3.1 Is this the right way to reduce embodied emissions and help to embed circular 
economy principles in new development? 
Question SE4: Reducing energy demand  
4.4.1 Is this the right approach to reducing space heating demand and in-use energy 
consumption? 
Questions SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon development 
4.5.1 Is % over Part L the right measure for reducing greenhouse gas emissions? 
4.5.2 Is this the right approach to incentivise on-site renewables? 
Question SE6: Renewable energy development 
4.6.1 Is this the right approach to properly managing the potential impacts of renewable 
energy development? 
Question SE7: C limate change adaption and managing heat risk 
4.7.1 Does this policy set out a robust framework for managing heat risk?  Chapter 5 
Addressing equality and improving health and wellbeing 
Strategic Policy 
SP SC1: Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s diverse communities 
107 5 Addressing equality and improving health and wellbeing 
Introduction  
5.1 This section outlines policies to ensure development contri butes towards creating 
healthier places and reducing inequalities across the Borough in line with the 
objectives of the Enfield Health and Well Being Strategy, Enfield Transport Plan, Blue 
and Green Strategy and London Plan.  
5.1 Strategic Policy SP SC1: Impro ving health and wellbeing of 
Enfield’s diverse communities 
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  SC1 Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s diverse communities  
1.Proposals will be expected to contribute to healthy and active lifestyles and incl ude
m
easures to reduce health inequalities through the provisi on of:
a.ac
cess to sustainable modes of travel, including safe cycling routes, attractiv e
w
alking route and easy access to public transport to reduce car dependency ;
b.ac
cess to green infrastructure, including to blue corridors, open spaces a nd
l
eisure, recreation and play facilities to encourage physical activity ;
c.ac
cess to local community facilities, services and shops, which encourag e
oppor
tunities for social interaction and active livi ng;
d.ac
cess to local healthy food opportunities, allotments and food growing spaces ;
e.an i
nclusive development layout and public realm that considers the needs of all ,
i
ncluding the older population and disabled peopl e; and
f.ac
tive design principles which supports wellbeing and greater physical movem ent
as
 part of everyday routines .
2.D
evelopment within the following categories will be expected to show how they will
address any adverse health impacts and contribute to improving the health and well -
being of the Borough through the submission of a health impact assessm ent:
•R
esidential developments comprising 50 or more units ;
•M
ajor and strategic development within areas of poor air quality10;
•E
ducation, health, leisure and community facilities ;
•C
are homes/sheltered accommodation ; and
•Ho
t-food-takeaways, drive-through restaurants, betting shops and payday l oan
s
hops.
Where significant impacts are identified, measures to mitigate the adverse impac t
of the dev
elopment should be incorporated within the proposed scheme  and,
w
here possible, achieve positive gains (taking account of the priorities set out i n
the E
nfield Health and Wellbeing Strategy  and any updating successor ).
10 As set out in the Air Quality Assessment Strategic Policy 
SP SC1: Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s diverse communities 
108 Explanation 
5.1.1 Health and wellbeing is  a cross -cutting theme, which has links to many other parts of 
the Local Plan. Our environment is a key determinant of people’s health and 
wellbeing. The planning system plays a key role in the physical and mental wellbeing 
of the population. A healthy environment can promote wellbeing and healthy lifestyles 
for all and can contribute to a reduction in health inequalities.   
5.1.2 Like other parts of London, Enfield faces a range of health inequalities, such as rising 
obesity rates and increasing prevalence of long term diseases like diabetes, heart 
failure and dementia. Overall, life expectancy is higher than the London and national 
average, but the gap between the deprived and more affluent wards of the Borough 
continues to widen.  
5.1.3 Health impact assessments  (HIAs) are designed to screen and test the health 
implications arising from proposed development (especially on vulnerable groups) 
and recommend mitigation and enhancement measures. These assessments will be 
expected to follow the recommended guidance set out in the latest Healthy Urban 
Planning Checklist (Healthy Urban Development Unit). This checklist should be used 
at the earliest possible stage of the planning process to inform the design, layout and 
composition of the proposed development (including ongoing management or 
monitoring arrangements). The level of detail required will depend on the scale, 
nature and location of the proposed development. 
5.1.4 The list set out in part 2 of the policy is not exhaustive: there may be other categories 
of development where t he submission of a health impact assessment (HIA) will be 
required under the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) regulations (for instance, 
where it would affect sensitive or vulnerable populations).  
5.1.5 Applicants should use the NHS Healthy Urban Developm ent Unit’s “Planning 
Contribution Model for London” to calculate costs and financial contributions. These 
contributions will usually be spent on capital projects. However, it may be appropriate 
to seek a revenue contribution within opportunity areas over a fixed period to cover 
the gap between the arrival of a new population and their inclusion within the Department of Health funding allocations.  Strategic Policy 
SP SC2: Protecting and enhancing social and community infrastructure  
109 5.2 Strategic Policy SP SC2: Protecting and enhancing social and 
community infrastructure    
DRAFT 
STATEGIC  
POLICY SP SC2 Protecting and enhancing social and community infrastructure   
1.Development involving the loss or release of a community building or use to otheruses will not be supported unless evidence can be provided as part of the planni
ng
appl
ication  to demonstrate it has been:
a.offered to the market for the range of existing lawful uses (typically non-residential
institutions, such as places of worship, schools and community halls) over a 12-
month period, at a market rent or sale price benchmarked against other equival ent
pr
operties in the area;
b.declared surplus to requirements or adequate replacement provision can  be
pr
ovided elsewhere;
c.shown to be unsuitable in size and scale to its location which already has  good
ac
cess to facilities which meet similar local needs where these arise; and
d.the opportunities to share the use of the existing site or co locate services hav e
been ful
ly explored and are shown to be impractical.
2.New or improved community facilities should:
a.be located within or adjacent to the Borough’s designated town centres (as show n
on the P
olicies Map) and neighbourhood shopping parades, unless they are withi n
w
alking distance of public transport, pedestrian and cycling routes or form par t of a
r
ecognisable or planned cluster/hub of community facilities;
b.be outward-looking, creating a strong active frontage which is not set back from
the street so that they are welcoming, safe and inclusiv e;
c.opti
mise the use and capacity of the site;
d.avoid the loss of housing and employment floorspace and significant harm  to the
am
enities of neighbouring properties and uses ;
e.oper
ate as a multifunctional space offering fair and affordable access to the public
(including protected groups) and sufficient capacity/flexibility to meet a r ange of
needs
 (e.g. shared spaces  or co -located uses), especially outside of core hours ;
and
f.put i
n place appropriate maintenance and management arrangements, taki ng
ac
count of the needs of other infrastructure providers.
3.C
ontributions will be sought towards new school places to meet the needs arising from
new housing development (excluding care homes) , taking account of availabl e
c
apacity within existing schools and the number of pupils it will generate, from early
years through to secondary education. New or expanded school s will be expec ted to
i
ncorporate specialist provision where demand exists and make reasonabl e
adj
ustments to support the needs of the disabled and mobility impaired. In exceptional
circumstances, a contribution towards off-site outdoor play space will be accepted i n
the v
icinity of the school in lieu of on- site provision.
4.Contributions will be sought towards additional health and social care facilities, taki ng
account of the latest strategic health needs assessment, p harmaceutical  assessmen t
and r
elevant NHS estate strategies .Strategic Policy 
SP SC2: Protecting and enhancing social and community infrastructure  
110 Explanation 
5.2.1 This policy seeks to secure the timely provision of new or enhanced community facilities 
in association with development to meet the changing demands and identified needs of 
the borough’s growing population, preferably towards the defined town centres (in 
chapter 10) and other accessible locations, such as public transport corridors. In the 
context of this policy, community provision includes:  
•education and training;
•health and leisure facilities,
•children’s playspace;
•places of worship;
•burial spaces;
•libraries;
•pubs and cultural uses; and
•provision related to community safety and security, such as police and emergencyservices.
5.2.2 Proposals involving the loss of an existing community use will be resisted, except in exceptional circumstances (see part 1 of the policy). Where the loss of a community use 
can be justified, the applicant will need to explore the opportunity to accommodate an alternative community use which would better meet local needs, in line with relevant 
strategies.  
5.2.3 Community facilities will be expected to operate as flexible and multi -purpose spaces to 
accommodate a range of uses and activities tailored to suit the needs of different groups, 
organisations and individuals. Community facilities should also be accessible to all users and designed to be visible from the street (for instance, active frontages and welcome entrances facing onto the public realm).   
5.2.4 Where appropriate, planning obligations will be sought to secure new and improved community facilities to mitigate the impact of new development in suitable locations 
across the B orough (as defined in part 2 of the policy). Estate regeneration schemes and 
other major developments will be expected to provide essential services (e.g. health, 
education and childcare facilities) within the site or a nearby location within walking distance (e.g. a neighbourhood parade) to meet the needs arising from the new 
occupants.  
5.2.5 All major developments involving the provision of community facilities (e.g. secondary 
schools and primary health care) must optimise the use of the site through a design- led 
approach. Developers will be expected to test the feasibility of innovative design options, such as multi -storey buildings, outdoor social space above the ground floor level, f lexible 
spaces and the co- location of community facilities (e.g. early year facilities within primary 
school sites and active ground floor units along the high street).  
5.2.6 New education facilities (including specialist provision) will be expected to comply wi th 
relevant guidance from the Department for Education, Sport England and other relevant national governing bodies. Planning applications will need to include details of the indicative catchment area of the proposed school and provide an assessment of the 
impact of the scheme on the local highway network and pedestrian and cycle movement 
through the site. Future needs will be met through expansion or redevelopment of existing school sites and new site allocations (as shown on the Policies Map) 
5.2.7 The Council will continue to work with infrastructure providers and relevant groups to ensure that community facilities and services are developed and modernised to meet changing requirements and reflect the new approaches to the delivery of services.
  
. Chapter 5  
Have your say… 
111 
 Have your say  on chapter 5…  
1. How best can the ELP  provide for our future community needs to secure a sustained 
high quality of life and well -being having regard to future growth?  
2. Are there any specific issues regarding educational provision that you consider need to 
be addressed with respect to new development?  
3. How do you consider that health issues should be addressed in the Local Plan? How can 
new development encourage healthy lifestyles?  
4. Do you have any other issues/comments?  
 
  Chapter 6 
Blue and green Enfield 
Strategic Policy 
SP BG1: Enfield’s blue and green infrastructure network  
112 6 Blue and green Enfield 
Introducti on 
6.1 This chapter relates to the ‘green’ (e.g. parks, open spaces, woodland, street trees and 
footpaths) and ‘blue’ (e.g. reservoirs, lakes and waterways) elements of Enfield’s 
infrastructure. The policies set out below explain how this network will be protected, 
maintained and enhanced through new development in line with the place-making principles set out in chapter 2 of the plan and the long-term vision of Enfield as a ‘deeply green and distinct place’ . 
6.1 Strategic Policy SP BG1: Blue and green infrastruct ure network  
DRAFT STRATGIC POLICY SP  BG1 Enfield’s blue and green infrastructure network 
1.Proposals will be expected to contribute to the creation of a more  integrated, multi -
functional  and accessible blue and green infrastructure network  and address
deficiencies  in quantity, quality and access  across the Borough.   This will be achiev ed
thr
ough:
a.protecting and enhancing areas of Green Belt and Metropolitan O pen Land to
m
aintain their function, quality and openness ;
b.ensuring development protects and enhances significant ecological features ,
ac
hieves biodiversity net gain and maximises opportunities for ur ban
gr
eening through appropriate landscaping schemes and the planting of str eet
tr
ees;
c.reviewing Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINCs) and areas  of
bi
odiversity deficiency every five  years to ensure development contributes as
appropriate to the borough’s  nature recovery network ;
d.i
mproving the quality, character, value and accessibility of existing publicly
accessible open spaces  and water  spaces  across the Borough, in line wi th
the
 priorities of the Blue and Green Strategy;
e.maximising  green grid links to enhance access through walking, cycling and public
transport to key destination points  (e.g. town centres), community facilities  and
pu
blicly accessible open spaces, especially  along rivers and waterways;
f.protecting, improving and enhancing access to blue spaces and the wider water
environment and improving relationship with the river  and naturalisi ng
the
 riverbank  through the removal  of hard engineered walls  and
c
ulverts  and introducing new habitats to the river corridor;
g.protecting and enhancing existing residential moorings located on the River  Lee;
h.maximising opportunities to create and increase publicly accessible ope n
s
pace and outdoor sports  (including playing pitches and ancillary sporting facilities)
with a range of sizes  across  a range of users, particularly in locations whic h
ex
perience the highest level of deficiency within the Borough;
i.protecting and enhancing the Borough’s habitat and wildlife resources, includi ng
l
inking green spaces with identified wildlife corridors, protecting and enhanci ng
s
pecies and habitats identified in the Blue and Green Infrastructure Audit
and London Biodiversity Action Plan or updated equivalent, and creating new
nesting and roosting sites;  andChapter 6  
Blue and green Enfield  
Strategic Policy  
SP BG1: Enfield’s blue and green infrastructure network  
113 
 j. supporting community food growing through development and 
building new partnerships with social enterprise and voluntary organisations that 
aspire to designate important local open spaces as local green spaces.  
2. Future blue- green interventions will be prioritised in the following locations (as shown 
on the key diagram ) through:   
a. creation of a continuous ‘green-loop’ – a walking and cycling route extending from 
the open countryside, via the river valleys, into the main urban area and onto the 
Lee Valley Regional Park  and Enfield Chase;  
b. provision of world-class sport villages at Enfield Playing Fields , Hotspur Way and 
Firs Farm ;  
c. expansion of routes into the Lee Valley Regional Park alongside open spaces and 
river corridors ; 
d. naturalisation and catchment restoration of Salmons Brook, Turkey Brook  and 
Pymmes Park through natural flood management 
e. creation of a new publicly accessible landscape (Enfield Chase – London National 
Park City ) comprising new woodland, open space and extensive rewilding;  
f. new continuous and publicly accessible linear parks (including Brooks Park  and 
Edmonton Marshes) across strategic development sites ;  
g. grey-to-green corridors: Public realm improvements along main routes ( e.g. A10, 
A406 and A101) and at key stations and town centre gateways, such as 
sustainable drainage systems (e.g. rain gardens, buffer strips and 
wildflower  verges) , civic squares and water features;  
h. new crossings/bridges over the A10, A406 and Lee Valley line to over come east-
west severance; 
i. sensitive restoration and enhancements of registered historic park s and gardens 
(Trent Park, Grovelands Park, Myddelton House Gardens and B roomfield Park) 
and associated visitor attractions ; and  
j. revitalisation of open spaces and leisure/recreational activities at Banbury 
Reservoir, Picketts Lock, Hotspur Way, Ponders End and Whitewebbs Park.  
 
Explanation  
6.1.1  As an outer London Borough, Enfield boasts some of the finest parks, gardens, 
woodlands and open spaces in Britain, attracting millions of visitors every year. This 
includes:  
• over 1, 000 acres of open space ( the second largest expanse in London);  
• over 300 hectares of woodland and scrubland;  
• 20,000 plus street trees;  
• reservoirs and six freshwater lakes;  
• Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land (which covers over 40% of the total land 
area); 
• 41 sites of nature conservation importance; and  
• 100 km of water courses  - the greatest length of any London Borough.  
 
6.1.2  As shown on Figure 6:1, Enfield’s blue -green network extends from the River Lee 
(including the Lee Valley Regional Park) in the east to open areas of undulating 
landscape and parkland in the west and north, with good links to Central London and 
adjoining boroughs. However, parts of this network remain fragmented and 
inaccessible to the public, largely due to physical  severance (e.g. railways and roads) 
and the lack of direct routes to open spaces. Open space distribution is very uneven 
between affluent and deprived areas  and there are shortfal ls of playing pitch Chapter 6 
Blue and green Enfield 
Strategic Policy 
SP BG1: Enfield’s blue and green infrastructure network  
114 provision, play space and burial space. The Lee Valley is  largely deficient in terms of 
access to open space and nature see Figure 6:1.  
6.1.3 Many of the Borough’s conservation areas contain extensive green spaces or 
important incidental spaces, often formed as  part of planned estates (e.g. Trent Park 
and Forty Hall). Important historic landscapes also exist at Myddelton House, Capel 
Manor and West Lodge Arboretum.  Grovelands Park, Trent Park and Bloomfield 
Park are identified on the heritage at  risk register and require sensitive restoration.  
6.1.4 This policy  seeks to promote the continued protection, management and expansion 
of the borough’s blue and green network, as an integrated whole, in response to the 
climate change emergency and on-going health crisis. Detailed boundaries (including 
nature conservation sites, parks, public rights of way and watercourses) are set out on the Policies Map.  
6.1.5 Enfield’s  long-term ambition is to become the greenest borough in London at the 
cornerstone of London’s national park city (as outlined in the Blue and Green 
Strategy). A series of strategic or landscape-scale interventions have been identified across the borough ( see Figure 6:1) to help the Borough achieve this vision.  
6.1.6 Development proposals will be expected to deliver improvements to open spaces, sustainable drainage systems, river corridors, green chain links and ecological 
networks in line with the principles of environmental gain set out in the government’s 
25 Year Environmental Plan.  
6.1.7 The Blue and Green Strategy should be used as a starting point to guide the provision of blue-green infrastructure within new development. Good practice guides and tools are also available from the Mayor of London (e.g. All London Green Grid Supplementary Planning Guidance) and government agencies, including Natural 
England’s Climate Change Adaptation Manual and Natural Green Space Standards.  
Blue-green infrastructure must form an integral component of new neighbourhoods 
and should be integrated into the wider network, such as the linear corridors, strategic nodes and green grid links identified on Figure 6:1.  
6.1.8 The Council will work with developers and other partners to facilitate the delivery of 
projects and programmes set out in the Blue and Green Strategy and other relevant 
strategies (taking account of the priorities identified in the latest audits and future management/maintenance arrangements) through the use of developer contributions and various external funding sources . 
Figure 6.1: Enfield’s blue and green network 
Placeholder for diagram Strategic Policy  
SP BG2: Protecting nature conservation sites  
115 
 6.2 Strategic Policy SP BG2: Protecting nature conservation  sites   
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  BG2 Protecting nature conservation sites   
1. Development will be expected to protect, maintain and enhance the biodiversity and 
geodiversity value of the borough’s international, national and local wildlife and 
geological sites in line with the following principles.   
International  
2. Development will not be permitted where it would adversely affect (directly or 
indirectly) the integrity of Special Protection Areas  (SPAs) and Special Areas of 
Conservation (SACs), unless it meets the requirements set out in the regulations11.  
Where  such potential exists, applicants should seek advice from Natural England to 
determine whether a habitat regulations assessment would be required as part of the 
planning application. The assessment w ill need to demonstrate that the development 
will not adversely impact on the integrity of a SPA or SAC.   
3. Development involving over 100 new homes within 6km of the boundary of the Epping 
Forest SAC (known as the “zone of influence’  as shown on the Polici es Map) will need 
to secure appropriate mitigation and avoidance measures in the form of strategic 
alternative nature green space (SANG) to offset any potential effects arising from 
increased recreational pressure and air pollution on the Epping Forest S SAC (either 
‘alone’ or ‘in combination’ with other relevant plans and proposals) in consultation with 
Natural England, Epping Forest Conservators and other relevant bodies.  
National  
4. Development will not be permitted where it would adversely affect (directly  or 
indirectly) the integrity of Covert Way Local Nature Reserves , William Girling Reservoir  
and Chingford Reservoirs Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), as shown on the 
Policies Map). Exceptions will only be made where the benefits of the developm ent 
would clearly outweigh the impacts on the special conservation features of the site and 
appropriate measures are provided to mitigate and/or compensate harmful impacts.  
Metropolitan, Borough and local 
5. Development affecting the integrity of a Site of Im portance for Nature Conservation (as 
shown on the Policies Map) , priority habitats/species , non-designated sites or features 
of biodiversity interest (directly or indirectly) will only be supported where: 
a. the mitigation hierarchy has been applied in line w ith the London Plan to offset the 
loss of habitats and species;  
b. it will protect, restore, enhance and provide appropriate buffers around wildlife and 
geological features as well as links to the wider ecological network; and 
c. the benefits of the proposed development would clearly outweigh the adverse 
impact on the biodiversity and geodiversity value of the site.  
                                                 
11 2006 Natural Environment & Rural Communities) Act (as amended), 1981 Wildlife & Countryside Act (as amended) and 2020 
Environment Bill  
 Strategic Policy 
SP BG2: Protecting nature conservation sites 
116 Explanation 
6.2.1 This policy sets out a hierarchy of designated and non-designated nature 
conservation sites, from international to local scale. As the hierarchy implies, the 
level of protection afforded to nature conservation varies according to the value and 
status of the site.  
6.2.2 While there are no designated sites of international importance in the borough, new 
development could have the potential to adversely affect the integrity of the Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation, Lee Valley Special Protection Area (SPA) and 
Wormley Hoddesdonpark Woods Special Area of Conservation (SAC) from the 
effects of air pollution and increased recreational pressur e. Development will be 
resisted where it would cause significant adverse harm to the integrity of these sites. 
6.2.3 Appropriate improvements will be sought within the zone of influence in the locations  
shown on Table 6.1 to mitigate the effects of air pollution and recreational pressure 
on the Epping Forest SAC through the use of financial contributions in line with the 
requirements of Natural England and the Epping Forest Conservators.  
Table 6.1: Proposed mitigation strategy to offset the impacts of development upon the 
Epping Forest Special Area of Conservation 
Type of mitigation Locations 
Recreational pressure – Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG)  
Environmental enhancements within the 
National Park City designation (as defined on the Policies Map)  •Enfield Chase
•Lee Valley Regional Park
•Trent Park
New areas of publicly accessible open 
space •Meridian Water  and other strategic
site allocations
Access enh ancements to the Lee Valley 
Regional Park (as set out in the Blue and Green Strategy) to facilitate active travel  •Areas of deficiency (access  to open
space and nature, as show n on
Figure 6:2)
Leisure and water -based sport provision •Banbury Reservoir  (in the London
Borough of Haringey)
•Picketts Lock
•Ponders E nd
Habitat creation and enhancement along wildlife corridors  •Sites of nature conservation interes t
(as shown on the Policies Map) .
Other •Contributions  to other projects
identified through the Bl ue and
Green Strategy
Enfield’s blue -green network  
Introduction of electric vehicle charging 
points in new developments  •Town centres, major growth areas
and areas of high densityStrategic Policy  
SP BG2: Protecting nature conservation sites  
117 
 Type of mitigation  Locations  
Reducing vehicle fleet emissi ons (e.g. 
non-fossil fuel buses)  • Based on the targets set out in the 
Climate Action Plan  
Promoting high speed broadband • Directed to areas with poor 
broadband speeds  
Promoting sustainable transport choice 
and public transport improvements  • Directed to areas of poor public 
transport accessibility (PTAL)  
More stringent parking standards than 
the London Plan • Spaces per number of bedrooms 
(areas of good public transport 
accessibil ity) 
Woodland and tree features to reduce 
nitrogen deposition  • Major trafficked roads and areas of 
poor air quality (as defined in the 
Air Quality Assessment ) 
 
Figure 6.2: Areas of deficiency  
Placeholder - Map showing areas of deficiency  
 
  Strategic Policy 
SP BG2: Protecting nature conservation sites 
118 6.2.4 Applicants will also need to provide details of the phased implementation of the 
residential development / access to new public open spaces and recreation facilities 
and details of site access management and monitoring to demonstrate that adverse 
effects  on the integrity of international sites  can be avoided / mitigated over the 
lifetime of the development, in consultation with Natural England and Epping Forest 
Conservators. 
6.2.5 Where a designated site or priority species/habitat is likely to be adversely affected, an ecological assessment will be required as part of the planning application. 
Protected species and priority species of plants and animals are defined in the 
Enfield Biodiversity Action Plan, Species of Conservation Concern in London and 
Species of Principal Importance in England.  The ecological assessment should 
include:  
•an evaluation of the characteristics (biodiversity and geodiversity interests)
 and
c
urrent and future conditions of the site; and
•details on how the proposed development will protect, replace and enhanc e
ex
isting biodiversity on the proposed site, including measures to wildlife habitats
and features aimed at particular spe cies.
6.2.6 In cases where biodiversity and geodiversity will clearly be affected, new development will be expected to follow the principles set out in the mitigation 
hierarchy within the London Plan. Where compensation is sought, it would need to 
adequately offset the impact on the site of nature conservation importance or 
protected/priority species through the provision of an alternative site or habitat. Strategic Policy  
SP BG3: Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and offsetting  
119 
 6.3 Strategic Policy SP BG3: Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and 
offsetting    
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  BG3 Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and offsetting  
1. All development proposals shall be considered in light of the mitigation hierarchy 
(avoid, mitigate and compensate) to protect most valuable ecological features of the 
site and minimise harm to nature. M easures will also be sought to increase or improve 
biodiversity through the restoration and re-creation of priority habitats and ecological 
networks  and the protection and recovery of protected wildlife populations , especially 
where there are gaps across e xisting corridors.     
2. Applicants must submit an action plan setting out how biodiversity will be improved as 
a result of the development to offset the loss or degradation of natural habitat on site 
(using the DEFRA metric model). The action plan will need to provide evidence of how 
the development will achieve a minimum of 10% net gain, including habitat creation, 
preferably on site.  
3. Where the 10% minimum requirement cannot be met on site, or would be better 
served elsewhere, adequate off-site compensation provision must be provided to an 
equivalent of better standard to offset the loss of habitats arising from the proposed 
development. Provision will be directed towards projects that contribute to Enfield’s 
nature recovery network and other biodiversity and landscape-scale conservation 
priorities, particularly within the following locations: 
a. Areas of nature deficiency (e.g. Enfield Chase and Chingford Reservoirs) ;  
b. Riparian corridors ; and   
c. Bug life B -line (as shown on Figure 6:3).  
 
Explanation  
6.3.1  This policy sets out how development proposals will be expected to enhance and 
increase biodiversity and mitigate or offset the harm arising from the loss of natural 
habitats (e.g. trees and river corridors) and ecological features , in response to the 
plan’s objective to create a distinct and leading part of London. Net gain12 is used as 
a proxy to measure the potential harmful effects arising from a development and 
calculate biodiversity net gain (e.g. habitat creation or enhancement) .  
  
                                                 
12 Biodiversity net gain is the achievement of measurable gains for biodiversity through new development and occurs when a 
development leaves biodiversity in a better state than before development.  Strategic Policy 
SP BG3: Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and offsetting  
120 6.3.2 The Environment Bill proposes to introduce a 10% mandatory requirement for 
biodiversity net gain within development13. Net gain measurements should be 
calculated using Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs ’(DEFRA) 
biodiversity metric (an online tool)  to establish the nature of the harm to biodiversity 
and the quality of the new green benefits arising from development as well as the anticipated costs of achieving a 10% level of net gain. In line with best practice, the 
provision of compensation to address residual biodiversity impacts will not be 
permitted unless the steps of the mitigation hierarchy  (enhance, avoid or minimise, 
restore, compensate and offset habitat loss) set out in the London Plan have been 
followed and all opportunities to avoid and then minimise negative impacts have 
been pursued.  
6.3.3 Developers will be expected to submit a detailed action plan to ensure that biodiversity measures can be properly considered at the planning application stage, 
including details of the pre-development biodiversity value of the site and the steps 
taken to avoid any adverse effects from development.   
6.3.4 As a general rule, biodiversity gain should be provided on site. Where this is not 
practicable or viable (e.g. due to its size or location), off-site mitigation measures will 
be sought from developers to achieve net gain of at least an equivalent standard.  
Any contributions will be calculated on a site-by-site basis, based on the cost of 
mitigation. 
6.3.5 Contributions will be sought towards enhancements to the nature recovery network  
such as the creation of buffer zones, removal of invasive species, planting of native species and river restoration projects  (as set out  in the Blue and Green Strategy and 
Biodiversity Action Plan) . Applicants should also consider opportunities to upgrade 
and enhance existing sites of nature conservation importance (as shown on the 
Policies Map) and habitat corridors within non-designated areas. In line with DEFRA 
guidelines these measures will need to be maintained over a minimum of 30 years. 
Figur
e 6.3: Bug Life B Line 
Placeholder – Diagram 
13 The government is considering how mandatory net gain will apply to different sites. There may be targeted exemption for 
some brownfield sites, as well as those with specific ownership characteristics, such as self-build schemes. Householder 
development (such as extensions) may also be exempt and the government is considering how net gain will apply to minor 
development schemes, including whether they are subject to a lower net gain requirement. Strategic Policy  
SP BG4: Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land 
121 
 6.4 Strategic policy SP BG4: Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  BG4 Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land    
1. Enfield’s Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land will continue to be protected from 
inappropriate development (as defined in the National Planning Policy Framework) 
and, where possible,  enhanced. The boundary of these areas is  shown on the Polici es 
Map.  
2. Development within or adjacent to the Green Belt / Metropolitan Open Land should not 
have a significant detrimental impact on the openness of the Green Belt / Metropolitan 
Open Land and respect the character of its surroundings.  
3. The positive use and management of the Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land will 
be supported where it is integrated with the wider blue and green infrastructure 
network and consistent with the strategic purposes of these designations.  
Explanation  
6.4.1  The northern and eastern parts of Enfield lie within the Metropolitan Green Belt which 
comprises 40% of the Borough’s area. Much of the Green Belt is used for agricultural 
forestry, open land and recreational uses, but also includes educational 
establishments and other institutional uses and employment premises.  
6.4.2  As well as continuing to restrict development in the Green Belt as set out in national 
policy, another key way to achieve a sustainable pattern of development is by 
promoting a strong and vibrant countryside character. This approach is consistent 
with national policy that promotes economic growth in rural areas in addition to create 
jobs and prosperity.  
6.4.3  This policy seeks to protect and safeguard the extent of the Green Belt and 
Metropolitan Open Land (as shown on the Policies Map and figure xx) and enhance 
the beneficial use of this land through positive management.   
6.4.4  These green assets contribute to the overall suburban and rural setting of the 
borough, open up access to green and blue spaces (e.g. outdoor sport and 
recreation) and the wider blue and green infrastructure network and contain diverse 
uses including agriculture, open space, wildlife sites and historic assets.  
6.4.5  The Green Belt is a permanent area of open countryside that wraps around the north 
and east of the built -up area of Enfield and contains a mixture of arable farmland, 
green space and woodland. Metropolitan Open Land is strategic open land within the 
built-up-area that contributes to the physical structure of London and includes a 
number of public parks ( e.g. Trent Park, Grovelands Park and Broomfield Park) and 
parts of the Lee Valley Country Park. Metropolitan Open Land is afforded the same 
status and level of protection as the Green Belt in line with the London Plan. 
  Strategic Policy 
SP BG5: Green Belt and edges of the countryside/urban areas  
122 6.5 Strategic Policy SP BG5: Green belt and edges of the 
countryside/urban area    
DRAFT 
SRATEGIC POLICY SP  BG5 Green Belt and edges of the countryside/urban areas  
1.Inappropriate development within the Green Belt (as shown on the Policies Map) willnot be permitted.  Development that is not inappropriate will only be permitted wher
e:
a.the s
iting, scale, height and bulk of the proposed development is sympathetic  to
and c
ompatible with the primary aim of preserving the openness of the Green Bel t;
b.i
t has regard to site contours, displays a high standard of design and landscapi ng
to c
omplement and improve its setting, and takes all measures to ensure t hat the
v
isual impact on the wider Green Belt is minimis ed;
c.the natur
e, quality, finish and colour of materials blend with the local landscape (a s
defi
ned in the Character of Growth Study ) to harmonise with surrounding natural
features; and
d.appropriate parking provision, safe access, egress and landscaping is provi ded to
ens
ure vehicles are parked safely and that the development does not prejudice the
opennes
s of the Green Belt.
2.Limited infilling within existing settlements (villages and hamlets) and the partial orcomplete redevelopment of previously developed sites within the Green Belt will
 be
per
mitted where it can be demonstr ated that:
a.the devel
opment would not have a greater impact on the openness of the Gr een
B
elt;
b.the dev
elopment would not lead to an increase in the developed proporti on of the
s
ite; and
c.the development would not lead to any significant increase in motorised trafficgenerati on, as evidenced through a suitable traffic modelling tool.
3.Agricultural, horticultural and forestry workers accommodation will only be permi
tted
w
ithin the Green Belt where it can be demonstr ated that:
a.the as
sociated agricultural unit is economically viable and has sound long-term
prospects;
b.the dwelling is essential to sustain the viability of the farming enterprise;
c.there is no suitable alternative accommodation in the vicinity of the proposed si te;
d.no ex
isting dwelling serving or closely associated with the holding has been sol d,
l
eased or otherwise disposed within the past three years; and
e.it is of a scale, design and layout appropriate to its surroundings .
4.Wher
ever possible, worker accommodation within the Green Belt should be sited as
close as possible to existing buildings or dwellings .
5.Tem
porary buildings in the Green Belt will be granted permission up to a maximum of
three years, over which period a pla nning application can be submitted to erec t a
per
manent building on the site, subject to an agricultural worker occupancy condition.Strategic Policy  
SP BG5: Green Belt and edges of the countryside/urban areas  
123 
 Explanation  
6.5.1  Development that is not inappropriate in the Green Belt is defined in the National 
Planning Policy Framework. This includes some forms of development on previously 
developed sites, limited infilling wi thin existing settlements and essential agriculture 
and forestry worker housing. However, there are some situations that may allow 
certain developments to take place in the Green Belt that under any other 
circumstances would not be allowed. These are known as ‘very special 
circumstances’. When attempting to prove very special circumstances the onus is on 
the applicant to prove that the exceptional nature of the proposal outweighs the harm 
that it would cause to the Green Belt. 
6.5.2  Applicants should demonstrate through design and access statements how the 
development has been designed to reduce the visual impact on the Green Belt and 
how it will improve the attractiveness and quality of the landscape through positive 
enhancements (including hedgerows and tree planting of native species).  
6.5.3  Limited infilling or the partial or complete redevelopment of previously developed 
sites and temporary accommodation will not be inappropriate subject to meeting the 
criteria set out in parts 2 and 3 of the policy .  
6.5.4  Farm and agric ultural workers will often live in convenient locations in or nearby 
urban areas . However, there will be some insta nces where the specific demands of 
the enterprise will require employees to live at or near to their workplace in the 
countryside. Whether this is essential in any particular case will depend on the needs 
of the enterprise concerned and not on the personal preferences or circumstances of 
any of the individuals involved. If temporary accommodation is granted, a permanent 
dwelling should not be s ubsequently approved unless clear evidence is provided that 
the proposed enterprise is planned on a sound financial basis. Upon expiry of the 3-
year time limit, the temporary building must be removed, while the land must revert 
back to a landscape of predominantly rural character.  
6.5.5  Trent Park , Picketts Lock  and Hotspur  Way are defined as ‘major developed sites’ in 
the Green Belt (as shown on the Policies Map) and contain comprise substantial 
areas of previously developed land. Where existing uses become redundant, we will 
work with partners to prepare planning briefs or masterplans to guide appropriate 
future development on these sites that will preserve or enhance the open character 
of the Green Belt.  
 
 
 
  Strategic Policy 
SP BG6: Protecting open space  
124 6.6 Policy DM BG6: Protecting open space 
DRAFT 
POLICY  DM BG6 Protecting open space 
1.Development involving the loss of designated open space (with the excepti on of
M
etropolitan Open Land) will be resisted unless:
a.it provides essential ancillary facilities (e.g. changing rooms, play equipm ent and
footpath/c
ycle links) that will enhance the function, use, accessibility and enjoyment o f
the ex
isting open space;
b.it is temporary in nature and the open space will be restored back to its originalpurpose;
c.it provides new outdoor space, the recreational and sporting benefits of which woul
d
outw
eigh the harm resulting from its loss; and
d.replacement open space can be re-provided (as part of the wider development site or
within a suitable alternative location within the catchment area) of equivalent or better -
quality  provision which is accessible to the public .
2.D
evelopments on existing designated open space (as shown on the Policies Map) will
be expected to:
a.promote the multifunctional and shared use of the existing open space, includi ng
s
chools, private sports facilities and playing pitches, subject to satisfactory
management arrangements being put in place; and
b.avoid harm to the ecological, heritage or recreational value of the existing open spac e
or
 the flood risk levels within and beyond the boundaries of the si te.
3.D
evelopment will not be permitted on private or semi -private outdoor amenity spac e
s
uch as residential gardens and communal areas within housing estates and other
similar non- designated open spaces (e.g. food growing plots) unless the loss of suc h
s
pace can be compensated and the development has overriding planning benefits.
Amenity spaces should be designed to be flexible so it can be easily adapted i n
r
esponse to changing needs, such as growing food.
Explanation 
6.6.1 Open space is an important feature of the Borough. In addition to public open space 
there are large areas of privately owned open space that residents and visitors can 
enjoy. Both public and private open spaces underpin people’s quality of life and 
wellbeing providing ‘green lungs’ in urban areas and forming an essential part of 
creating sustainable and healthy communities. It is important that residents have 
access to open spaces, including outdoor sports and leisure facilities near to their 
homes.  
6.6.2 This policy aims to ensure that new development does not unduly harm the integrity 
and open character of existing open space (as designated on the Policies Map) and 
contributes to its enhancement and/ or expansion, responding to the plan’s vision of creating a deeply green place. Some types of development (e.g. changing rooms, 
play equipment and seating) will be acceptable in principle within areas of open 
space. However, it must relate to the scale and function of the existing open space 
and be ancillary to its main function.  Strategic Policy  
SP BG6: Protecting open space  
125 
 6.6.3  In some cases, existing open space could be replaced or re- provided (as part of a 
comprehensive redevelopment and/or estate regeneration scheme) where it would 
enhance the quality of provision within or close proximity to the development site 
(e.g. reconnect previously inaccessible or fragmented areas of open space or provide 
a larger and more useable area of consolidated open space). The loss of outdoor 
sport and recreational facilities will be protected against unjustified loss in line with 
the requirements set out in the National Planning Policy Framework.  Policy DM 
BG7: Wa tercourses  
126 6.7 Policy DM BG7: Watercourses  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  BG7 Watercourses 
1.Development within or adjacent the Borough’s watercourses  will be expec ted to:
a.av
oid the net loss or covering of watercourses (unless it is a water -dependant o r
w
ater-related use in appropriate locations and of appropriate scale);
b.incorporate suitable setbacks to protect the water’s edge and contribute towards its
restoration as well as active frontages along the waterfront, where appropriate;
c.conserve and enhance views across the water and its open character; and
d.provide ecological and biodiversity enhancements to water spaces, having regar d
to the pr
inciples of the Biodiversity Action Plan and the design/landscaping of the
publ
ic realm.
2.Development within or adjacent to the Borough’s waterspaces should prom ote
oppor
tunities that facilitate:
a.continuous public access along towpaths, especially where there is fragmentati on;
b.the pr
ovision of water-related uses and sport and recreation activities;
c.water-borne freight and passenger transport along the River Lee Navigati on,
w
here possible; and
d. de-culverting urban rivers to create naturalised edges, improve links to gr een
s
paces and increase the visibility of the riverside, where possible.
3.Permanent residential and commercial moorings (e.g. marinas and boatyards)
alongside associated ancillary facilities and access requirements will be suppor ted
w
here they are located away from the main course of the River  Lee and the Lee
N
avigation Canal and do not have adverse impacts on navigation, biodiversity, micro -
climate, amenity of surrounding residents and the public enjoyment of the water space.
Explanation 
6.7.1 This policy seeks to protect, maintain and enhance the quality, quantity, accessibility 
and usage of the Borough’s existing network of watercourses (as shown on Figure 
6:4). In the context of this policy, watercourses relate to any area of water 
(permanently or intermittently) that exists in the borough, as described in  Table 6.2.. 
Figure 6.4: Network of watercourses in the Borough 
Placeholder Policy DM  
BG7: Wa tercourses  
127 
 Table 6.2: Categories of watercourses 
 
6.7.2  Collectively, these assets have played a critical role in the development of the 
borough and London as a whole, acting as important trade routes, water supply hubs 
and sources of energy and heat. The River Lee, Enfield Lock, Lee Navigation and 
New River also have significant industrial heritage and nature conservation value.  
However, much of this network remains inaccessible or hidden from public view, due 
to the presence of underground culverts (for instance, along the Salmons  Brook, New 
River Loop/Saddlers Mill Stream), high embankments (e.g. William Girling Reservoir) 
and the lack of crossing points.  
6.7.3  Proposals seeking to improve public access to the Chingford and Banbury reservoirs 
will need to consult with Thames Water  and adjoining local authorities  to ensure its 
operational function and ongoing structural integrity can be maintained and mitigate 
any potential risks to public safety and health.  
  Category  Desc ription  Regulatory 
Authority  Examples  
Main Rivers  Main rivers are designated by the 
Environment Agency and 
recorded as such on a main river 
map, they can be open or 
culverted.  Environment 
Agency  River Lee, Turkey 
Brook, Salmons 
Brook, Pymmes Brook 
and others  
Ordinary 
Watercourses  Smaller rivers, streams and lakes 
are classed as ordinary 
watercourses, they can be open 
or culverted. Often tributaries and 
headwaters of main rivers and 
land drainage features.  Lead Local 
Flood 
Authority  Saddlers Mill Stream, 
Moore Brook, 
Merryhills Brook 
(upper part), New 
River Loop, Pymmes 
Park Lake  
Surface 
Water Sewer 
Network  Surface water sewer network 
(operating in a separated network 
from foul sewers) generally 
accept rain water from highway 
gully’s and roofs and convey to 
outfalls in main rivers and 
ordinary watercourses.  Water and 
Sewerage 
Company 
(e.g. 
Thames 
Water)  All adopted highway 
surface water sewers  
Inland 
waterways / 
canals  Navigable stretches of water  Canal and 
Rivers Trust River Lee Navigation  
Artificial 
watercourses  Manmade structures constructed 
and managed to convey drinking 
water to London Land owner 
(e.g. 
Thames 
Water)  New River (the course 
of which has been 
altered through its 
history  
Reservoirs  A large raised structure designed 
or used for collecting and storing 
water  Environment 
Agency  Lee Valley Reservoir 
Chain (William Girling 
and King George V), 
Trent Park Lower Lake 
and Grovelands Park 
Lake  Policy DM 
BG7: Wa tercourses  
128 6.7.4 Contributions will be sought from developments along or close to the waterfront to 
deliver improvements to open spaces, natural habitats, flood alleviation and public 
access, particularly within areas of open space and nature deficiency   and 
fragmentation. Where development is sited near to a watercourse, it will be expected 
to contribute towards the restoration and naturalisation of the river /stream  and 
maximise opportunities to enhance the floodplain using natural flood management techniques.  
6.7.5 There is a strong presumption against development which adversely affects the character and effective operation of the water network (for example, where it involves 
the loss or covering of watercourse, such as culverting and development platforms). 
New development will be expected to maximise the benefits of its proximity to the 
waterside and its natural setting.  
6.7.6 Proposals which generate freight water -borne movements will be encouraged along 
the Lee Navigation, especially w here industrial premises (e.g. Edmonton Ecopark ) 
are located. Applicants will need to demonstrate using robust evidence that 
operations will not cause excessive disturbance to habitats .  Policy DM  
BG8: Urban greening and biophilic principles  
129 
 6.8 Policy DM BG8: Urban greening and biophilic principles    
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  BG8 Urban greening and biophilic principles  
1. New development will need to demonstrate how it will exceed the urban greening 
factor targets set out in the London Plan and how the green features (e.g. brown roofs  
and living walls) will be maintaine d throughout the life of the development in line with 
the principles of biophilic design.  
2. New development will be expected to promote opportunities to restore, create and 
enhance Enfield’s tree and woodland resource and improve links to existing assets, 
including the Lee Valley Regional Park, Enfield Chase, Trent Park and Salmons 
Brook , with priority given to:   
a. densely built -up urban areas (e.g. Edmonton, Ponders End, Southbury, Brimsdown 
and Southgate) which are deficient in terms of access to nature, open space and 
woodland and experience high levels of deprivation;  
b. areas of poor air quality along busy radial and orbital routes (e.g. A10, A110 and 
A406);  
c. the arc of publicly -owned land between Enfield Chase, Crews Hill and Lee Valley 
Regional Park ; and  
d. areas of flood risk (including river corridors ) to mitigate the impact of new 
development on the wider catchment. 
3. In particular, new development will be required to: 
a. retain and protect trees and hedgerows of landscape and biodiversity value on and 
adjacent to the site, especially those which are healthy and offer a clear public 
amenity benefit;  
b. use available roof space and vertical surfaces to install green or brown roofs, living 
walls and low zero carbon technologies (subject to viability and other planni ng 
considerations);  
c. maximise the provision of soft landscape treatment, amenity space (e.g. garden 
terraces) and new tree planting (including the use of large, shade-producing trees, 
pollinator friendly, non-native species and indigenous species, where possible); 
and   
d. provide adequate separation between the built form and the trees (including having 
regard to shading arising from existing trees and buildings and proximity to wildlife 
sites).  
4. Development that will involve the loss or deterioration of ancient woodland, veteran 
trees, ancient hedgerows, trees covered under preservation orders and other trees of 
significant amenity or biodiversity value, either directly or indirectly, will be resisted. 
Where exceptional circumstances can be demonstrated to jus tify the removal of such 
trees, adequate compensation measures must be put in place (subject to consultation 
with Natural England and the Woodland Trust) through a long-term management plan.  
5. All new streets (including new cycle lanes and roads) should be tree-lined. Proposals 
to remove trees on existing streets will be resisted.  Any improvements to the public 
realm must include a high proportion of greenery (including trees, landscaping and 
other types of planting) and active spaces.  Policy DM 
BG8: Urban greening and biophilic principles  
130 Explanation 
6.8.1 This policy seeks to maximise the opportunities to encourage the greening of the 
Borough’s urban and rural environment through landscaping, the planting of new 
woodland and street trees, provision of garden roofs and spaces, soft landscaping treatment, other planting and restoration of channelised or culverted watercourses, 
as appropriate. Implementing such measures will not only improve the aesthetic value of the borough but also provide multiple environmental benefits, such as 
biodiversity enhancements, surface water run-off attenuation, urban cooling, noise 
attenuation, energy savings, improve insulation and water purification to remove pollutants.  
6.8.2 The target is based on the urban greening thresholds and scoring matrix set out in the London Plan. Applicants will need to meet the target or provide evidence to justify 
why this target cannot be achieved. Particular priority will be given to biodiversity 
enhancements and climate change mitigation and adaptation measures in the 
application of the urban greening assessment. The assessment should also outline 
how the urban greening measures will be maintained over the lifetime of the 
development. The Council will take a flexible approach where delivery of the urban 
greening factor would detract from the heritage significance of a building, monument or conservation area and historic park and garden.  Urban greening should also form 
an integral part of the design and layout of public realm schemes and small -scale 
developments. 
6.8.3 Urban greening measures such as green/brown r oofs, living walls, trees and 
landscaping should be integrated into the design and layout of new development to maximise the environment benefits from habitat creation, building insulation, 
sustainable drainage and cooling. The type and extent of green roof/living wall 
provision sought will depend on the structure and form of the proposed development 
(including building orientation and function of the roofspace) and the character and 
context of the site (including proximity to sensitive receptors, such as noise -intensive 
activities and heritage constraints). Extensive green roofs are required to have a substrate depth of 75-150mm, unless it can be demonstrated that this is not feasible. 
The substrate depth should be varied within this range to maximise biodi versity 
benefits. Where recreational or amenity space is sought, intensive green roofs should be installed with deep substrates to attenuate surface water runoff and harvest 
rainwater on site. Further guidance on the installation and maintenance of living roofs 
or walls can be found in the Green Roof Organisation Code. 
6.8.4 Applicants are advised to seek qualified expertise from a suitably qualified 
arboriculturist prior to the initial design phase to ensure that any works to trees are 
carried out in line with relevant British standards and other guidance. Where development necessitates the removal of trees and hedgerows, adequate 
replacement provision of an equivalent value will need to follow the requirements set 
out in CAVAT, i-Tree Eco, or another similar valuation system. Where appropriate, 
planning conditions or legal agreements will be used to secure the retention of 
existing trees and landscape features within the site (especially those which are 
significant in terms of amenity and nature conservation).  Policy DM  
BG8: Urban greening and biophilic principles  
131 
 6.8.5  Works to protected trees (e.g. TPOs) or trees situated within a conservation area) 
must ensure the long-term  health of each tree and retain and enhance amenity value 
of the surrounding area. Where appropriate, new TPOs will be introduced within and 
adjacent to new development to protect the amenity of important trees. Enfield has 
vast tracks of ancient woodland, much of which forms part of the former royal hunting 
ground (known as Enfield Chase) and remains vulnerable to land use change.     
6.8.6  Green/brown roofs or low/zero carbon technologies present design solutions to the 
energy efficiency targets set out in policies (see chapter 4) at a cost commensurate 
with carbon abatement schemes. Where it is claimed that such installations are not 
technically feasible or economically viable (due to site constraints, design and 
orientation etc), this must be clearly evidenced within the sustainable design and 
construction statement.  
6.8.7  Tree-lined streets within new development should incorporate a mix of native species 
(semi-mature) and other green features, such as sustainable urban drainage. Where 
possible, new trees should be evenly placed on either side of the street.  These 
streets should also be well -connected and offer a choice of direct routes to key 
designations ( e.g. town centres), with particular attention given to ensuring 
accessibility and safety to the elderly or disabled.   
 
  Policy DM 
BG9: Allotments and community food production  
132 6.9 Policy DM BG9: Allotments and community food production 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  BG9 Allotments and community food production 
1.Proposals will be expected to include measures that increase or prom ote food
pr
oduction (from productive landscaping through to food growing spaces, such as roof
gardens, allotments and community orchards) and access to healthy and affordabl e
food. E
xisting allotment sites are shown on the Policies Map.
2.A
llotments in the Borough will be protected from development. There will be an in-
principle support for new allotments and community gardens/orchards. Proposalsshould not result in a net loss of allotment provision.
3.Provision of allotments and community food growing sites will be supported as par
t of
new
 development (including within site allocations) to meet identified needs, especially
within areas of deficiency and parts of the urban fringe.  Food growing provision w ill be
s
ought within areas of incidental open space within housing estates and business
parks, areas of good quality agricultural land (e.g. farm enterprises), road verges  and
v
acant or underused sites (as a meanwhile use).
4.New food growing spaces should be accessible to everyone and integrated with otheruses (e.g. sport and play facilities) and supporting services (e.g. water supply
 and
i
rrigation), where possible.
Explanation 
6.9.1 Benefitting from good access to agricultural farmland and water resources, Enfield is a 
leading centre in the development of sustainable food production and horticulture. Food growing space ranges from allotments, nurseries and garden orchards (e.g. Forty Hall) to community supported agriculture (e.g. farm shops) and commercial production enterprises (including London’s only commercial -scale vineyard at Capel Manor).  We 
want to encourage people to grow their own food in Enfield and maximise the benefits of food growing spaces, such as providing social interaction, reducing stress and anxiety, encouraging exercise and providing places to relax and unwind. By law, we have a duty to provide a sufficient number of allotment plots to meet current and future demand. However, many of the Borough’s allotments are near to or at capacity, especially in urban 
areas. Some plots also remain overgrown. Allotment waiting lists are also increasing in 
response to rising demand from residents, with notable deficiencies in the Lee Valley, 
Palmers Green, Bush Hill Park and Winchmore Hill.  
6.9.2 Food growing provision within new development could take the form of dedicated food 
growing areas as well as within communal planting schemes, such as fruiting trees, 
shrubs and bushes. Particularly where sites are constrained or tightly defined, developments should utilise rooftops, walls or balconies as growing spaces and 
innovative solutions, where possible. Community or private food growing facilities should 
be affordable, functional and accessible to all those who wish to take part. Participants 
should also be able to access supporting services, such as water (water butts or mains 
water supply) and tool storage.  Where a health impact assessment  (HIA) is required (see 
Policy SC1) as  part of a planning application, this should include consideration of how the 
development will support access to green space, exercise and healthy food.   Policy DM  
BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces  
133 
 6.10 Policy DM BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces   
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  BG10  Burial and crematorium spaces   
1. Proposals to reuse, expand and extend burial and crematorium spaces (as defined on 
the Policies Map) will be supported where they meet identified needs.  
2. Additional land will be set aside (as shown on the key diagram and Policies Map) to 
meet the current and future burial needs of Enfield. New burial, memorial and 
associated facilities wil l be required to fit sensitively into the London National Park City 
designation (Policy PL8).   
3. Development involving the provision of reuse, expansion, extension, new burial and/or 
cremation spaces or related facilities must demonstrate how it will:   
a. adequately meet the requirements of the various faith groups within the Borough, 
including groups where burial is the only option; 
b. be appropriately located and within close proximity to the community it is tended to 
serve; and 
c. appropriately respond to potenti al flood risk (as shown on the Policies Map) and air 
and water pollution issues through the incorporation of mitigation measures.  
4. New cemeteries or burial grounds in the Metropolitan Green Belt or Metropolitan Open 
Land will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that there are no suitable 
sites outside of Metropolitan Green Belt or Metropolitan Open Land. These sites do 
not have to be within the borough boundary of Enfield.  
5. Sites set out in Table 6.3 are al located for burial and cremation uses and defined on 
the Policies Map. Further information on site allocations is presented on the site 
proformas in Appendix C . The proformas indicate key requirements and 
considerations that need to be taken into account as sites come forward for 
development.  
Table 6.3: Sites allocated for burial and/or cremation uses 
Site ID  Site address   
SA58  Alma Road Open Space  
SA59  Firs Farm Recreation Ground (part)  
SA60  Sloemans Far m  
SA61  Church Street recreation ground for crematorium  
 
 
  Policy DM 
BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces 
134 Explanation  
6.10.1 Enfield is, like many other London Boroughs , facing serious shortage of burial space 
-a situation which will exacerbate as the population increases and the lack of funeral
space drives up costs.  Enfield has among the highest burial requirements in London .
S
pace is running out due to land shortages and rising burial demand. Enfiel d
C
rematorium, for instance, will be completely full  before the end of this dec ade.
6.10.2 Faith groups in the Borough have specific burial requirements. Muslim burials mainly 
take place at the Tottenham Cemetery in Edmonton and there are four Jewish 
cemeteries in the Borough: Federation of Synagogues Cemetery, Western 
Synagogue Cemetery and Adath Yisroel Cemetery  and Bulls Cross. The C ouncil will 
continue to work with religious groups  and other partners  (e.g. cross-boundary 
authorities ) to meet future burial need requirements as well as tackle burial space 
shortages during the plan period.  
6.10.3 In order to meet the Bo rough’s  need the preferred approach is set out in the policy to 
securing sufficient burial space in the right locations to meet the needs of the 
borough’s diverse communities over the plan period. This includes: the reuse and 
intensification of existing sites (e.g. churchyards and cemeteries) in the urban area; 
the provision of new burial spaces (including new allocations in the Green Belt) and 
extensions to existing designated sites and adjoining virgin land.   
6.10.4 New burial plots should be located away from areas of flood risk (as shown on the 
Policies Map), air quality hot spots and sources of ground water pollution. Proposals 
will be refused where they are at risk of flooding or would cause flooding to other 
burial plots (irrespective of whether  there are no other suitable sites within the 
borough). 
6.10.5 As part of the ELP, the Council has  identified six policy options and their associated 
benefits and dis -benefits, set out in Table 6.4. As part of this consultation, the 
Council is  inviting stakeholder’s thoughts on these alternatives and suggestions of 
other alternatives through consultation questions. For the next draft of the Local Plan 
the key issues section will be removed from the policy and the policy options 
removed from this section of the Plan to make the document more streamlined, but at 
this stage it was felt helpful to include in this draft for consultation to inform 
stakeholders of the issues being contended with.  Policy DM  
BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces  
(options)  
135 
 Table 6.4: Policy options for DM BG10: Burial and cremation space 
Policy options for BG10 Pros and cons of each option  Preferred 
option  
A. Do nothing  Cons  
 Means that local authority provision would be rapidly exhausted  
 Increased reliance placed on i ndependent denominational provision 
 Increased reliance on neighbouring authorities (at a higher cost to residents)  
 No  
B. Meet our objectively 
assessed needs 
ourselves in the urban 
area and extension of 
existing sites 
 Pros  
 The Borough has already taken a proactive approach to identify capacity within existing 
cemeteries and to use them whilst retaining the quality of the provision required.  
 There is the opportunity to identify existing burial sites where extensions could be 
possible (i.e. adjacent to open, undeveloped land). Other forms of provision which 
could easily intensify –  like local churchyards .  
 The Borough could provide a small or large number of additional plots depending on 
the size of extension.  
 Opportunity to identify additional capacity if adjoining land is owned by the Council, 
within the local green infrastructure network . 
Cons  
 Extension and further intensification is not likely to be feasible to meet the identified 
need.   
 The feasibility of extending sites must be considered on a site by  site basis as it will 
depend on a wide range of factors, specifically whether it is physically possible, and 
potential environmental impacts caused by extensions, and the current uses and roles 
fulfilled by such land.  
 Timescales for extensions unknown.  No  Policy DM 
BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces 
(options)  
136 Policy options for BG10 Pros and cons of each option Preferred 
option 
C.Meet our needs thr ough
t
he re-use of gr avesP ros 
This approach is already occurring in the Borough at Lavender Hill cemetery and is
considered a sustainable way of ensuring enough burial space is available i n the
borough.
R
euse of graves could be intensified further helping to ease land pressur e.
Cons
Thi
s option has potential sensitivity and controversial implications and is not suitable i n
som
e places e.g. consecrated l and.
There is no scope to reuse graves at Edmonton Cemetery as this has been exhaus ted
from 2011 to 2019.No 
D.Set a reduced target Pros 
The Borough has already taken a proactive a proactive approach to identify capacity
within existing cemeteries and to use them whilst retaining the quality of the provisi on.
O
ther forms of provision have been explored including the intensification of local
churchyards .
C
ons 
The Borough could set itself a reduced target, but this would mean that local authority
provision would be rapidly exhausted .
There is increased reliance placed on independent denominational provision and an
increased reliance on neighbouring authorities (at a higher cost to residents) .No 
E.Meet our objectively
assessed need wit h
assist
ance from duty t o
cooper
ate partner sC ons 
From consultation feedback on the Burial Needs Assessment 2020, it was clear  that
peopl
e generally preferred to be buried within their local area, so the meeting unm et
need i
n other authorities is likely to be less popular with residentsNo Policy DM  
BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces  
(options)  
137 
 Policy options for BG10 Pros and cons of each option  Preferred 
option  
 In addition, as part of the assessment, duty to cooperate engagement was undertaken 
and it is not understood whether adjacent authorities have sufficient understanding of 
their own provision and future requirements to support a co- operative dialogue and 
approach at this stage.  
F. Meet our objectively 
assessed need in the 
urban area first and 
new sites in the Green 
Belt  Pros  
 Meets the Borough’s needs in full   
 New sites could facilitate a broader offering of cemetery spaces  
 2x potential sites to meet needs  
o Sloemans farm for cemetery and  
o Church Street Recreation Ground for crematorium  
 Yes  
•  Policy DM 
BG10: Burial and crematorium spaces 
(options)  
138 Policy DM  
BG11: Blue and gr een infrastructure plans  
139 
 6.11 Policy DM BG11: Blue and green infrastructure plans    
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  BG11  Blue and green infrastructure plans  
1. A blue-green infrastructure plan must be submitted alongside major planning 
applications to demonstrate how the development will:  
a. prevent net loss, damage or deterioration to blue -green assets (including areas of 
amenity and ecological value);  
b. contribute towards delivering identified opportunities and priorities set out in the 
Blue and Green Strategy, partic ularly in areas where there is poor or unequal 
access to open space and nature (see Figure 6:2);  
c. establish a clear hierarchy of open spaces and public rights of way through the site 
and integrate them into the wider blue-green network;   
d. incorporate appropriate landscape and green elements (including new native 
planting, setbacks/ buffer zones  and water features) to reinforce and enhance the 
open character of open spaces and routes along the corridors and strategic nodes 
shown on Figure 6:1 and mitigate the impacts of pollution;    
e. help people and wildlife adapt to the impacts of climate change, including 
naturalised forms of flood storage and additional tree planting;  
f. take account of tranquillity and offer generous biodiversity rich open spaces;  
g. maximise public access and use of blue-green infrastructure, with clear 
demarcation between public and private spaces  and routes; and  
h. maintain and manage blue-green features throughout the life of the development 
(including safety and security arrangements, staffing and upkeep of facilities ).  
 
 
Explanation  
6.11.1  This policy requires the preparation of blue and infrastructure plans to accompany 
planning application submissions to guide the design and layout of major 
developments. Masterplans will be required to embed and integrate the overarching 
principles and proposed interventions of the blue -green infrastructure network set out 
in the Blue and Green Strategy and policy BG1.   
6.11.2  Developers should undertake an evaluation of the green and blue assets and 
facilities in the vicinity  of the proposed development, in terms of their  quantity, 
accessibility, quality and value to local  communities.  Each plan should set out a 
clear vision of how bl ue and green infrastructure will transform and outline the 
priorities / planned interventions across the site and wider  area.  
 Chapter 6 
Have your say… 
140 Have your say on Chapter 6… 
Policies BG1 to BG9  
How best do we protect and enhance our blue and green network in the face of i ncreasing 
growth and development pressures? 
Can you give us practical examples of how we work with other stakeholders, funding bodies 
and developers to identify opportunities to promote and enhance the natural environment, 
and incorporate net gains for biodiversity?  
Do you agree with our approach to encourage food production? 
Policy DM BG10: Burial and crematoriums    
Is Policy BG10 the right approach to meet our needs? 
Do you think it is acceptable to plan for a shortfall of space within the Borough boundary and 
promote cross border expansion instead?  
If you think we should meet local needs, where should it be? 
•More burial space in the urban area – wher e?
•Intens
ification of suburban areas ?
•B
uild on some public open spac e?
•R
elease of Green Belt land on the edge of the Bor ough?
•If other
, please specifyChapter 7  
Design and character  
141 
 7 Design and character  
Introduction  
7.2 One of the core planning principles of the NPPF is to secure high-quality  development 
and a good standard of amenity for all existing and future occupants of land and 
buildings. Design is not just about how a development looks, but is also about how well 
it works and meets the needs of users. It plays an essential role in the functioning of 
places. Well -designed buildings, places and spaces help to create attractive 
envir onments that set a positive context for the development of successful places and 
sustainable healthy communities. 
7.3 The Council is committed to achieving high quality design that responds to the 
distinctive character of the Borough. Delivering good design is  a key element of the 
ELP. There are many different principles that go into delivering good design including 
visual factors, functionality, sustainability and local distinctiveness.  
7.4 Individual places within the Borough have their own distinctive characters  which have 
evolved over time. They are valued by local communities as part of the heritage of the 
area. The council has carried out a detailed review of the character of its rural and 
urban areas in the form of a Characterisation Study that considers loca l character 
attributes. This document (and any updating successors) will be one of the factors 
taken into account when the council is assessing the design quality of development 
proposals. The Council will produce a Borough Wide Design Guide Supplementary 
Planning Document (SPD) to illustrate in detail what it considers to be high quality 
design for the Borough as a whole.  
  Strategic Policy 
SP DE1: Delivering a well-designed, high quality and resilient environment 
142 7.1 Strategic Policy SP DE1: Delivering a well-designed, high quality 
and resilient environment  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  DE1 Delivering a well-designed, high quality and resilient 
environment  
1.All developments and interventions in the public realm must be high quality  and
des
ign-led. Applications for development that are not suitable for their int ended
func
tion, that are inappropriate to their context, or which fail to have appropriate regar d
to thei
r surroundings, will be refused.
2.Development must take the opportunities available to improve an area in accordanc e
w
ith following characteristics of well -designed places:
a.context – development that enhances the surroundings, maximising the value that the
c
ontext can bring, including complementing and referencing heritage and natural
assets. The design of development must begin with an understanding o f, and
r
esponse to, its context;
b.identity  – development that is attractive and distinctive. Locally distinctive or historic
patterns of development, landscape and culture that make a positive contributi on to
qual
ity of life and a place’s identity should be reinforced;
c.built form  – development must provide a coherent pattern of development wher e
publ
ic and private spaces, including buildings, are clearly  distinguished, safe and
s
ecure;
d.m
ovement – development must be accessible, inclusive, and easy for all to get to an d
m
ove through around. It must connect well with other places, put people before priv ate
v
ehicles and  integrate land uses with sustainable modes of transport. Developm ent
s
hould be easy to understand with recognisable and intuitive routes, intersections a nd
l
andmarks;
e.nature – developments  should embrace biophilic design principles, enhance natur e
and dr
aw it into the urban environment, providing opportunities for all to access i t.
D
evelopment must connect to functional ecological corridors and habitats. Impor tant
ec
ological links must form  a structuring principle of any new developmen t.
f.public spaces
 – all spaces , including streets,  should be safe, social and inclusiv e.
They
 must be attractive, uncluttered and suitable to their intended function.
g.uses – Development should contribute to places that provide variety and choic e
thr
ough the provision of a mix of compatible uses that work together to create viabl e
pl
aces that respond to local needs.
h.homes and buildings – The interior spaces of all buildings and individual homes  must
be func
tional, healthy and sustainable, reflecting the most up to date best practic e
gui
dance.
i.resources – Developments must be efficient and resilient in their use of resources
both in construction and operation.
j.lifespan – Developments must be durable and flexible enough to, as far as possibl e,
r
espond to economic, social, environmental and technological change. Their  design
and m
aterials should ensure long term resilience and minimise ongoing maintenance.
3.All development should create safe and secure places and comply with the principlesof Secured by Design.Strategic Policy 
SP DE1: Delivering a well-designed, high quality and resilient environment 
143 Explanation 
7.1.1 The Local Plan contains a number of specific policies on design intended to address 
specific issues identified through the plan’s evidence base and engagement. However, 
all new developments must meet high standards of design and therefore, even where use-specific policies are not included in the Local Plan, the Council will assess all 
applications in line with the above policy. The identified characteristics set out above 
are set out in the National  Design Guide. 
7.1.2 The Council endorses many best practice publications and will use these and their successors to help determine whether developments are meeting the policy’s 
requirements. These include, but not limited to the Urban Design Compendium 
(Housing Corporation and English Partnerships, 2007), Manual for Streets 
(Department for Transport, 2007) as well as guidance produced on behalf of the Greater London Authority.  
7.1.3 In all cases, development should respect and complement the distinguishing positive 
characteristics of an area, paying particular attention to the immediate context. This 
does not necessarily mean creating replica development. Contemporary and innovative design can often enhance local identity, while reinforcing the positive 
aspects of an area’s built form. Likewise, proposals will be required to address 
cumulative design-related issues identified in the evidence base, such as the loss of 
street greenery, architectural detailing, boundary treatments and the visual impact of 
car parking. The Council has undertaken a Character of Growth study to inform the 
development of the L ocal Plan and ensure that new development responds to the 
unique qualities of the borough and its communities. The study builds on the work 
completed in the Enfield Characterisation Study (2011)  and describes the existing 
character of the Borough by: 
•updating the categorisation of the borough to account for recent developments;
•assessing the quality of existing areas using assessment agains
t the
c
haracteristics listed in the National Design Guide and other material, such as
more detailed conservation area character appraisals ;
•assessing the presence of local ‘ drivers of change’ , for example the presenc e of
ex
isting low -density development in relation to high levels of access  to public
transport or proximity to town centres ;
•making recommendations for the level of change  (transformative, medium ,
l
imited) to the character that would be supported through development proposals ;
and
•pr
oposing the form of development ( ‘types ’ or ‘typologies ’) that will be suppor ted
i
n each area based on the existing context and level of change propos ed,
i
ncluding the consideration of how tall buildings should be defined in differ ent
ar
eas, where tall buildings might be appropriate and what heights should  be
c
onsidered .
7.1.4 The high-level outputs from stages 1 and 2 of the  assessment can be seen in Figure 
7.1 and in the accompanying Character of Growth  study . Interactive maps of the 
outputs of the study are also available to view in more detail at 
https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/evidence-base/  . The Council will consult 
the Metropolitan Police on all applications involving major development. In areas with 
high crime rates, achieving secured by design certification may be required as a 
condition of planning consent. Where a conflict exists between secured by design Strategic Policy 
SP DE1: Delivering a well-designed, high quality and resilient environment 
144 principles and other urban design objectives, applicants must explain their reasoning 
behind the compromises made in their design and access statement. 
Figur
e 7.1: Scale of change recommendation 
Policy DM 
DE2: Design process and Design and Review Panel 
145 7.2 Policy DM DE2: Design process and Design Review Panel 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE2 Design process and Design Review Panel  
1.Design and access statements
a.Applications accompanied by design and access statements that do not clearlydocument the design evolution and rationale behind the proposal will not be accepted
.
They
 must include an analysis of the site constraints, opportunities and an assessm ent
of how
 the context has influenced the design.
2.Pre-application
a.All applications should seek pre-application advice. Applications for significant majordevelopment should be informed by a thorough and genuine pre-application process.This will involve:
i. engagem
ent in a planning performance agreement (PPA) that sets a targ et
c
ommittee date, expectations and programme of meetings; and
ii. engagement with the borough’s Design Review Panel, unless advised otherwis e.
S
maller major schemes are referable after first pre application meeting and may  be
r
eviewed by the Design Review Panel at a ‘minor majors’ workshop session. Lar ge
s
chemes (and GLA referable schemes) will need to attend multiple panels at early ,
i
ntermediate and pre-submission stages .
b.A
ll major applications must demonstrate a meaningful engagement with local
communities that give them real power to shape development. When appropri ate,
appl
ications should be presented to a planning panel.
c.Applicants may be required to provide 3D digital massing models suitable for collatio n
by
 the planning team to assess cumulative impact of development. This could be in a
for
m that accommodates software, such as VU.City .
3.P
lanning applications and post-p lanning:
a.Design quality must be maintained through to building completion by :
i. ens
uring maximum detail appropriate for the design stage is provided to avoi d the
need for
 later design amendments that negatively impact quality (to include smok e
v
ents, rainwater goods , grills, signage and other items to be affixed to or interr upt
the el
evations):
a.For major or contentious schemes (such as those within a conservati on
ar
ea or a tall building) a higher level of detail must be submit ted.
b.Im
portant design features will be identified and agreed with officers, with
input from Design Review Panel members or other independent technicalexperts
.
ii. ens
uring the wording of the planning permission, associated conditions and legal
agreements provide clarity regarding the quality of design; and
iii. avoiding deferring the assessment of the design quality of large elements  of a
dev
elopment to the consideration of a planning condition or reserved matter (for
example through the requirement for the submission of a design code); and
iv. requiring that, for important schemes such as those affecting heritage assets , the
ar
chitect appointed as design lead for the project up to and including planni ng
appr
oval must be retained for the duration of the design and construction  of the
project. Shall the architect not be retained then a payment under the secti on 106Policy DM 
DE2: Design process and Design and Review Panel 
146 agreement is due to directly employ the architect or another to provide “design 
guardian” services. This is to ensure that the original design intent is retained up to 
completion of the project.  
Explanation 
7.2.1 All new proposals in the Borough must meet the design process requirements set out 
in the National Planning Policy Framework and London Plan. The more detailed processes and actions set out in the policy will help ensure development delivers good design. 
7.2.2 The Enfield Design Review Panel will play a key role in assessing the quality of 
proposals and providing expert, independent scrutiny of proposals. This will follow the guidance laid out in the London Quality Review Charter. It is important that design quality is maintained throughout the development process from the granting of planning permission to completion of a development. Changes to designs after the 
initial planning permission has been granted are often allowable as minor 
amendments, or in the case of outline applications, in the form of additional necessary detail. However, even minor changes can have a substantial effect on design quality, environmental quality and visual impact. The cumulative effect of amendments can often be significant and should be reviewed holistically. Sufficient 
design detail needs to be provided in approved drawings and other visual material, 
as well as in the wording of planning permissions to ensure clarity over what design has been approved, and to avoid future amendments and value engineering resulting in changes that would be detrimental to the design quality. 
7.2.3 The Council will require key details that are submitted with the planning application to 
be highlighted as such so that the case officer will know to escalate and involve the design officer in the assessment and discharge of conditions. The scope of the Design Guardian is to be limited to the review of external elevations or items impacting the aesthetic look and feel of the building. This may  include, for example, 
internal items that can be seen externally and any mechanical and electrical  
packages identified as requiring ‘architect’s review’ that have an impact on the 
elevations. The scope of Design Guardian can be increased to include the re view of 
key internal spaces including communal areas, principle lobby areas and amenity spaces. The contractor and their design team remain fully responsible for all  
technical, contractual, and statutory compliance matters . 
7.2.4 Citizen participation should be part of the design process to an extent where people have meaningful say and engagement over the process and development. This should come at an early stage and fully inform the participants of the pros and cons 
and not be a “tick box” exercise limited to minor aesthetic preferences. In this way, 
local people are empowered to shape and therefore support development, both helping to improve the design outcome but also ease the proposal through the planning process.  Policy DM  
DE3: Incl usive design  
147 
 7.3 Policy DM D3: Inclusive design  
DRAFT  
POLICY DM  DE3 Inclusive design  
1. All development will be expected to contribute to creating more accessible, welcoming 
and inclusive spaces and places and to demonstrate how this has been achieved: 
a. All development proposals will need an Inclusive Access S tatement as part of the 
Design and Access Statement and as appropriate to the scale of development14.  
Applications without this will be refused. 
b. All development proposals will need to: 
i. reflect the borough’s diverse population;   
ii. demonstrate responsive engagement with affected user groups with relevant 
protected characteristics as appropriate to the scale and type of development;  
iii. support ease of access and independent, dignified approach  to, access around 
and exit from all types of development as part of buil ding inclusive 
neighbourhoods ; 
iv. provide flexible spaces that can support adaptation to accommodate changing 
requirements ; 
v. facilitate independent access to new development that minimises separation 
vi. support dignified emergency evacuation provision;  
vii. provide Changing Places facilities as consistent with the amended Building 
Regulations Approved Document Part M as a minimum ; and  
viii. identify access enhancements for heritage assets affected while maintaining 
the significance of the asset and its setting.  
 
Explanation   
7.3.1  Inclusive design approaches will benefit all of the borough’s communities in seeking 
to reduce barriers to participation and encouraging ease of access and flexible forms 
of development.  Inclusive design will encompass consideration of the journey to and 
through places, arrival, access through a site and departure. 
7.3.2  Enfield has a diverse population with many groups with protected characteristics. 
Early and responsive engagement with affected communities and relevant groups 
with protected characteristics  will be encouraged and responsive engagement for 
larger schemes must be demonstrated through an Inclusive Design Statement within 
the Design and Access Statement as appropriate. 
7.3.3  Creating inclusive neighbourhoods relies upon consideration of how space is 
accessed and social networks built.  Development proposals must show through the 
Inclusive Design Statement how access has been considered for more than the 
immediate site including connections into and out of the area. Access audits should 
be used as a fir st stage in the process of understanding barriers to access for 
building refurbishment or repurposing and almost always where a heritage asset is 
affected.  
7.3.4  Development should be sufficiently flexible to accommodate the needs of current and 
future users without requiring significant restructure.  Occupants will continue to feel 
welcome, safe and supported in their local environment at different stages of life.  
                                                 
14 Inclusive Access Statement should follow the criteria set out in paragraph 3.53 of the London Plan 2021 Policy DM 
DE3: Incl usive design  
148 7.3.5 Separation reinforces barriers to inclusion and can result in social isolation.  New 
development should always demonstrate through the Inclusive Design Statement 
how separation has been avoided through the design process.  Where existing 
property is refurbished then mitigatory measures should be identified.  
7.3.6 Emergency escape provision for disabled people should be dignified, legible and 
well-maintained.  Manual handling for escape purposes does not preserve individual 
dignity and should only be used as a last resort.  Evacuation lifts allow for significantly greater independent use.  The Inclusive Design Statement should show Emergency escape has been addressed. All measures should be fit for purpose.  
7.3.7 Changing Places facilities are an essential provision for supporting disabled people 
and their carers to leave home with confidence.  The provision of Changing Places Facilities is now covered by the amended Building Regulations Approved Document Part M for places of assembly, recreation and entertainment and collections of smaller buildings if they are newly built or undergoing major refurbishment. These locations should be the minimum provided and proposals should seek to identify 
other locations through early engagement.  
7.3.8 Historic buildings and landscapes are often perceived as barriers to participation.  Almost all heritage assets are capable of some access enhancements without harm 
to the significance of the asset.  Applicants should undertake access audits of 
heritage assets at the earliest opportunity to identify enhancements that are consistent with the significance of the asset and with guidance available from Historic England. Policy DM  
DE4: Putting heritage at the centre of place making  
149 
 7.4 Strategic Policy SP DE4: Putting heritage at the centre of place 
making  
DRAFT 
STATEGIC 
POLICY SP  DE4 Putting heritage at the centre of place making 
1. The Council will continue to review and update local heritage designations including 
conservation area designations, appraisals and management proposals, the local 
heritage list and archaeological designations, on the advice of the Greater London 
Archaeological Advisory Service (GLAAS).  Designations will be according to 
published criteria.  
2. New development within the Borough should:  
a. align with the aims and objective of the Heritage Strategy;  
b. respond to the cultural, built and landscape heritage of existing communities and 
take opportunities to integrate it into the sustainable growth agenda;  
c. better reveal heritage which is not formally recognised, valued or understood; 
d. seek to remove heritage assets from the Heritage at Risk Register in collaboration 
with Historic England and other relevant stakeholders; 
e. improve access to cultural , built and landscape heritage. Proposals should 
demonstrate how inclusive design to heritage assets has been assessed and 
integrated; and  
f. contextual development affecting heritage assets or their setting should be of 
sufficient design quality to become future heritage. 
3. Development proposals should demonstrate a clear understanding of the heritage 
significance of the site and its surrounding context and how proposals will conserve 
and enhance that significance, using available published and archival resour ces 
including the GLHER. Heritage s tatements must demonstrate: 
a. the significance of heritage assets affected by proposals;  
b. the contribution made by their setting; 
c. the extent of the impact of the proposal on the significance of any heritage assets 
affected; and 
d. any supporting information required to assess the impact of proposals.  
The level of detail should be proportionate to both the significance of the heritage 
asset(s) affected and the scale of development.  
4. Non-designated heritage assets identified as par t of the planning process should be 
assessed in line with the local heritage list criteria. 
5. Where a development has the potential to impact archaeological remains, developers 
should submit with their application an Archaeological Desk Based Assessment and 
potentially an evaluation report in order to assess the significance of the 
archaeological resource.  
6. Archaeological remains of national significance should be preserved in situ. Where a 
proposal affects archaeological remains of regional or local signific ance, developers 
should mitigate harm as appropriate in relation to the significance of the remains and 
record evidence to be deposited with the Greater London Historic Environment Record 
and the local archive. Policy DM 
DE4: Putting heritage at the centre of place making 
150 7.A full understanding of the impacts of the pr oposals on the setting of the heritage asse t
at a scale appropriate to the significance of the asset and scale of propos ed
dev
elopment.  Appropriate techniques for assessment may include annotated photos;
3D wirelines or wireframe; photomontage; verified views; 3D modelling software.
Applicants are encouraged to take advantage of new technology to demonstr ate
ac
curately the impact of a development upon a heritage asset or its setting. The level
of detail required will depend upon the scale of development / change. Through pre-
application advice services we will work with applicants to clarify and define w hat
i
nformation will be required to assess development proposals.
8.Where development is of a sufficient scale to affect area character as identified in theEnfield characterisation studies and conservation area character appraisals
 a
c
haracterisation study will be required. This will demonstrate impact on historic
character typologies as identified in the Enfield Characterisation Study (2011)  and
c
onservation area character appraisals or subsequent emerging and ad opted
doc
uments.
Explanation  
7.4.1 Long-term aspirations for management of the Borough’s heritage are contained in 
Making Places: Enfield Heritage Strategy Supplementary Planning Document15.  
Applications for development will be expected to demonstrate how proposals maximise 
the benefits of heritage for place making and community wellbeing.  
7.4.2 This policy responds to the plan’s objectives of creating a distinct and leading place by 
ensuring that heritage in Enfield is about more than standing structures and designed 
landscapes. It may be reflected in patterns of land use or community and cultural 
practices as much as key historic structures. Communities across the borough are engaged with its heritage in different ways. Local conservation study groups and The Enfield Society worked with the Council on the Local Heritage Review; many other groups and organisations are engaged with different expressions of heritage in less formal ways. The role of memory and storytelling in place making and heritage is 
expressed through oral history and reminiscence projects, faith practices, trails, festivals 
and events. This work is supported by the Council’s Museum and Local Studies Library and Archives services. The Council will continue to explore how diverse communities engage with local heritage and create a sense of place as the borough grows.  
7.4.3 In some cases, the importance of a local heritage asset, whether designated or not, can 
be linked with a certain use or purpose or with cultural practices connected to it. This 
could for example be a public house or a local place of worship which, in addition to its central function also has a purpose and significance at the centre of a local community, as a meeting place and as a venue for local gatherings and activities. These uses and the associated interaction of the public with the building may combine to be as significant as the building itself in representing and demonstrating local character and therefore a 
change of use may constitute a significant loss to local heritage and culture, even if the 
building is retained.  
7.4.4 Sufficient information is necessary to make an assessment of harm for applications affecting heritage assets. Applications will not be validated where they are subm itted 
without heritage statements, as appropriate to the asset’s significance. Details of what should be included in a heritage statement will be included in an appendix in the next plan and should be prepared by qualified heritage experts. References should include but are not limited to the Heritage Strategy, characterisation studies, Conservation 
15 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/heritage-strategy/  Policy DM 
DE4: Putting heritage at the centre of place making 
151 Management Plans for both buildings and landscapes, Conservation Area Character 
Appraisals and Management Proposals and the Local Heritage Register.  
7.4.5 Gaps in the evidence base for the historic environment have been identified. These include recognition of the relative significance of waterways which are to the historic development of the borough, particularly in the east. Enfield has an unusual number of very sig nificant historic waterways including the River Lee, the C18th Lea Navigation and 
the C17th New River all central to the development of London and Enfield. A network of cycle and footpaths and heritage walks recognises and makes positive use of these 
asset s. 
7.4.6 Designed landscapes of historic significance will include, but not be limited to: formal 
parks and gardens; burial grounds and cemeteries; semi -rural spaces; waterways; 
landscape associated with planned estates; formal greens; front and back gardens and 
street trees.  Conservation Area character appraisals and management proposals set out 
a positive strategy for the conservation and enhancement  of all of the borough’s 
conservation areas.   Development in conservation areas should demonstrate how the 
proposals are consistent with identified priorities and their distinctive place character.  
Inclusions on the Local Heritage Register have been assessed against the criteria in Historic England’s Conservation Principles. They have special local interest for thei r 
evidential, historical, aesthetic or communal value. Their significance as heritage assets will be a material consideration in applications.  Inclusions and new proposals for the list will continue to be reviewed as new information is forthcoming.  
7.4.7 Inclus ions on Historic England’s register of heritage at risk will be the focus of 
conservation and potential opportunities for enhancement.  Heritage assets can be at risk from lack of maintenance, unauthorised development or deliberate neglect. Appropriate enforcement action will be taken where there are assets of both designated and non -
designated heritage significance.  Where there is evidence of deliberate neglect of, or damage to, a heritage asset, the deteriorated state of the heritage asset will not be taken into account. This will apply to both designated and non- designated heritage assets.  
Demolition of heritage assets will only be accepted where there is evidence that all options for retention, repair and re- use have been fully explored including those options 
which may not realise the highest economic viability of the asset.  
7.4.8 Where appropriate, opportunities to enhance heritage including townscapes will be 
identified at early stage in area- based policy proposals including but not limited to 
masterplans,  area action plans, town centre studies, conservation area appraisals and 
management plans.  Public realm strategies and the use of design codes can secure a 
consistency of materials that will be of particular use for highways and area -based 
proposals in c onservation areas or affecting the setting of heritage assets.  
7.4.9 Early engagement on major schemes affecting heritage assets will be encouraged to ensure that heritage is central to place making and conserved and enhanced as appropriate to its significance.  Planning Performance Agreements and the Design 
Review Panel offer opportunities for the review of major development proposals and the pre-application service for smaller schemes.  Policy DM 
DE5: Strategic and local views 
152 7.5 Policy DM DE5: Strategic and local views 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM DE5 Strategic and local views 
1.Development is required to positively contribute to the setting and integrity of importa nt
local views  (as set out in Table 7.1 a nd Figure 7.2) and shorter -distance local views
(as identified in conservation area character appraisals and supplementary planni ng
doc
uments).
2.Where developments are likely to be visible within designated important views , the
c
ouncil will require the production of accurate visual representations of th e
dev
elopment form the surrounding area and from different points within the viewi ng
c
orridor. Dynamic models, such as VuCity, will often be sufficient. For schemes wi th a
gr
eater impact, fully rendered and verified visual representations may be required i n
l
ine with the guidance contained within the London View Management Framework
Supplementary Planning Guidance16. Development will only be supported wher e the
appl
icant can demonstrate that it does not harm or obstruct the views identified.
3.Where appropriate, opportunities to create new attractive views and vistas as well aslocal landmarks should be explored.
16 https://www.london.gov.uk/what- we-do/planning/implementing-london-plan/london-plan-guidance-and-spgs/london-view-
management   Policy DM  
DE5: Strategic and local views  
153 
 Table 7.1: Long distance views  
Longer distance important 
views  Summary of loc ation of main viewing point  
1.  Barn Hill  Epping Forest District Council off Daws Hill near 
Sewardsbury Essex E4  
2.  King’s Head Hill  London Borough Waltham Forest – Kings Head Hill 
junction with The Ridgeway Chingford E4 7EA  
3.  Mansfield Park  London Boroug h Waltham Forest – entrance junction of 
Mansfield Hill / The Ridgeway / Old Church Road 
Chingford E4  
4.  Broomfield Park  Range of views from north west corner of the park 
(Cannon Hill / Aldermans Hill entrance) looking south into 
Haringey  
5.  The Ridgeway 
(A1005) Spectacular and extensive range of long distance views 
from The Ridgeway down to Chase Court Gardens 
junction  
6.  Whitewebbs Lane  No set viewpoint but a range of panoramic views mainly 
looking south across Forty Hall are obtained moving along 
Whitewebbs Lane and form public footpaths leading off 
Whitewebbs.  
7.  Rammey Marsh  Long distance views across the marshes to the open 
Essex countryside beyond the M25.  
8.  Clay Hill  Views from junction with Theobalds Park Road, Flash 
Lane and Strayfield Road.  
9.  Approa ch to Enfield 
Town  From the top part of Windmill Hill near the junction with 
The Ridgeway down to Cha se Court Gardens junction  
10.  Ponders End  From the bridges over the railway line Nag’s He ad Road 
(A110) and Meridian Way (A1055)  
11.  Meridian Water  Raised r oad infrastructure offer views across the v alley of 
both natural and urban features. The tall buildings in the 
City of London (view 11a) and Canary Wharf (11b)  
are visible to the south and Alexandra Palace (11c)  to the 
south west, can be seen from a number  of locations within 
the Meridian Water Masterplan area  
12.  New Southgate  View from Station Road looking south towards Alexandra 
Palace  
13.  Forty Hall  Views from / to Forty Hall across the historic parkland  Policy DM 
DE5: Strategic and local views 
154 
Figure 7.2: Important local views Policy DM  
DE5: Strategic and local views  
155 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
7.5.1  Enfield has a number of attrac tive views of skyline ridges and landmarks that make a 
significant positive contribution to the borough’s townscape and landscape. These  
views  provide corridors that help to make a significant contribution to a person’s 
ability to understand the geography of the borough and its position within the wider 
north London context. They make an essential contribution to the character and 
identity of Enfield in line with the National Design Guide. Adopting a positive 
approach to managing these views and landmarks over the long term is important, 
particularly given the increasing pressure to accommodate growth and new 
development within the Borough.  
7.5.2  The London Plan identifies and protects Strategic Views which include significant 
buildings, urban landscapes and river scapes that help to define London at a strategic 
level. Whilst there are no strategic views traversing Enfield, there are a number of 
important local views that warrant protection and positive management. In addition, a 
number of local landmarks have been identified because they add to the distinctive 
quality of the townscape and provide points of visual interest. These Local Views and 
Landmarks are listed in Table 7.1 and shown on Figure 7.2.  
7.5.3  Development should seek to enhance public access to viewing locations through 
public realm improvements. Opportunities should also be taken to create new local 
views and vistas. Proposals for major development, including where multiple s ites 
are to be brought forward comprehensively, present particular opportunities to 
enhance views. Consideration should be given to the layout, orientation and height of 
buildings and spaces to enhance existing viewing corridors, or introduce new ones, 
to help reveal townscapes and landmarks. Proposals should also maximise the visual 
amenity provided by watercourses in the Borough.  
  Policy DM 
DE6: Tall bu ildings  
156 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.6 Policy DM DE6: Tall buildings 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE6 Tall buildings 
Location 
1.The principle of tall buildings will be supported in appropriate locations. Differ ent
defi
nitions of “tall building” are used throughout the Borough to reflect local context (as
explained in Figure 7.3). If a proposal is defined as tall, it will be assessed against th e
fol
lowing criteria:
a.Figure 7.4 identifies areas where tall buildings could be acceptable (subjec t to the
c
riteria contained in this policy) along with indicative maximum heights. Tall buildings
should only be developed in locations that are identified as potentially suitable ; and
b.Loc
ations marked as potentially appropriate for tall buildings do not allow for a blanke t
hei
ght across the area. Height will only be supported as part of a coherent strategy. All
other policies within the development plan remain relevant in determining the detailed
location, form and design of buildings. It should be noted that many of the locationsinclude sensitivities, including those related to heritage assets, and therefore moredetailed analysis will be needed to justify proposals
.
D
esign quality  
2.Proposals involving tall buildings must demonstrate how they will:
a.be of the highest architectural and urban design quality (in terms of materials ,
s
ilhouette, proportion, finishes and the treatment of the public realm);
b.relate well to the character of the immediate context and its surroundings, taki ng
ac
count of building heights, topography and the pattern of adjoining streets ( both
ex
isting and planned) ;
c.not har
m the significance of heritage assets, including their settings and protec ted
v
iews;
d.pr
ovide high quality private and communal amenity and play space in accordance
e.activate the street fronta ge;
f.be c
arefully sited to avoid creating a wall of tall buildings or isolated and poorly defi ned
bui
ldings and spaces ;
g.av
oid adverse impacts on the microclimate (including wind and overshadowing)  and
am
enity of the site and surrounding area (including appropriate modelling);
h.provide a positive contribution to the skyline that considers views in the medium, shor t
and l
ong distance as well as contribution to a cumulative impact across an area.
3.Applicants must submit 3D models of their designs in an agreed format to allow a fullassessment of the tall building (or cumulative impact of a cluster of tall buildings)across the borough as part of the planning application process
.
Sa
fety 
4.Tall buildings must be safely designed to protect residents and users from fir e and
other
 emergency situations. Extra scrutiny will be applied at planning stage to ensur e
s
afety is considered from design inception, including the materials and constructi on
s
ystem proposed.Policy DM  
DE6: Tall bu ildings  
157 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
  
Figure 7.3: Definition of tall buildings 
 
 
Policy DM 
DE6: Tall bu ildings  
158 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Figure 7.4: Appropriate locations for tall buildings 
Policy DM  
DE6: Tall bu ildings  
159 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
7.6.1  The London Plan defines a tall building as those which are “taller than their 
surroundings and cause a significant change to the skyline”. Context is important and 
therefore this policy defines what is considered tall in the context of different areas 
within the Borough. These definitions are shown in Figure 7.3 and as part of the 
ELP’s evidence base https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/evidence-base/   
7.6.2  There are significant opportunities to optimise the provision of new homes and 
businesses while providing a form of development at a human scale which is 
responsive to the surrounding context. Figure 7.4illustrates the areas where tall 
buildings may be acceptable. This is based on a rigorous assessment of townscape, 
character and the sustainability of the location for higher dens ity development.  
However, these are broad areas of potential change. More detailed siting and 
appropriate height of tall buildings must always be proportionate to the level of 
importance of the location (i.e. the level of relevance to the local and wider 
community and the degree to which the building helps people to identify locations 
and navigate the borough) and should be determined following the criteria below, in 
line with the London Plan:  
• Location marks a point of visual or civic significance (e.g. educational buildings, 
hospitals, leisure centres, community centres, administrative buildings). Some 
height may be appropriate to respond to the scale of existing infrastructure (such 
as large roads and junctions). However, the height should be consistent with the 
importance of these locations and should not imply important locations in medium 
and longer views ;  
• Location is near or within a town centre. This relates to the centres of Enfield 
Town, Edmonton, Angel Edmonton, Palmers Green and Southgate. 
Propo rtionate height may also be acceptable in larger local centres with good 
public transport access and amenities. Tall buildings might be considered in close 
proximity to town centres if within a short walking distance (up to 800m as 
measured along the actual walking route) and appropriate within the context 
where this does not adversely impact on the visual hierarchy of the location; and  
• Location has good (or planned) public transport access (generally “PTAL 4” and 
above, but more detailed analysis of the l evel of service and the destinations and 
travel times is recommended). Stations may also justify some height, although 
due to the context, a height meeting the definition of “tall” may not always be 
appropriate.         
 
  Policy DM 
DE6: Tall bu ildings  
160 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.6.3 Carefully sited tall buildings can help optimise the development potential of sites and 
can make a positive contribution to the skyline, denoting areas of activity and core 
functions by providing landmarks. They are often visible over a wide area. At an early 
stage of the design process, applicants will need to consider the impact of tall 
buildings and high-density development in terms of scale, massing and height (both 
within and outside of the tall building areas) on heritage assets and their setting and 
other areas of sensitivity within the borough (including waterside environments, 
nature conservation sites and countryside/open locations, such as the Green Belt 
and Metropolitan Open Land). However, it is acknowledged that the juxtaposition 
between the open countryside and visible elements of the borough (including 
landmark buildings) can make a positive contribution to the townscape and the 
skyline, particularly  where there are other strong drivers for height and in the 
absence of other sensitiv ities.   
7.6.4 Tall buildings are not the only solution to delivering high quantities of housing. In 
Enfield, tall buildings should form part of a comprehensive approach to development, 
such as an area-wide masterplan or site allocation. Where this is not the case, 
proposals should explore alternative building forms that achieve similar densities. For 
instance, mansion blocks, terraces or stacked maisonettes can achieve the same 
number of homes or floor space without excess height. These buildings can offer 
advantages in terms of better amenity and less costly maintenance.  Policy DM  
DE7: Creating liveable, inclusive and quality public realm  
161 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.7 Policy DM DE7: Creating liveable, inclusive and quality public realm  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM DE7 Creating liveable, inclusive and quality public realm  
1. All development will be expected to contribute to improving the quality of the public 
realm in terms of its connectivity, legibility, permeability, accessibility and visual 
appearance.  
2. Proposals affecting the public realm will be expected to:  
a. be consistent with best practice (such as Manual for Streets or later equivalents) and 
any locally specific guidance produced or endorsed by   the Council . 
b. take account of the hierarchy of streets (primary, secondary and quiet 
neighbourhoods) and spaces as well as focal buildings, landmarks, squares, nodes 
and gateways;  
c. retain existing traditional mater ials, boundary treatments and street furniture in situ 
unless it can be replaced to at least an equivalent standard or re-used within the wider 
development; 
d. adopt a consistent palette of surfacing and street furniture along routes, squares and 
road verges which can be maintained and replaced/repaired with the same or similar 
durable materials;  
e. open up links and improved sightlines to civic buildings, transport hubs, high streets 
and areas of open space, where possible;  
f. enhance the area’s character through planting in new, upgraded or replacement 
primary and secondary routes by lining with trees or by including appropriate 
sustainable drainage systems or other biophilic interventions;   
g. resist the creation of gated communities or privatised areas of pseudo pu blic realm, 
which do not promote socially inclusive and cohesive neighbourhoods or connectivity 
between places;  
h. create safe and accessible routes and spaces to all users (particularly the disabled 
and mobility impaired people and children in pushchairs) which are well -lit and meet 
inclusive design;  
i. incorporate appropriate safety and counter -terrorism measures to mitigate risks (e.g. 
anti-social behaviour) without compromising the aesthetic and functionality of streets 
and public spaces, particularly within crowded spaces or important civic spaces;  
j. clearly differentiate between public and private spaces and locate building entrances in 
prominent, publicly accessible locations;  
k. avoid excessive visual clutter and provide good quality signage and lighting to i mprove 
wayfinding;  
l. integrate high quality public art into the public realm, especially at gateway locations or 
other appropriate landmarks;  
m. design out concealment points and dead spaces at ground floor level;  
n. increase activity and natural surveillance at ground floor while meeting the minimum 
defensible space standards; 
o. provide accessible entrances and good access to public facilities (e.g. public toilets, 
water fountains, baby changing facilities, cycle changing and shower facilities and 
wayfinding oppor tunities) to help meet the Healthy Street indicators;  
p. sensitively integrate bin/waste storage and car parking so it does not overly dominate 
the public realm; and  Policy DM 
DE7: Creating liveable, inclusive and quality public realm 
162 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 q.provide shelter at appropriate locations where seating has been installed and no other
alternatives are provided and which respond to appropriate sunlight and micro-clim ate
c
onditions, for example, the sunny side of the str eet.
3.Proposals affecting the health of the Borough’s streets will be expec ted to:
a.prioritise and support pedestrian and cycle movem ent;
b.promote road safety and safer cycling and pedestrian movement around town centres
and transport nodes and traffic -calming measures within residential areas ; and
c.ensure electric vehicle charging points are located off street or on the carriageway i n
ac
cessible locations, avoiding creating obstructions on footways and integrate them
sensitively to reduce the impact on the visual aesthetics of the public realm  and
m
inimise appearance of clutter along the streetscape.
4.Contributions will be sought towards public realm improvements from residential
developments comprising 11 or more units in the place making areas (SS1 and PL1-10). Contributions from non-residential uses will be assessed on a site-by -site basis
,
tak
ing account of the location, nature and scale of the proposed developm ent and the
ex
tent of public access to the site and wider public realm.
Explanation 
7.7.1 The public realm can be defined as any space that is free and open to everyone.  A 
Borough-wide Public Realm Design Guide SPD , defining the network and hierarchy 
of public realm across the Borough, design guidelines and a palette of materials  will 
be prepared to illustrate further how this policy will be implemented.   
7.7.2 The public realm is the key connecting element running through Enfield, linking to the 
wider context and should be considered the initial impression of the borough. 
Enfield’s public realm should:  
•be liveable - focussing on improving health, wellbeing and reducing impac t of
noi
se levels for all users ;
•be i
nclusive – providing a safe, convenient, legible and accessible environm ent to
al
l users ; and
•ac
hieve quality - demonstrating local distinctiveness/sense of place, walkability ,
c
yclability, stop-ability, sustainability, increasing active frontages, increasi ng
natur
al surveillance, including defensible space, providing planting and access to
natur
e, detailing/furniture and maintenance arrangements .
7.7.3 The design of the public realm should denote the importance of routes and spaces by following a clear street hierarchy (primary, secondary and quiet routes) and clearly 
demonstrate how each street meets the liveable, inclusive and quality principles 
above. The relationship between the public realm and other public spaces and 
activities should be carefully considered to provide a continuous journey between 
them and incorporating other functions, such as outdoor seating and play as 
appropriate.  
7.7.4 Public realm enhancements will be focussed around town centres, conservation 
areas, commercial areas, civic spaces (including schools, recreation and leisure 
uses), transport hubs, cycle routes, footpaths, towpaths and river walks (as set out in 
the placemaking policies). Policy DM  
DE7: Creating liveable, inclusive and quality public realm  
163 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.7.5  Developing local distinctiveness and a sense of place throughout the public realm is 
a fundamental aspect of the transition of the Borough’s opportunity areas into high-
density and balanced neighbourhoods comprising a broad mix of uses. Policy DM 
DE8: Design of business premises 
164 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.8 Policy DM DE8: Design of business premises 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE8 Design of business premises 
1.All new business premises must make efficient use of land and maximise theircontribution to the urban environment. Having regard to viability and the operationalrequirements of the proposed use, a proposal for business premises will only
 be
per
mitted where it:
a.facilitates movement through the provision of suitably located, safe, naturally li t
and publ
icly accessible routes;
b.positively addresses the public realm: publicly accessible and more active areasshould front the public realm and be located close to the site entrance. Gr
ound
fl
oor uses adjacent to the public realm should have high levels of visual
permeability. Building entrances should be prominently located and clearly
indicated through the architecture and/or massing of the building. The am ount and
l
ocation of fenestration, landscaping, means of enclosure, architectural detaili ng
and l
ighting should all help to create a pleasant and safe environment for
pedestrians, cyclists and vehicles at all times of the day;
c.clearly differentiates between public and private areas and respects anyappropriate, existing building lines. In the absence of such a feature, the
development should establish one;
d.provides inclusive access arrangements and encourages commuting via cycl
e and
on foot, and 
where possible provides supporting facilities such as showers and
lockers;
e.wherever possible, locates servicing, parking and refuse to the rear, sensitively
locating and screening these where visible from the public realm;
f.is flexibly designed so as to be suitable for a number of different businesses  and to
fac
ilitate conversion to alternative uses, subdivision and/or amalgamation of units;
g.through layout, landscaping and other site features, helps to mitigate the potential
for negative impacts on surrounding uses, including consideration of access
arrangements for different uses within the site and wider area;
h.ensures that the massing and facades of buildings are made visually interesti ng
thr
ough architectural detailing, height variation and fenestration. Consideration will
need to be given to how the development will appear when viewed from  the
s
urroundings and in long views;
i.respects the grain and character of the surrounding area, for example by wrappi ng
l
arger buildings in smaller units to maintain activity, character and visual interest;
j.uses materials that are high quality and considers how, through the use of local
materials and those used in surrounding buildings, a distinct character and ar ea
i
dentity can be created, enhanced or preserv ed;
k.m
aximises opportunities for the inclusion of urban greening measures  and
i
ntegration with existing blue and green infrastructur e;
l.c
reates a good quality of internal environment including provision of natural
daylighting and ventilati on; and
m.does
 not conflict with historic land / building use where this use contributes to the
character, appearance and significance of a heritage asset or historic area.
2.Proposals involving co-location with residential uses will be supported where i t:
a.minimises overlooking between residential and industrial units and ensures good
quality  ameni ty space  for each dwelling . This can be a chieved, for example, byPolicy DM  
DE8: Design of business premises 
165 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 using top lighting for the industrial spaces and therefore reducing the need for 
windows overlooking the residential units ;  
b. incorporates measures to ensure acoustic and other environmental mitigation 
(such as odours, dust and vibration). This can be achieved, for example, with the 
introduction of winter gardens, triple glazing or mechanical ventilation into the 
residential buildings on effected facades ; and   
c. addresses movement, access and s ervicing by separating routes for different 
uses.  
3. Larger proposals must consider improving connectivity to walking and cycling 
infrastructure; access to sustainable  public  transport; access to green spaces / pocket 
parks; places to eat and drink; creche and nursery facilities for employees . 
 
Explanation  
7.8.1  There is no reason why the quality of environment of places that accommodate 
employment uses should be of poor quality. These are places in which many people 
spend a large portion of their daily lives and as such they should be attractive and 
comfortable environments that provide amenities and facilities that contribute to a 
good quality of life. This policy will help to secure improvements to the urban 
environment, create flexible, sustainable buildings, facilitate access to and through 
employment areas and encourage new businesses to locate to Enfield. The policy is 
supported by best practice urban design publications including: Industrial 
intensification and co-location study (Mayor of London, 2020) and Practice Note on 
Industrial Intensification (Mayor of London, 2018), Evidence supporting the need for a 
higher quality environment is contained in the Enfield Characterisation Study (2011). 
The criteria within the above policy will be applied to all industrial and commercial 
development proposals.  
7.8.2  The highest standards of design will be sought in areas where a higher quality 
environment is necessary, including within regeneration areas and commercial 
centres, adjacent to open spaces or waterways; in the transition zone with other 
uses; or along public routes connecting people and facilities.  Policy DM 
DE9: Shopfronts and advertisements  
166 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.9 Policy DM DE9: Shopfronts and advertisement  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE9 Shopfronts and advertisement  
1.Development involving the creation of new, or alterations to existing ground floorfrontages and shop fronts within town centres and other non-industrial locations willonly be supported wher
e:
a.the fr
ontage maintains visual interest and does not have a detrimental impac t on the
s
treetscene;
b.the frontage respects the rhythm, style, materiality and proportions of th e
bui
lding/group of buildings of which they form part of (including the upper floors) ,
av
oiding damage to existing pilasters, capitals and other significant features , and
w
here possible reinstating lost features important to the character of the street or
buildi ng;
c.s
eparate access to the upper floors of the building is maintai ned.
d.any
 security shutters proposed are internally mounted, located behind the fasci a and
v
isually permeabl e;
e.i
t does not create deep fascia zones (except where it would respect the character  of
adj
oining premises);
f.the street number is displayed within the frontage ;
g.no m
ore than 10% of the glazed area is obscured at any time, and a window display is
included and maintained at all times. Window displays should be lit at night usi ng
dedi
cated energy efficient fittings ; and
h.new
 and redeveloped shopfronts established on corner sites will be expected to utilis e
both el
evations to help activate and contribute to natural surveillance.
2. Advertisements must be of an appropriate size and type in relation to the premises
and to the street scene:
a.Adverts should not become visually dominant, nor lead to visual clutter ;
b.Advertisements should not normally extend above the ground floor ;
c.Fascia boards must be of a height and depth consistent with the traditional proportions
of the building ;
d.A
dvertisements should not normally project forward of the building line unless this is
part of an established and positive character; and
e.Internally illuminated signs, box fascias or projecting box signs will not be supported inconservation areas or where they negatively impact designated or non-desi
gnated
her
itage assets. They will be refused elsewhere unless the proposal is: of limi ted
hei
ght; recessed into the fascia area (not projecting forward from the façade) ;
c
ontained between flanking pilasters; or where the proposed advertisement type is  a
pos
itive feature of the building upon which it is proposed. Internal illuminati on of the
enti
re sign will rarely be acceptable. Externally illuminated fascias and bracketed sig n
boar
ds may offer an acceptable alternative.
3.Within conservation areas and for other designated and non-designated heri tage
as
sets, the size, siting and illumination of new advertisements must conserve or
enhance the heritage asset and protect the special characteristics and overall visualamenity of the heritage asset and its setting. Opportunities should be taken to replac
e
ex
isting advertising signage where it is of a design, location or materials that c ause
har
m to the heritage asset or its setting.Policy DM  
DE9: Shopfronts and advertisements  
167 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
7.9.1  To ensure shopfronts are attractive, secure and of a high-quality design, this policy 
requires that new shopfronts and related alterations respect the scale, character, 
materials and features of  the buildings of which they form part and the surrounding 
context. 
7.9.2  “Ground floor frontages” refers to all non-residential development outside designated 
industrial areas. The majority of these developments are those offering services to 
the public that ar e traditionally integrated within the street and located in town or local 
centres. However, the policies also apply to business premises located away from 
such centres. Frontages are defined as any ground floor element of the building that 
abuts the public  realm.  
7.9.3  The attractiveness of individual shops and other business premises concentrated 
within the borough’s town centres is of prime importance to the vitality of existing 
shopping streets and the perception of the borough. Applicants should look to 
surro unding buildings, similar buildings elsewhere, historic records (e.g. photos) and 
remaining architectural features to develop an appropriate shopfront and 
advertisement designs17.  
7.9.4  Larger businesses sometimes occupy adjacent buildings, which may be of a sim ilar 
age and character or may have been built at different periods. In either case it is 
seldom appropriate to attempt to unite separate shop units under one entablature. 
Separate vertical sub-divisions should be maintained. Where they have been 
removed in the past, they should be reinstated as part and parcel of proposals for 
new shop fronts. Similarly, in cases where adjoining buildings have different floor 
heights, ceiling heights or building lines, it is almost never appropriate to impose 
uniform alignm ents of fascias, either in elevation or in plan.  
7.9.5  In the right context advertisements can enhance the appearance and vitality of an 
area. However, where they are poorly designed or located and where too many signs 
have been installed, they can cause considerable damage to visual amenity by 
cluttering the built environment and detracting from the quality of the area. 
7.9.6  Internally illuminated projecting box -signs are not appropriate within conservation 
areas or for other designate or non-designated heritage asse ts and will only rarely be 
considered suitable elsewhere, since they are usually unduly obtrusive in the street 
scene, appearing clumsy during the day and distracting at night. Bracketed 
signboards, externally illuminated as appropriate, will often be an acceptable 
alternative. However, as with any sign, particular care should be taken to ensure that 
architectural features are not damaged when any sign is installed.  
7.9.7  The recent tendency to install disproportionately deep fascias will be resisted, 
notwithstan ding the existence of any deep fascias on adjoining premises. Every effort 
will be made to secure the reinstatement of fascias according to the traditional 
proportions of the buildings to which they are fitted.  
  
                                                 
17 Including archive images held in the borough’s Local Studies Library and Archive 
 Policy DM 
DE9: Shopfronts and advertisements  
168 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.9.8 The requirement to light window displays at night and include visually permeable, 
internally mounted shutters reflects the need to maintain safety and reduce the fear 
of crime within centres outside of business hours. It is necessary to limit the degree 
to which glazed areas are obscured (i.e. items fixed directly to the glazing which prevent visual permeability) to maintain both visual amenity and safety through protecting active frontages. This requirement will normally be implemented through a planning condition as part of a planning consent.  
7.9.9 Shop fronts should use a consistent palette of materials and consider the relationship with the neighbouring shop fronts to create a cohesive aesthetic along the shopping street/place and its impact on the public realm. Access to the upper floors of the 
buildings should always be maintained.  In cases where separate access to upper 
floors does not exist, we will attempt to secure its provision through negotiation when examining new shop front proposals and encourage access to these via main routes and street frontages to encourage continual activity.  
7.9.10 Fascias, like shop fronts, should be divided in accordance with the architectural 
pattern and traditional divisions of the buildings on which they are fixed.  Burglar 
alarms should always be fitted in the least obtrusive position possible (preferably 
immediately above the fascia) and any associated wiring should be run within the building or otherwise concealed.  Policy DM  
DE10: Conserving and enhancing heritage assets  
169 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.10 Policy DM DE10: Conserving and enhancing heritage assets  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE10  Conserving and enhancing heritage assets 
1. Development proposals will be required to:  
a. conserve and enhance the significance of heritage assets, and put them to viable 
uses consistent with their conservation; 
b. utilise the Borough’ s heritage resource to realise wider social, cultural, economic 
and environmental benefits  for affected communities;  
c. make a positive contribution to local character and distinctiveness;  
d. draw on the contribution made by the historic environment to the character and 
identity of a place; and  
e. demonstrate the value of embodied carbon within existing heritage assets  as part 
of a ‘whole house’ approach.  
 
2. Enfield will expect development proposals to make a positive contribution to the 
Borough’s regeneration and unique character  as described in the Local Plan ev idence 
base including, but not limited to the Enfield Characterisation Study and Character of 
Growth study, Heritage Strategy SPD, masterplans, conservation area character 
appraisals and management proposals .  
3. Great weight will be given to the asset’s cons ervation and consideration of harm will 
be weighed against all other material considerations .  
4. The Council  will support proposals which respond to the setting of heritage assets and 
conserve and enhance those elements of the setting that make a positive or  neutral 
contribution to the heritage asset.  
5. When considering the impact of proposals, there should be regard to the cumulative 
effect of minor changes on heritage assets and consideration of past harm.  
6. Proposals affecting heritage assets should:  
a. take opportunities to conserve, enhance or better reveal heritage significance 
through directed through  section 106 contributions to secure heritage benefits 
(public benefits) where harm cannot be minimised or otherwise mitigated; 
b. improve thermal and energy effic iency where there is evidence of a ‘whole house 
approach’ which has balanced the significance of the heritage asset and identified 
alterations which are suitable, well integrated, and sustainable; and  
c. conserve and enhance heritage at risk to secure a long term and sustainable use 
appropriate to its significance.  
 
  Policy DM 
DE10: Conserving and enhancing heritage assets  
170 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
7.10.1 Enfield’s heritage is dynamic and constantly added to as the Borough evolves and 
interactions between local people and assets change. Heritage is therefore about 
positive management of change making creative use of heritage assets and their settings for regeneration and placemaking engaging communities and promoting design quality.  
7.10.2 Heritage assets are an irreplaceable part of the Borough’s unique character and 
identity. Heritage significance will be assessed according to interest as defined in the 
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). Development affecting the significance of an asset may include, but is not limited to: the introduction of new 
structures/objects; alterations; complete or partial demolition; removal of 
buildings/features or parts thereof; development in the curtilage of an asset or demolition of assets within the curtilage of a structure, the introduction of signage or advertisements; changes of use (including the use of open spaces); subdivision or 
fragmentation; changes to landscaping; the removal of built or landscape features or parts thereof; or any other form of development which fails to conserve and enhance the asset or its setting.  
7.10.3 Enhancement of a heritage asset can take many forms, including, but not limited to: restoration, repair, removal of inappropriate development, increasing access, 
increasing visibility, increasing the educational value, conversion to a more 
appropriate use or enhancement of the asset’s setting. Only rarely will there be no opportunity for enhancement. 
7.10.4 The Council has published a Character Appraisal and Management Plan (CAMP) for 
each conservation area in the Borough. Development in conservation areas should demonstrate how the proposals are consistent with identified priorities and their distinctive place character. Article 4 directions exist for a number of the borough’s conservation areas and are an important tool in the management of development and to protect their significance. In conservation areas particular regard will be had to 
shopfronts and advertisements.  
7.10.5 Lack of visibility from the public realm does not equate to a lack of harm. The built environment is experienced in the round and consideration must be given to the impact upon views of heritage assets from private land as well as from within the 
public realm. Conservation is an evolving practice and not all previous development 
may be consistent with current best practice or national / local polices. The Council  
will su pport the development which seeks to address previous interventions which 
have had a negative impact upon the character, appearance or significance of a heritage asset or its setting.  
7.10.6 The cumulative impact of incremental small -scale changes may have as great an 
effect on the significance of a heritage asset as a larger scale change. Where the significance of a heritage asset has been compromised in the past by development unsympathetic to the asset or its setting, consideration still needs to be given to 
whether additional change will further detract from, or can enhance, the significance 
of the asset. D evelopment which has the potential to cause cumulative harm through 
repeating previous harmful interventions or setting a precedent for further 
development of a similar nature will be resisted. Exceptional design quality will define 
good growth in historic areas.  In some instances, replication and reference to the 
design characteristics of a heritage asset or area will be appropriate. In other cases, 
a contemporary and contextual design response may be more appropriate to conserving an asset’s significance.   Policy DM  
DE10: Conserving and enhancing heritage assets  
171 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.10.7  The conservation and enhancement of heritage will anchor  successful place making 
as part of growth. This can include but is not limited to the contribution to area-wide 
placemaking from distinctive landmarks, scale and grain, architectural design, texture 
and mix of material and architectural detail, distinctive patterns of development, 
characteristic patterns of use, public realm and landscape and waterw ay design and 
features.  
7.10.8  In 2019 Enfield Council declared a climate emergency. As part of the declaration 
holistic approaches to improving the energy efficiency of traditional buildings which 
demonstrate a clear understanding of construction, location, envi ronment, historic 
significance, services and occupant behaviour  will be supported. Assessments 
should take into account the existing embodied carbon within the fabric of traditional 
buildings; the carbon required to implement the proposed intervention; the carbon 
payback period; and, alternative options for realising a similar carbon reduction.  
7.10.9  Where development proposals include the demolition in whole or part of a heritage 
asset, it is important to recognise the carbon embodied within the existing structure 
and include this in a whole life assessment of the buildings carbon emission. 
 
  Policy DM 
DE11: Landscape design  
172 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.11 Policy DM DE11: Landscape design 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE11  Landscape design 
1. Proposals  will be expected to take account of the quality, distinctiveness and the
s
ensitivity of  the Borough’s areas of landscape character  (including the river valleys o f
S
almons , Turkey and Pymmes Brooks , Enfield Chase/Trent Park, Forty Hall , Lee
V
alley reservoirs, registered parks and gardens  and Theobolds Estate) and restor e,
c
onserve and enhance:
a.the landscape character and distinctiveness of the area, including its biodiversity
and cultural value and tranquillity;
b.the distinctive setting and identity of settlements (beyond the urban area)  and
bui
ldings and the wider landscape, including strategic and local views ;
c.the v
isual quality of the rural -urban fringe, marking a clear distinction betw een the
ur
ban edge and wider countrysi de;
d.the patter
n of woodland, forests, trees, field boundaries, vegetation and other
distinctive landscape features;
e. the special qualities of the historic landscapes, rivers, waterways, wetlands, lakes
and ponds, and their surroundings; and
f.the topography of the area, including sensitive skylines, ridgelines and geologicalfeatures.
2.Where impacts are likely to be significant, an assessment of the potential impac
t of the
pr
oposed development on the borough’s landscape (as defined in the Characterisatio n
S
tudy) will be required, taking account of its time -depth, scale, massing, desi gn,
hei
ght, form, layout and orientation and the measures to mitigate or minimise any
adverse impacts (e.g. cumulative) .
3.A
ll developments will be expected to provide a high quality, comprehensive har d and
s
oft landscape scheme that:
a.includes links to the wider blue-green infrastructure network ;
b.re
tain existing landscape features (e.g. trees, shrubs, hedges) which contribute
positively  to the setting and character and historic significance of the area;
c.provides sustainable drainage systems and designs that facilitate floodplai n
c
ompensation and preservation of flood flow routes, where appropriate;
d.generous tree, shrub and hedgerow planting consisting of appropriate species  and
nur
sery stock in the context of location, role and prominence of the landsc ape
featur
e, and to provide year -round interes t;
e.i
ncorporate suitable wildlife habitats, including micro-habitats
f.create new areas of landscape planting which are visually attractive, saf e and
eas
ily accessible, using local styles and materials, where possible or recr eate
ar
eas of lost or eroded historic  landscape character ;
g. contextually appropriate, robust and low maintenance surfacing materials withi n
publ
ic areas, including more attractive finishes (including block paving) in key focal
spaces and lightly trafficked carriageways; and
h.a long-term management strategy with clear responsibilities and regimes  to
maintain the upkeep of all external areas .Policy DM  
DE11: Landscape design  
173 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
7.11.1  Enfield’s landscape and topography ranges from the farmland and woodland ridges 
(e.g. Enfield Chase) and areas of open parkland in the west (e.g. Trent Park) and 
landscaped gardens (e.g. Forty Hall), river valleys  (e.g. Lea) and floodplains  to the 
east, reflecting its important position between urban London and rural Hertfordshire. 
Information of the characteristic traits of the Borough’s landscape can be found in the 
Enfield Characterisation Study, Heritage Strategy and conservation area 
management plans. D evelopment proposals will be required through a design and 
access statement to demonstrate how this is taken into account and the need to 
respect the character and appearance of the Borough’s landscape and its valued 
features, including areas of woodland and farmland, public parks and historic 
landscape.  Positive features and views should be retained and opportunities should 
be taken to improve the character through development.  
7.11.2  Landscaping should be considered as an integral part of any development scheme at 
an early stage in the planning process and landscaping schemes should be approved 
(including details on the layout of hard and soft lands caping, structural planting, 
materials, lighting and long-term  maintenance/management) before work on site 
commences. New planting will be particularly important on development sites that 
abut the countryside to soften the urban edge.  Policy DM 
DE12: Civic and public developments 
174 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.12 Policy DM DE12: Civic and public developments  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE12  Civic and public developments 
1.Development involving the construction of civic buildings, institutions and other
buildings providing services to the public will be supported where i t:
a.fac
es onto the street (including all main entrances) and includes an active fr ontage
that i
nteracts with its surroundings and encourages community use;
b.is designed to provide a landmark appropriate to the importance and setti ng of the
func
tion, aiding legibility of the wider are a;
c.bui
lds flexibility into its design and layout to allow adaptable spaces that can be us ed
to m
eet current and future unanticipated needs over its lifetime (e.g. shared learni ng
s
paces) ;
d.i
s designed to be naturally ventilated to maximise daylight, shade (e.g. use of hi gh
c
eilings in communal spaces) and social interaction;
e.communicates the importance and function of the building through architectural cues
and appropriate and attractive signage, paving and street furniture which is integrate d
i
nto the built fabric ;
f.pos
itively addresses the public realm through means of enclosure, landscapi ng and
the l
ocation and design of parking and servicing (car parking should be located at th e
r
ear of the building, where possible);
g.puts inclusive access arrangements in place so that all users can move freelythroughout the site and opportunities to facilitate ancillary/alternative uses ar
e
m
aximised; and
h.maximises opportunities for the inclusion of urban greening measures, biophilic desi gn
pr
inciples and integrates with existing blue and green infrastructure.
2. Large-scale civic developments (especially those occupying more than one building)
must consider whether public access through the site is necessary to facili tate
m
ovement within the area. In this instance, way -finding infrastructure may als o be
r
equired.
Explanation 
7.12.1 Civic/public buildings and institutions are defined as any building that provides a public 
service, or to which the public has a high degree of access. These can include but are not limited to: polic e and fire stations; educational facilities, health care facilities, leisure and 
cultural facilities; community halls and gathering spaces; administrative centres and government buildings. By their very nature, these buildings tend to stand out from surrou nding 
uses and act as landmarks.  
7.12.2 This policy seeks to ensure that new public buildings of civic importance or extensions to 
existing civic buildings and spaces achieve the very best standards of design and fit well into 
the surrounding public realm, creating a renewed sense of identity and civic pride, 
championing urban greening and the principles of sustainable design.  
7.12.3 Larger institutions, however, have the potential to create a barrier to movement, especially 
when security measures are introduced to limit access to the site. Measures set out in part b 
of the policy such as the creation of internal streets can maintain security while preserving/creating public routes along desire lines. This includes consideration of parking, 
drop off provision and other points of access and egress.
 Policy DM  
DE13: Housing standards and design  
175 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.13 Policy DM DE13: Housing standards and design  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE13  Housing standards and design  
1. New residential development will only be supported if it:  
a. is appropriately located, taking into account the nature of the surrounding area and 
land uses, access to local amenities, and any proposed mitigation measures; 
b. is of an appropriate scale, bulk and massing;  
c. preserves the amenity of existing and new occupiers in terms of daylight, sunlight, 
outlook, privacy, overlooking, noi se and disturbance, having regard to best 
practice, including B uilding Research Establishment (BRE)  guidance on daylight 
and sunlight; 
d. meets or exceeds the minimum internal space standards set out in the London 
Plan (and any updating successors); 
e. provides a well -designed, flexible and functional layout, with adequately sized 
rooms in accordance with the Mayor of London’s Housing Supplementary Planning 
Guidance, Building Regulations, BREEAM Home Quality Mark and other best 
practice guidance documents;  
f. meets  standards in local and the Mayor  of London’s  guidance relating to 
accessible housing. Ten per cent of all units (of different sized homes) should be 
wheelchair accessible or easily adapted  for wheelchair users to meet national 
standards for accessibility and adaptability (Category M4(2) of Building 
Regulations. The building as  a whole should be designed to be accessible for  
wheelchair users. All buildings with wheelchair  or adaptable housing at above 
ground floor must include two lifts providing access to those units;  
g. provides adequate access, parking, cycle parking and refuse storage which do not, 
by reason of design or location, adversely affect the quality of the street scene;  
h. ensures that hardstandings do not dominate the appearance of the street 
frontages or cause harm  to the character or appearance of the property or  street, 
and are permeable wherever possible; 
i. ensures that boundary treatments do not dominate or cause harm to the character 
or appearance of the property or street and maintain visibility  splays. In the case of 
front boundary treatments, the height should not normally  exceed one metre; and 
j. is attractive and well designed and there should be no discernible difference 
between tenures within a local area; and  
k. Habitable rooms should have at l east one window where the distance to 
unobscured windows  and/or unscreened external amenity space of neighbouring 
residential occupiers is at least 18m, unless it can be demonstrated that this would 
not result in housing with inadequate daylight/sunlight or privacy for the proposed 
or existing development.  
2. Even where it meets BRE guidance on daylight and sunlight, no part of a proposed 
development should have elements above ground floor that are within 11 metres 
(horizontally) of an existing residential window serving a habitable room (drawing a 45 
degree line from the edges of the existing window).  
3. New residential development above ground floor must be set back form the edge of 
existing amenity space by a minimum of 1.5 metres for every total storey of new  
development proposed, irrespective of daylight and sunlight implications. i.e. beginning 
with 3 metres for 2-storey  development. Policy DM 
DE13: Housing standards and design  
176 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 4.Side and rear facing windows overlooking adjacent sites will not be permitted abov e
ground floor unless:
a.they are necessary to achieve positive surveillance (such as the overlooki ng of
s
ide alleys, streets); or
b.they do not result in an adverse degree overlooking and loss of privacy to existi ng
oc
cupiers; a nd
c.i
t can be demonstrated that their including will not preclude development of a
s
imilar form on the adjacent site.
5.Consideration may be given to the use of high-level windows or obscured glazi ng,
obs
cure view/angled windows, use of level changes, staggered windows that achiev e
the abov
e requirements.
Explanation 
7.13.1 This policy will ensure that development is high quality, sustainable, has regard for 
and enhances local character, can meet the existing and future needs of residents, and protects the residential  amenity of neighbouring properties. 
7.13.2 Distancing between developments serves a number of purposes: it helps to maintain a sense of privacy; it avoids new development being perceived as oppressive and/or overbearing; and it ensures adequate amounts of daylight and sunlight are available for all occupiers. Residential extensions are set out in Policy DM DE15 and should 
accord with the above standards.  Policy DM  
DE15: Residential extensions  
177 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.14 Policy DM DE14: External amenity standards  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE14  External amenity standards   
1. New development must provide good quality private amenity space that is not 
signific antly overlooked by existing development and meets or exceeds the following 
minimum standards:  
Table 7.2: Minimum external amenity space  
Maximum intended occupiers  Minimum external amenity space  
1 5sqm  
2 5sqm 
3  6sqm  
4  7sqm  
5 8sqm  
6  9sqm  
6+ 9sqm+1sqm for each potential additional occupier  
 
2. All amenity space contributing to the minimum  standard must: 
a. be a minimum of 1.5 metres wide and be provided in one contiguous area. 
Additional amenity space does not have to meet this requirement; and  
b. have level access from the dwelling it serves. 
3. All private ground floor amenity space, which is the sole source of amenity for a home, 
must  be located at the rear or side of the building (the latter being acceptable i f this is 
adequately screened from publicly accessible areas without the need for occupiers to 
erect personalised screens).  
4. Private amenity space should achieve good levels of sunlight in line with BRE 
guidance.  
5. In addition to the standards for private amenity space set out above, developments 
containing homes with two  or more bedrooms must either  have larger private amenity 
spaces or have access to a communal amenity space (either  at ground floor or as a 
podium courtyard/roof terrace) that:  
a. is not accessible to the public;  
b. is of a suitable size and containing facilities and landscaping suitable to the 
number and type of units it serves. As a minimum, this should allow space for 
external cooking and dining, soft landscaping, areas for relaxation and play;  
c. is overlooked by windows and/or balconies of the development it serves; 
d. is directly accessed from communal circulation cores (and each individual dwelling 
where possible); 
e. is accessible to wheelchair users and other  disabled people; and 
f. has suitable manageme nt arrangements in  place.  
 
  Policy DM 
DE15: Residential extensions 
178 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
7.14.1 Amenity space associated with housing provides opportunities for play, exercise, 
sport, biodiversity, socialising and to engage in interests such as gardening and food 
growing. Access to multi -functional amenity  space can enhance the ‘liveability’ and 
enjoyment of people’s homes. 
7.14.2 Private amenity space is defined as open space which is accessible only to the resident/residents of the dwelling. It does not include space used for purposes such 
as access roads, driveways, garages/car ports/car parking spaces, outdoor storage areas; or landscaped areas which provide a setting for the development such as front gardens.  
7.14.3 A minimum standard of provision is necessary to ensure that any amenity space provided is functional. It is acknowledged that providing private amenity space as 
part of flatted development may present different challenges than housing schemes due to the higher numbers of units  which are accommodated and distributed across  
different storeys on the site. However, both types of development still need to offer access to good quality amenity space as a mixture of private and communal provision. 
7.14.4 The overall quality and design of amenity space is also important to how successfully 
it functions, screening to facilitate privacy, accessibility, sunlight to allow for 
prolonged usage and management arrangements can help to create a space which 
is attractive and inviting therefore promotes the use of the space for leisure and 
relaxation. 
7.14.5 In areas exposed to excessive noise  or air pollution, winter gardens will be 
considered as an alternative to external amenity instead of balconies, subject to 
acceptable design and access to light. 
7.14.6 The standards for private amenity space do not take into account the potential for loss of amenity space resulting from permitted development extensions. In these 
circumstances the council may remove permitted development rights to ensure that the minimum standard of amenity space is retained. 
7.14.7 The minimum requirement will not represent an acceptable standard of provision on all sites, there will be cases where new development will be required to provide more amenity space, such as when the development is within an area with identified open space or play deficiencies, or where amenity space makes a greater contribution towards  setting and the character of areas, having regard to Conservation Area 
Appraisals and Management Plans and other parts of the evidence base. 
7.14.8 Development should demonstrate in the design and access statement how the design of the amenity  space accords with best practice. Policy DM  
DE15: Residential extensions  
179 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.15 Policy DM DE15: Residential extensions   
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  DE15  Residential extensions   
1. Rear extensions 
a. Proposed extensions will only be permitted where: 
i. there is no impact on the amenities of the original building and its neighbouring 
properties;  
ii. adequate amenity space and the maintenance of satisfactory access to existing 
garages or  garage/parking space is retained; and 
iii. there is no adverse visual impact. 
 
b. Single storey extensions must: 
i. not exceed 3 metres in depth beyond the original rear wall in the case of terraced 
and semidetached properties, or 4 metres for detached dwellings. 
ii. in the case of a flat roof, the single storey extension should not exceed a height of 
3 metres from ground level when measured to the eaves with an allowance of 
between 3.3-3.5 metres to the top of a parapet wall.  
iii. for pitched roofs the extension should not exceed 4 metres in height when 
measured from the ridge and 3 metres at the eaves. 
 
c. Extensions above ground floor must: 
i. not exceed a line taken at 45-degrees from the edge of the nearest original first 
floor window to any of the adjacent properties;  
ii. where appropriate, secure a common alignment of rear extensions; and.  
iii. not be highly visible from the public realm if this adversely impacts on the 
character of the area.  
2. Side extensions 
a. Extensions to the side of existing residential properties will only be permitted where: 
i. they do not result in the creation of a continuous façade of properties or ‘terracing 
effect’ which is out of character with the locality. A minimum distance of 1 metre 
from the boundary with adjoining property should be maintained. A greater 
distance may be required depending on the size and nature of the residential plots, 
and to prevent adverse impacts on the streetsc ene and residential amenity;  
ii. they maintain an acceptable distance from the back edge of the pavement on the 
return frontage to the flank wall. This will be assessed having regard to the 
following:  
a. the need to maintain a direct relationship with the establi shed building line 
and vista to the properties adjoining at the rear;  
b. the character of the local area; 
c. the bulk/dominance of the structure along the street frontage and it 
subordination in relation to the original dwelling;  
d. the need for adequate visibility  splays; and  
e. the need to retain an adequate amount of amenity space. 
3. Roof extensions 
a. Roof extensions to residential properties will only be permitted where they are: Policy DM 
DE15: Residential extensions 
180 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 i. of an appropriate size and location within the roof plane and, in the case of r oof
dormers , being visually subordinate, inset from the eaves, ridge and edges  of the
r
oof as well as any existing features such as valley gutters and chimneys (insets
should normally be between 500-750mm);
ii. in keeping with the character and materiality of the property, and not domi nant
w
hen viewed from the surrounding area;
iii. limiting rooflights to less prominent roofslopes with their placement, size and
num
ber being considered so as to relate to the style, proportions and arrangem ent
of the l
ower elevation and the prevailing roofscape of the locality.
b.Roof extensions to the side of a property must not disrupt the character or balanc e of
the pr
operty or a pair or group of properties of which the dwelling forms a part.
c.Roof dormers on front facing roofs will generally only be permitted if they  do not
m
aterially affect the character of the area and are not dominant or intrusive w hen
v
iewed from the surrounding area.
d.Placement of rainwater goods, soil pipes and other services/vents should not be to t he
aes
thetic detriment of the property or roofscape.
e.Proposals for flat roof dormers within a conservation area, or setting of a lis ted
bui
lding, will be refused.
4.Outbuildings
a.Outbuildings to residential properties will only be permitted where:
i. the building must be ancillary to the use as a residential dwelling;
ii. the design should have regard to topography;
iii. it should not normally project forward of the front building line; and
iv. it should maintain an adequate distance from the dwelling and be of an appropri ate
hei
ght and bulk so as not to adversely impact on the character  of the local ar ea
and am
enities of neighbouring properties.
b.The size, scale and siting of the development must not have an unacceptable impact
on the adjoining properties in line with other policies in this plan.
Explanation 
7.15.1 Extensions to residential properties can be an efficient and, in difficult housing 
markets, more affordable and practical way of adapting to household changes. However, extensions may disrupt the established pattern and form of development 
and therefore may have impacts on residential amenity. There should be no 
chamfering of edges to avoid the policy although a well -designed extension with a 
single stepped wall may be acceptable, although the length of the step should be 
reasonable and the design should not be dictated by the need to maximise the depth 
of the extension at the expense of the overall aesthetic.  
7.15.2 Where there are existing extensions on adjacent properties built either as permitted development or with planning permission, the criteria set out  in above will apply as 
from the original dwelling regardless of the depth of the adjoining extensions, although if an extension of greater depth is justified to secure a common alignment of rear extensions, this may be permitted. 
7.15.3 Outbuildings can provide space for activities ancillary to the residential dwelling such as space for a study, gym or playroom/summer house. The scale of the development 
will be expected to be proportional to its ancillary function, and therefore be 
subordinate within the s ite. Policy DM  
DE15: Residential extensions  
181 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 7.15.4  Roof and side extensions, due to their visibility, can have a more discernible impact 
on the streets cene. Uniformity in architectural treatments, such as roof lines, and the 
rhythm of building widths are important to maintaining a continuity of charac ter 
across parts of Enfield. Side facing dormers, in particular, can result in awkward 
development forms and disrupt the balance of a row of terraced or pair  of semi -
detached houses, where roof treatments are mirrored.  
7.15.5  Side extensions can, if developed right up to the side boundaries adjoining 
neighbouring properties,  lead to a ‘terracing’ effect, as semi -detached or detached 
properties becomes attached via extensions to those adjoining properties. In many 
cases, this would be out of keeping with the charac ter of the locality and therefore a 
clear  separation between the built form needs to be maintained. 
7.15.6  As a minimum, there needs to be a one metre separation from the side boundary, 
however, where this would give rise to a very large extension due to the size and 
nature of the residential plot, a greater distance may be required. The determining 
factors for the degree of separation include the impacts on the street scene and 
residential amenity  (privacy, outlook, daylight, sunlight). Developers should also 
consider appropriate access for ongoing maintenance purposes.  
7.15.7  Where the property is already at the end of a row  of terraces, the circumstances are 
different and therefore the separation distance from the back  edge of the pavement is 
important. Corner/end of t errace properties occupy prominent places along a street 
frontage, maintaining a separation from the pavement on a return frontage will help to 
ensure that side extensions on these properties are not overly dominant.  
7.15.8  Where the property is within a conservation area, or setting of a listed building, flat 
roof dormers will rarely be considered appropriate. New dormers should respect the 
prevailing character and appearance of the roofscape and not cause additional / 
cumulative harm. Lack of visibility from the public realm does not equate to a lack of 
harm and consideration will be given to the impact upon all types of views at varying 
scales. The placement and design of dormers should be visually subordinate to the 
roofslope and relate to the style, proportions and arrangement of the lower elevation. 
Where a dormer has the potential to cause harm to a heritage asset, a greater level 
of detail will be required at application stage to ensure a high -quality intervention. 
 
Have your say on chapter 7… 
Do you have any other issues/comments?  
 
   Chapter 8 
Homes for all  
182 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8 Homes for all 
Introduction  
8.2 The Enfield Local Plan supports the delivery of new housing to meet local needs. 
Determining the scale, distribution and type of new homes to be delivered is a very important role of the new Local P lan.  The Borough’s starting point is to make the best 
and most efficient use of previously developed land to minimise the amount of new land required for house building in non-urban areas and the redevelopment of existing sites at higher densities in the suburban areas, changing the use of some employment sites, tall buildings in the placemaking areas and development on other previously developed windfall sites  
8.3 The Council has determined that to meet the level of need for housing in the Borough, there will need to be a limited amount and plan-led development and redevelopment on 
land currently designated as Green Belt. The Borough’s preferred strategic locations 
have been identified in Policies SS1: Spatial strategy and place making policies PL 9 and 10. Further sites  including residential and non-residential uses  have also been 
identified in spatial policies  H1: Housing development sites , E1: Employment and 
growth, CL4: Sporting Excellence and BG10: Burial and cremation needs .   
8.4 In order to support housing growth for all, the Council will monitor the supply of housing 
land to ensure that a five -year  supply of deliverable sites is maintained as required by 
legislation. The council will also keep under review the monitoring and updating of housing land supply  data through the Authority Monitoring Report 
https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/monitoring/
.    Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
 
183 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.1 Strategic Policy SP H1: Housing development sites    
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY  SP  H1  Housing development sites    
1. The Enfield Local Plan will provide for at least 24,920 new dwellings in the plan period 
up to 2039, equating to 1,246 homes per year.  
2. The sites  set out in Table 8.1 are alloc ated for housing development and defined on 
the Policies Map. Further information on site allocations is presented on the site 
proformas in Appendix C . The proformas carry the status of policy and indicate key 
requirements and considerations that need to b e taken into account as sites come 
forward for development.  
Table 8.1: List of sites to be allocated for housing development  
Site 
Allocation 
Reference  Site address  Proposed 
land use  Estimated 
capacity  
Enfield Town (PL1)  
SA1 St Anne’s Catholic High School for Girls, 
Enfield  Housing  236 
SA2 Palace Gardens Shopping Centre Enfield  Housing  350 
SA3 100 Church Street, Enfield  Housing  56 
SA4 Enfield Town Station and the Former Enfield 
Arms, Genotin Road  Housing  100 
SA5 Enfield Civic Centre  Mixed Use  150 
SA6 Southbury Road Superstore Area  Mixed use  291 
SA7 Oak House, 43 Baker Street,  Housing  55 
Southbury (PL2)  
SA8 Sainsburys Crown Road  Mixed use  1,041  
SA9 Colosseum Retail Park  Mixed use  1,587  
SA10  Morrisons, Southbury Road  Mixed use  892 
SA11  Southbury Leisure Park  Mixed use  450 
SA12  Tesco store, Ponders End, 288 High Street, 
Enfield  Mixed use  350 
Edmonton Green (PL3)  
SA13  Edmonton Green Shopping  Centre  Mixed use  1,173  
SA14  Chiswick Road Estate (Osward and 
Newdales)  Housing  272 
Angel Edmonton (PL4)  
SA15  Joyce Avenue and Snells Park Estate  Housing  1,217  
SA16  Public House 50 -56 Fore Street London  Housing  68 
SA17  Upton Road and Raynham Road  Housing  198 
SA18  South -east corner of the North Mi ddlesex 
University Hospital Trust of Sterling Way  Housing  400 
Meridian Water (PL5)   Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
184 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 SA19  IKEA store; Tesco  Extra, 1 Glover Drive; 
Meridian Water Willoughby Lane and 
Meridian Way  Mixed use 5,000  
Southgate (PL 6) 
SA20  ASDA Southgate, 130 Chase Side, 
Southgate  Mixed Use  165 
SA21  Southgate Office Village 286 Chase Road.  Mixed Use  125 
SA22  M&S Food  Mixed Use  150 
SA23  Minchenden Car Park and Alan Pullinger 
Centre, 1 John Bradshaw Road, Southgate 
N14 6BT  Housing  48 
New Southgate  (PL7)  
SA24  Arnos Grove Sta tion Car Park  Housing  162 
SA25 Site between North Circular Road and 
Station Road  Mixed Use  230 
SA26  Station Road, New Southgate  Mixed Use  203 
Crews Hill (PL9)  
SA27  Land at Crews Hill  Housing 3,000  
Chase Park (PL10) 
SA28  Land at Chase Park Housing 3,000  
SA29  Arnold House (66 Ridgeway)  Housing 62 
Other proposed site allocations outside of the place making areas (urban areas)  
SA30  Claverings, Centre Way, London N9 0AH  Mixed use  587 
SA31 Cockfosters Station Car Park (Parcel s a and  
b)Cockfoster s Road, BarnetHousing  316 
SA32  Sainsburys Green Lanes  Mixed use 299 
SA33 Blackhorse Tower, Holbrook House and 
Churchwood House and 116 Cockfosters 
Road  Housing  200 
SA34  241 Green Street Mixed use 148 
SA35  Land at former Wessex Hall Building  Housing  110 
SA36  188-200 Bowes Road Housing  86 
SA37  Main Avenue Site  Housing 82 
SA38  Land at Ritz Parade  Mixed Use  79 
SA39 Travis Perkins Palmers Green, Bridge Drive, 
Broomfield Lane  Mixed Use  76 
SA40 Land known as Brimsdown Sports Ground 
EN3 7LL, EN3 7QZ, EN3 7RN EN3 7RP  Mixed use 50 homes 
and 
community 
uses 
SA41 Albany Leisure Centre and Car Park and 55 
Albany Road  Housing 30 
SA42  Fords Grove Car Park  Housing 24 
SA43 Lodge Drive Car Park (incl. Depot), Palmers 
Green  Housing 18 
Other proposed sit e allocations outside of the place making areas (outside urban 
areas)  
SA44 Land opposite Enfield Crematorium (known 
as The Dell). Great Cambridge Road  Mixed Use 270 
SA45 Land between Camlet Way and Crescent 
West, Hadley  Housing 160  Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
 
185 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Total  23,566  
 
 
Explanation   
Amount and distribution  
8.1.1  The NPPF requires local authorities to meet the full objectively assessed need for 
housing unless the impacts of doing so would significantly and demonstrably 
outweigh the benefits when assessed against the NPPF as a whole, or specific 
policies indicate that development should be restricted. This is placed against the 
background of positively seeking opportunities to meet need and the ELP takes a 
positive approach to providing for the identified level of need across the Borough as 
noted in the spatial strategy of the plan.   
8.1.2  The London Plan sets out ten-year housing targets and directs local authorities to 
include the relevant Borough level targets within their local plans. Boroughs are also 
required to set a positive planning framework to meet and wherever possible, exceed 
the London Plan housing targets. For Enfield, the ten-year strategic housing target is 
12,460 net housing completions (or 1,246 net completions per year).  
8.1.3  The ELP’s preferred approach is set out in p olicy SS1: Spatial strategy, which 
proposes the provision of 24,920 new homes within the Borough in strategic 
locations with some release of the Green Belt due to the exceptional circumstances 
identified by this Local Plan. The spatial strategy pursues the more intensive use of 
urban land, particularly in the place making areas as identified in Chapter 3 of this 
plan while protecting the built and natural environment.  
8.1.4  The result of the step change in the level of housing provision within each of the 
urban placemaking areas  will result in higher urban density development and the 
regeneration and renewal of existing sites. Outside of the urban placemaking areas, 
the Council is  also allocating a number of smaller brownfield sites which will make a 
valuable contribution towards meeting the identified need for housing. There is a 
number of sites where a mix of uses is proposed including housing, employment, 
retail and community facilities and details are provided on the individual site 
proformas  set out in Appendix C of the plan.  
8.1.5  The Council will be supportive of new residential development on the number of 
small sites that are impractical to identify in advance which unexpectedly become 
available during the plan period providing that the sites are suitable and appropriate 
for residential development. This source of land recycling is expected to provide for 
at least an additional 1,650 new dwellings over the plan period based on recent 
trends (see Table 8.2 below). 
8.1.6  National policy and guidance require the objective assessment of the future need for 
housing over a functional housing market area; an area which reflects the key 
functional relationships between places where people live and work. The assessment 
should identify the scale and mix of housing that meets the household and population 
projections, taking account of migration and demographic change. 
8.1.7  Enfield forms part of a wider Strategic Housing Market Area and has close links with 
other Housing Market Areas in neighbouri ng areas. The Council has worked 
collaboratively with the other authorities to address our unmet need.  Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
186 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.1.8 The approach to identifying sites seeks to meet the identified need for housing in line 
with the expectations of national policy and guidance. It is important to note that the 
ELP’s housing requirement does not represent the only source of new dwellings that 
can be accommodated. Additional accommodation created through the extension of properties and some forms of shared accommodation do not require planni ng 
permission but will still make an important contribution to meeting housing needs as will provision arising from changes to permitted development rights.  
Housing provision 
8.1.9 The ELP aims to accommodate a significant increase in housing provision over the 
plan period in line with the objective of the plan to create a nurturing place. This 
includes continued work to identify emerging windfall sites and working with other agencies such as the Greater London Authority, to ensure that the optimum use of 
surplus  land and facilities is made to accommodate need, and working with 
Neighbourhood Plan groups to identify further sites for housing. The Borough’s total 
housing supply over the plan period is indicated in Table 8.2 and will comprise 
homes from a variety of sources in addition to the Local Plan’s site allocations.    
Table 8.2: Housing supply – sources of supply over the plan period up to 2039 (net 
number of homes)  
Category Amount  
Completions since 1 April 2019 429 
Allocations (as defined in Strategic Policy SP H1: Housing 
development sites )  23,566 
Other deliverable sites identified in the Housing and Employment Land 
Availability Assessment (HELAA)  3,688 
Other developable sites identified in the Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment (HELAA)  969 
Unidentified small windfall schemes 1,540 
Total 30,192[2] 
8.1.10 Informed by the spatial strategy, the anticipated distribution of housing makes 
provision for approximately 30,000 new dwellings over the plan period up to 2039. A 
significant contribution of 23,566 new dwellings towards meeting this target will be 
made by sites allocated for housing in the urban area and a small number of Green 
Belt sites to accommodate new dwellings. This approach recognises the need to 
support the delivery of larger units and increasing the provision of affordable homes. 
[2]This excludes current permissions/completions associ ated with allocations . Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
 
187 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.1.11  The Council expects a high proportion of developments in urban areas to be in the 
form of flatted developments  and therefore rely on lower density greenfield 
developments to deliver more family housing.   
Housing delivery and targets  
8.1.12  National policy requires local authorities are able to demonstrate a rolling five-year 
housing land supply from the date of adoption  of the plan. This must take account of 
both the deficit accrued until that point and a 20 per cent buffer moved forward from 
later in the plan period. Without a rolling five-year supply of homes or where the 
Housing Delivery Test (HDT) indicates that the delivery of housing was substantially 
below the housing requirement over the previous three years, the policies are the 
most important for determining a planning application would not be considered up to 
date.  
8.1.13  National policies states that where possible the deficit accrued since the start of the 
plan period should be met within the first five years. Given the step change in 
housing requirement compared to past delivery rates, the accrued backlog is 
significant. Whilst the plan includes numerous smaller s ites capable of being 
delivered early in the plan period, there are a number of strategic sites that have 
longer lead in times. 
8.1.14  Further details of the sites that are considered to be key to delivering the strategy are 
provided in the site allocations polic y of the Local Plan and shown on the Policies 
Map. The key infrastructure requirements on which the delivery of the plan depends 
is set out in the infrastructure delivery schedule or the latest Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan. Details of all the sites that ar e expected to be delivered are set out in the 
Council’s latest Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA). The 
expected phasing of sites is set out in the Housing Trajectory, included in the ELP’s 
Topic Paper on Housing , 2021. This will be updated annually in the Council’s 
Monitoring Report. 
8.1.15  Analysis of unimplemented planning permissions suggests close to 16% of all 
permitted housing schemes were not implemented and subsequently lapsed. The 
number of identified homes in the Local Plan is ther efore higher than the Council’s 
proposed housing target. This will allow the Council to acknowledge any shortfall in 
housing delivery and plan to meet and exceed the identified housing target of 25,000 
homes up to 2039.   
Options for housing development sites  
8.1.16  In order to support the delivery of new housing to meet local needs four  policy 
options and their associated benefits and dis -benefits  are set out in Table 8.3. As 
part of this consultation, the Council is invit ing stakeholder’s thoughts on these 
alternatives and suggestions of other alternatives through consultation questions. For 
the next draft of the Local Plan the key issues section will be removed from the policy 
and the policy options removed from this section of the Plan to make the document 
more streamlined, but at this stage it was felt helpful to include in this draft for 
consultation to inform stakeholders of the issues being contended with.  
  Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
(Options)  
188 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Table 8.3: Policy options for H1: Housing development sites 
Policy options for H1 Housing 
development sites Pros  and cons of each option Preferred Option 
A.Do nothing
This option continues with the 
approach set out in the Core Strategy seeking to focus developmen t in the urban area 
in order to maximise the use of brownfield land and promote a sustainable pattern of development. However, continuing with this approach without looking for additional 
growth options to accommodate 
the Borough’s future development needs  could lead 
to adverse impacts for the borough and its residents. Cons 
currently Enfield is placed under the presumption in favour
 of
“
sustainable development”, which means planning permissions for
development could be granted on appeal, leading to uncontroll ed and
s
poradic development in the Green Belt against the wishes of the local
community ;
thi
s eventuality could also severely undermine the ability of the Council
to plan for and deliver transformational change;
the viability of many sites in the urban area for housing is constrained by
their small size and high build costs ;
the l
imited number of new homes that could be delivered under  the
c
urrent approach would fundamentally undermine economic growth i n
E
nfield and potentially lead to increased levels of in -commuti ng and
c
ongestion on local roads, or the loss of future investment due to a lack
of high quality and affordable housing for the future workforce;
the limited viability of sites in the urban area means that developer
contributions for affordable housing and the provision of new communityfacilities will be difficult to achieve and deliver; 
and
addi
tional housing development in the urban area could increas e the
s
train on existing community facilities (schools and health) where ther e
i
s already limited physical scope and capacity to meet existing needs .For  the reasons set out, 
continuing with the current spatial strategy alone is not 
considered a realistic or 
viable option.  
To do so would lead to 
production of a local plan which would ultimately be found unsound by an Inspector at Examination. 
Moreover, it would also 
constrain the future growth of the Borough and miss the significant opportunities 
to make Enfield a place of 
growing opportunity for future generations, the green lung of London 
where all our communities thrive.  
B.Plan for t he baseline
gr
owth of 17,000 hom es
over
 the plan periodPros 
maintains existing Green Belt boundaries and reduces the need for
development in the Green Belt;No  Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Hous ing development sites  
(Options)  
 
189 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Policy options for H1 Housing 
development sites  Pros  and cons of each option   Preferred Option  
This option seeks to plan for 
1,246 homes a year up to 2029 
and around 500 homes from 
2029 to 2039.  
It continues to support and 
facilitate redevelopment of 
urban sites and wider 
regeneration of urban areas, 
particularly in the town centres, 
areas around stations and large-
scale  regeneration and renewal 
areas.  
   promotes a sustainable pattern of development which makes use of 
existing brownfield land;  
 enhances the viability and vitality of existing town centres as a focus for 
shopping, leisure and community/cultural activity ; and   
 supports regeneration and re-use of existing land and property in the 
urban area  
Cons  
 delivers all the housing by concentrating development within the urban 
area by significantly increasing densities on all sites more akin to those 
found in the most urbanised parts of the country such as central London;  
 would require tall buildings not only in the town centres and areas 
around the stations, but across the Borough;   
 seeks to protect the Green Belt from redevelopment but would have a 
considerable impact on the character of the Borough making it 
significantly more urbanised and adversely affecting the quality of the 
environment in which we live in;  
 involves high density development would deliver smaller units such as 
studios and 1-2 bedroom flats, creating a significant risk to the 
deliverability of larger/family homes to meet local needs ;  
 could also affect the development viability of and the delivery of 
affordable housing due to the increasing costs associated with tall 
buildings ;   
 places pressure on those areas that have historically taken most 
development and will not deliver the desired mix of housing; and  
 potential to increase levels of housing delivery in existing town centres 
constrained by a lack of currently available sites and the time and costs 
associated with the  land assembly process .   Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
(Options)  
190 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Policy options for H1 Housing 
development sites Pros  and cons of each option Preferred Option 
C.Plan to deliver 25,000
hom
es under the medium
growth opti on
Thi
s option seeks to deliver up 
to 25,000 homes over the plan 
period, equating to 1,246 homes per year up to 2039.  
As far as possible, it meets 
development needs whilst 
maintaining development at appropriate densities in the urban area by increasing densities on sites in the urban 
area where it is considered 
appropriate and does not impact significantly on character.  
Amends Green Belt boundaries where the areas are in sustainable locations and the 
areas are not, or are only 
partially affected by absolute constraints. Within these areas, new settlement and an urban extension have opportunities for 
accommodating the Borough’s 
housing needs taking into 
account site cons traints, land Pros 
seeks to balance the needs for housing whilst recognising there ar e
c
onstraints on development within the Bor ough;
pr
otects the character of the urban area ;
pr
otects the majority of the Green Belt ensuring boundaries can endur e
bey
ond the plan period ;
del
ivers an increase in housing provision over previous Core Strategy
larger sites enable infrastructure to be delivered alongside new
developmen t
i
ncreases in the delivery of larger/family homes with gardens  and
del
ivery of affordable housing, by providing for a wider mix of housi ng
uni
ts
reduces reliance on small housing units in tall buildings
supports the regeneration and re-u se of urban areas
opportunity to deliver a new settlement at Crews Hill of a signific ant
s
cale on land around the station; there is a limited number  of
l
andowners potentially increasing the deliverability of the project; there is
the potential to bid for Government funding to support the delivery  of
s
trategic infrastructure; and critical mass of development could hel p to
s
ecure the infrastructure needed to support developm ent.
an ur
ban extension at Chase Park could provide a very wide r ange of
hous
ing needs can be met. This  includes the ability to increas e the
fi
nancial viability of delivering much more affordable housing;
New development at Chase Park will deliver investment in newcommunity infrastructure and services, for example, schools, heal
th
fac
ilities, community buildings and recreation space. This ca n be
ac
hieved through a combination of investment within the new
development and in existing facilities in the established settlem ent,Ye s  Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Hous ing development sites  
(Options)  
 
191 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Policy options for H1 Housing 
development sites  Pros  and cons of each option   Preferred Option  
ownership, the need to support 
sustainable development, and 
compliance with other planning 
policies .  
 especially those that have suffered from a lack of investment or l ack 
capacity to meet existing needs.  
 New settlement and extension, can support the regeneration of existing 
urban areas. Services and facilities which may be struggling to remain 
viable, from shops and buses to sports clubs and community groups, 
benefit from a sizable influx of population.  
Cons 
 some loss of Green Belt and would be contrary to the London Plan.   
 development of a new settlement at Crews Hill would require;  
significant public and private sector investment in order to provide 
the supporting c ommunity infrastructure and upgrades; could further 
exacerbate the recognised capacity issues on the strategic road 
network; development of scale could have significant environmental 
implications in terms of impact on the Green Belt and landscape 
character  and flood risk considerations ;  
 large scale urban extension and new settlement are complex to bring 
forward and take longer to deliver as they may require the provision 
and forward funding of critical elements of strategic infrastructure; 
and  
 large scale  urban extension and new settlement can change the 
nature/character of the existing settlement and have the most direct 
impact upon immediately adjoining communities .  
 
D. Seek to deliver a higher 
number of new homes 
within the plan period  Cons 
 significant outward expansion of urban area to achieve additional  
homes ;  
 significant increase in densities in the urban and Green Belt areas ; No  
  Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Housing development sites  
(Options)  
192 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Policy options for H1 Housing 
development sites Pros  and cons of each option Preferred Option 
Based on del ivering 55,000 
homes up to 2039.   requires significant upgrades to the strategic transport network ;
loss of significant areas of Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land ; and
is unlikely to be achievable as there are significant infrastructur e and
del
ivery issues that would need to be overcome to free up all sites for
development within the plan period. Further  information is set out i n the
Growth Topic Paper , 2021 . Strategic Policy 
SP H1: Hous ing development sites  
(Options)  
 
193 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
  Policy DM 
H3: Housing mix and type  
194 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.2 Strategic Policy SP H2: Affordable housing 
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  H2 Affordable housing 
1.The Council  will seek to maxi mise  the delivery of  affordable housing in the Borough
and aim  to secure 50% of all new homes across the plan period as genuinely
affordable.
2.Proposals that involve the net loss of affordable homes  that have been built that wer e
s
ecured by planning obligation or condition will be resisted.
3.Affordable housing requirements will be calculated based on proposed gross housing
floorspace and sought from new developments on sites comprising ten or more new
housing units or a combined proposed gross floorspace of over 1,000 square metres
based on the following requirements :
a.50%
 affordable housing on estate regeneration schemes and council -owned sites ;
b.50%
 affordable housing where developments delivering net additional homes  on
i
ndustrial land would result in the net loss of industrial floorspac e;
c.50%
 affordable housing in all areas of the Green Belt, including the proposed rural
place making areas at Crews Hill and Chase Park ; and
d.35%
 affordable housing on all other major housing developm ent.
4.A
ffordable housing should be provided in line with the guideline mix of 50% social -
affordable rented housing and 50% intermediate housing. Flexibility in the tenure mixwill be allowed subject to viability where developments propose more than 50%
affordable housing.
5.Proposals that involve the loss or demolition of existing affordable housing floorspac
e
(
including estate regeneration schemes) will be expected to deliver at leas t an
equi
valent amount of affordable housing floorspace and, where possible, achiev e an
upl
ift in provision. Estate regeneration schemes will be expected to reflect the existin g
m
ix of affordable and family housing and the particular needs of existing and futur e
tenants
 (including specialist housing).
6.Development involving the provision of affordable housing will be required to:
a.achieve the same high-quality standards as the private housing element of the schem e
i
n terms of accessibility, internal space requirements, external appearance and desi gn
qual
ity and provision of private outdoor space; use grant funding to maximis e the
del
ivery of affordable housing where feasible; an d
b.pr
ovide affordable housing on site as part of residential and mixed-use schemes . In
ex
ceptional circumstances, off-site provision or contributions of broadly equival ent
v
alue will be accepted where i t:
i. av
oids an over -concentration of one type of housing (both on and off site) to
ens
ure mixed and balanced communities ;
ii. s
ecures a greater proportion of affordable units overall; and
iii. offers the best way of delivering affordable homes, including a higher level  of
affor
dable rented family homes. Policy DM 
H3: Housing mix and type  
195 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 7.When determining the amount of affordable housing acceptable on the site , regard will
be given to the economics and financial viability of the development including any
particular costs associated with it. The London Plan’s threshold approach to affordabl e
hous
ing will be applied and will not require a viability assessment where the proposal
includes 50% social/affordable rented homes and 50% intermediate homes
8.Development proposals will be subject to detailed review mechanisms thr oughout the
per
iod up to full completion of the development, including an advanced stage review
mechanism .
Explanation 
Local needs   
8.2.1 There is a significant London-wide and local need for genuinely affordable housing18. 
Affordability is a major concern to those on the lowest earnings, who are generally 
first-time buyers. House prices, on average, are over fourteen times that of the 
average salary  in Enfield. As a result, many lower paid and lower skilled jobs are 
filled by people who cannot afford to live in the borough and this  has led to an 
increase in commuting. It is also creating a climate where smaller, privately rented properties are often the only feasible option for residents faced with high costs and a 
shortage of affordable properties. In the private rented sector, average households 
spend over 45% of their gross income on rent, and a much higher percentage of their net disposable income. As a result, Enfield has one of the highest percentages of 
adults claiming housing benefit in London, well above the national and the London 
average. 
8.2.2 This policy seeks to maximise the delivery of affordable housing from new 
development across the borough to meet identified needs to ensure that Enfield is a 
nurturing borough. Like other parts of London, Enfield faces a significant shortage of 
genuinely affordable housing and there is an urgent need to boost the supply of 
affordable homes to meet the diverse needs of the growing population. This means a 
greater variety of affordable housing products and well -designed homes of the right 
size, tenure and price that local people (especially those on low incomes) can afford.  
8.2.3 This policy applies primarily to the following types of housing:  
•Self-contained houses and flats; and
•Housing for older people and vulnerable people .
8.2.4 The Council is committed to increasing the delivery of affordable housing, including key worker housing and want to encourage more residents to invest in securing their 
own housing in the borough and thus a broader range of affordable housing products 
to meet the demand across the whole of the local housing market.  
8.2.5 In line with the London Plan, the following forms of genuinely affordable homes will 
be prioritised: 
18 Affordability is a measure of whether housing can be afforded by certain groups of households and is defined by the 
relationship between local incomes and the local general housing market. Therefore, the ability of a household to satisfy its own 
housing requirement is fundamentally a factor of the relationship between local house prices and household income.  Policy DM 
H3: Housing mix and type  
196 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 •Homes based on social rent levels, including London Social R ent and London
A
ffordable Rent;
•London Living Rent ; and
•London S
hared Ownership .
8.2.6 Other forms of affordable housing will also be supported, such as community led 
housing (see policy DM H6), if they meet the London Housing Strategy definition of 
genuinely affordable housing and are considered to be genuinely affordable. 
8.2.7 The Borough’s target is to deliver at least 711 new affordable homes per year in the 
Borough up to 2039, based on a threshold approach (at least 35% on gross 
residential homes, rising to at least 50% on public sector land, industrial land)  to 
meet identified needs19. 
8.2.8 Applicants will be strongly encouraged to meet or exceed affordable housing targets (as set out in part 3 of the policy) in line with the London Plan. Schemes which fail to 
meet these targets will be subject to viability testing in line with the requirements set 
out in part 6 of the policy.    
Affordable housing provision in the rural areas 
8.2.9 The rural areas of the Borough have high house prices and very limited supply of 
affordable homes. This acts to restrict the ability for residents to live in a home which 
they have an element of equity. There is a considerable component within the 
community across the Borough who cannot afford the homes that are available on 
the open market. The Council will expect housing developments on Green Belt land, 
in particular the rural place making areas of Crews Hill and Chase Park to deliver 
50% affordable housing. The justification is based on the findings of the Whole Plan 
Viability, which demonstrated that 50% affordable housing on Greenfield land in 
higher value areas was achievable.  
19 This is based on: the backlog of households currently in need, as evidenced in the council’s waiting list; the formation of new 
households who are unable to afford to meet their needs in the market, and the available supply of social and other affordable 
rented housing through lettings each year  Policy DM  
H3: Housing mix and type  
 
197 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Viability  
8.2.10  Where the applicant wishes to demonstrate that the affordable housing thresholds 
(including the tenure mix) cannot be satisfied on viability grounds, they must provide 
a detailed financial viability ass essment of the scheme prior to submitting a planning 
application to validate this claim. In this case, the applicant will need to appoint a 
consultant (chosen from the Council’s preferred list) to carry out an independent 
evaluation of the financial viabil ity assessment at the pre-application stage, at its own 
expense.  Schemes that fail to meet the affordable housing targets set out above 
(excluding public estate regeneration schemes) will be subject to detailed review 
mechanisms through the section 106 agreement to take account of changes to costs 
and values from the granting of planning permission to full completion (including an 
advanced stage review mechanism).   In exceptional circumstances where a reduced 
affordable housing contribution can be justifi ed on viability grounds, the applicant will 
be required to enter into a planning agreement to implement the scheme within 12 
months of the granting of the planning consent and deliver the agreed affordable 
housing contribution within a specific timescale. If the development is not 
implemented or affordable housing is not delivered within the agreed timescale, the 
applicant will be expected to deliver the full affordable housing requirement or in the 
case of renegotiated schemes revert to the original agreed position. For multi -phased 
schemes, we will insert trigger clauses into the section 106 agreement at the 
beginning of each phase to review the viability of the scheme.  
8.2.11  A tenure split of 50% social -affordable rented housing and 50% intermediate housing 
is preferred based on identified need and viability testing. There may be specific 
instances where it would be more appropriate to deliver an alternative tenure mix 
(e.g. higher proportions of intermediate housing in areas of predominately social 
rented hous ing) where it would be more consistent with local housing need (as set 
out in the latest Enfield housing need assessment) and the principles of good growth, 
including the creation of mixed and balanced communities. Where affordable homes 
are provided above the 50% threshold, the tenure mix of the additional affordable 
units on site will be subject to negotiation. We will expect schemes proposing more 
than 50% affordable housing to demonstrate that they satisfy the tenure split 
requirements at the 50% level20.  
8.2.12  The affordable housing mix should also reflect the need to provide larger family 
homes and smaller affordable units. Large groupings of the same tenure type should 
be avoided, wherever possible. Affordable housing should also be tenure -blind and 
well-integrated into the design and layout of the proposed development (including 
market-led housing) and the wider public realm, with access to communal spaces 
(e.g. open space) and management facilities.   The design and quality of materials 
should also be cons istent. Developers will also be expected to demonstrate how the 
affordable housing will be designed in line with the standards of the Home Quality 
Mark.  
  
                                                 
20 For example, if the proposal only includes 40 affordable homes, we will expect to see at least 10 social -  affordable rented 
homes and 10 intermediate housing as part of the scheme.      Policy DM 
H3: Housing mix and type  
198 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.2.13 Enfield has embarked on an ambitious programme of estate renewal and council 
housing to significantly  improve the quality of life of residents.  Estate regeneration 
schemes and other proposals involving the loss or demolition of existing affordable units will be expected to secure alternative provision of at least an equivalent basis 
(in terms of unit size, tenure mix and floorspace) as well as significant uplift in the 
total number of units. This includes the provision of family housing and social rented 
accommodation.  All units to be retained on site should be brought up to decent 
homes standard, either  through major redevelopment works or planned maintenance.  
8.2.14 On-site provision is the preferred way of delivering affordable housing in Enfield. 
Alternatives to on-site provision will only be considered in exceptional circumstances 
where it can be robustly  justified (as explained in part 7 of the policy). The onus will 
be on the applicant to demonstrate that off-site provision or a cash-in -lieu payment 
(i.e. commuted sum) would offer the best way to deliver more affordable housing 
(due to physical constraints, such as small and tightly confined sites, or other factors) 
and achieve mixed and balanced communities (e.g. rented housing). Cash-in -lieu 
contributions should only be used where it is not possible to provide affordable housing on or off site. These contributions will be ringfenced and pooled into an 
enabling fund to support the delivery of affordable housing projects across the 
borough, such as empty homes and refurbishments, estate regeneration schemes, 
site acquisition of existing properties and specialist housing provision, such as 
supported housing.  In the case of small sites, we will accept payment in lieu of 
affordable housing.  
8.2.15 Affordable housing contributions will be calculated based on the number of habitable 
rooms per unit and gross floorspace  (taking account of the percentage of 
intermediate and social rented units and the percentage of affordable housing delivered in the proposed scheme). It is expected that there should not be a greater 
than 5% variation in floorspace between the private and affordable units, excluding 
units designed to be wheelchair accessible. This prevents an under provision of affordable housing where the developer proposes unusually large market homes.   
8.2.16 This policy will be implemented through partnership-working and the use of grant 
funding to meet local need as well as strategic targets .  Policy DM  
H3: Housing mix and type  
 
199 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.3 Policy DM H3: Housing mix and type         
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  H3 Housing mix and type  
 
1. The provision of new homes (market and affordable) should contribute to meeting the 
needs of cur rent and projected households having regard to the following: 
a. provide an appropriate mix of dwelling types and sizes, reflecting the most up to 
date evidence as set out in the Local Housing Needs Assessment (2020) or 
successor documents;  
b. the character of the development in the context of the site and surrounding area, 
taking account of accessibility arrangements and amenity considerations (e.g. child 
density); 
c. the location and physical characteristics of the site (including any identified 
constraints on the preferred housing mix);  
d. the viability of the development (taking account of abnormal costs and particular 
characteristics of particular sectors, such as build-to-let housing); and  
e. the extent to which flexibility around the mix of market units could secure the 
delivery of additional affordable housing.  
 
Table 8.4: Dwelling size priorities 
 Studio/bedsit  One-
bedroom  Two-
bedrooms Three -
bedrooms  Four -
bedrooms 
or more  
Social/afford
able rented  Low priority  Medium 
priority  High 
priority  High 
priority  Low priority  
Intermediate  Low priority  High 
priority  High 
priority  Medium 
priority  Low priority  
Market  Low priority  Low priority  Medium 
priority  High 
priority  High 
priority  
Self-contained units   
2. All forms of self-contained living accommodation (including conversion of single 
dwellings to flats) will be required to meet and, where possible, exceed the internal 
and external space standards set out in the London Plan and the Nationally Described 
Space Standard. 
Accessible, efficient and inclusive design  
3. At least ten per cent of new dwellings should be built to M4(3) wheelchair accessible 
dwelling standard in accordance with Building Regulations.     
4. All new residential developments should be designed to be ‘tenure-blind’. Tenure 
should be spread and integrated throughout the development to prevent 
concentrations or clear distinctions and provide choice to all users .  
5. Development proposals should demonstrate that housing type and mix have been 
taken into ac count and demonstrate how dwellings have been designed to be 
adaptable.   Policy DM 
H3: Housing mix and type  
200 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
8.3.1 Enfield requires an appropriate mix of housing across both market and affordable 
tenures to meet the changing needs of its growing population.  An important part of 
addressing the need and demand for housing is to ensure that new housing is of an appropriate size and type, and that the existing stock is managed. To this end, the 
Borough has undertaken a housing needs assessment and is monitoring new 
building and changes to the existing housing stock in the Authority Monitoring Reports. 
8.3.2 The requirements of the policy will be based on the best available and up to date objective assessment of need including careful consideration of the specific needs of 
different groups of occupiers, such as older people, families with children and single 
people. When applications are assessed evidence of specialist housing need 
submitted with any proposal, as well as any special characteristics of the site and the results of Borough-wide and local area monitoring of recently completed 
development will be considered. 
8.3.3 The priorities set out in the policy is intended as a guide to inform the tenure mix of 
new housing developments in Enfield. Assessments undertaken for the LHNA  
suggests that most new households expected to form over the plan period are likely to need larger homes (3 bedrooms  and larger). In the social - affordable rented 
sector most households need 2 or 3 bedrooms  and in the market sector most 
households need 3 or 4 bedrooms .  For example, in terms of the size of affordable 
dwellings required by those currently in acute need on the waiting list, 14.7% need one-bedroom, 35.3% need two-bedroom, 42.3% need three-bedrooms and 7.7% 
need four or more -bedrooms. Therefore, Table 8.4 of the policy categorises two and 
three-bedroom social -affordable rented units as high priority, one-bedroom units as medium priority and four or more-bedroom  units as low priority. In certain cases, an 
area-based approach to housing tenure may be warranted. Some parts of the Borough have specific tenure deficits or surpluses (refer to the evidence in the 
LHNA
21). However, deviation from the policy will only be justified where the evidence 
clearly demonstrates that the priorities in the catchment area of the proposed 
development differ from the list set out above.    
8.3.4 In certain circumstances it may not be viable to secure dwelling size mix in 
accordance with the priorities set out in policy H3. The approach this policy  takes 
expects new housing development to contribute to supporting the creation of stable local neighbourhoods and cohesive communities. Preference will therefore be given 
to larger homes, because proposals which provide more than a small proportion of 
studios are unlikely to achieve this objective and therefore will not normally be 
supported. Although the increasing proportion of single person households is forecast to continue, this does not necessarily result in a proportionate increase in 
demand for small studios as many people would like a spare bedroom for visitors or 
to use as a study/office. Therefore, a realistic approach is to allow for a proportion of 
new developments to contain studios up to a maximum limit. However, proposals 
solely for self-contained dwellings comprising predominantly 1-bedroom or studio 
flats (excluding specialist housing) will be resisted.  
21 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/evidence-base/   Policy DM  
H3: Housing mix and type  
 
201 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Mix of affordable homes  
8.3.5  In terms of the proposed mix of affordable homes, the LHNA recommends that the 
focus of affordable ownership provision should be on one and two-bedroom housing 
units as the majority of households who live in intermediate (shared ownership) 
housing are households without children. 59% are single households, 33% are 
couples without children. However, 7.5% of those living in intermediate housing are 
households with children. This demonstrates that, whilst smaller in scale, there is 
demand for family sized intermediate housing.  
8.3.6  While the dwelling mix of market and affordable homes is expected to reflect the 
preferred dwelling mix set out in this policy, rigid application of these requirements 
may not be appropriate in all cases. When considering the mix of dwelling sizes 
appropriate to a development, we will have regard to individual site circumstances 
including location, the c haracter of the area, site constraints, viability and the 
achievement of mixed and balanced communities. The Council will allow flexibility in 
estate regeneration schemes, in particular where a dwelling mix has been agreed on 
the basis of detailed consultation with the residents which has taken on-board their 
specific needs. Furthermore, flexibility will be applied for developments providing for 
retirement, sheltered or extra care housing.  
8.3.7  The policy responds to the objectives of the plan to create a nurtur ing place by 
providing a variety of housing options to meet the needs of everyone, regardless of 
income, age and ability. It also recognises that the needs identified in the LHNA 
could change over time. Therefore, the policy refers to ‘current’ evidence in relation 
to housing need. 
Accessible and inclusive housing 
8.3.8  In line with the London Plan the Council  will expect that all new development meets 
the strategic target for provision of wheelchair  user dwellings and ensuring 
accessible and adaptable dwellings, in accordance with Building Regulations M4(3) 
and M4(2) respectively. Parts 4 and 5 of this  policy  applies to dwellings that are 
created via works  to which Part M volume 1 of the Building Regulations applies. To 
comply with the Building Regulation requirements appropriate  step-free access into 
the dwelling will need to be provided. This policy helps to support the ELP’s strategic 
approach to meeting housing needs  for older people through adaptable housing, as  
set out in Policy DM H5.  
8.3.9  In considering the suitability of a site for  wheelchair accessible or user dwellings the 
council  will have regard to individual site circumstances. This  is because flexibility 
may need to be applied to meet policy objectives ( for example  to enable the 
requirement to apply to 10% of habitable rooms  where a better outcome is provided 
in terms  of provision of larger units). Discretion may  also be needed in exceptional 
circumstances  when provision of a lift to dwelling entrances  is not technically 
feasible, such as with some constr ained infil l sites or flats above shops. The Council 
will seek to secure appropriate provision for  individual developments, including 
through the use of planning conditions. 
   Policy DM 
H3: Housing mix and type  
202 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.3.10 To support the ELP’s  objectives for providing a variety of housing options to ensure 
that more people can access good quality homes, all development should be 
designed to promote social interaction and equality of access to facilities and 
services.  This includes inclusive and welcoming access to buildings, particularly front 
entrances . Proposals  should avoid the unnecessary use of separate main entrances. 
Where private communal amenity  space is provided in new housing development, 
this must be made accessible to all residents  occupying the building. The Council  will 
strongly resist pro posals that unnecessarily restrict or prevent access to buildings or 
communal amenity space, including for reasons of housing tenure.  Policy DM  
H4: Small sites and small housing development  
 
203 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.4 Policy DM H4: Small sites and small housing development      
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  H4 Small sites and small housing development  
 
1. The Council will support well -designed new homes on appropriate small sites 
(including on vacant infill and backland plots, upward extensions of flats and 
redevelopment of non-residential buildings) and seek to achieve the London Plan 
target of 353 new homes per year on sites of less than 0.25 hectares.  
2. Housing delivery and intensification on small sites will be particularly supported in the 
following locations:  
a. sites with good public transport accessibility (PTAL 3-6);  
b. sites within 800 metres of a tube, rail station or the boundary of a major, district or 
town centre (as defined on the Policies Map); 
c. sites with good local infrastructure e.g. local centre, local shopping parade, local 
schools  and community facilities ; and  
d. places with planned infrastructure improvements that will improve PTAL and 
walking / cycling accessibility over time.  
 
3. New residential development on small sites must be carefully and creatively designed 
to avoid harm to amenity of surrounding properties and uses, especially in terms  of 
outlook, privacy, daylight and sunlight.  Innovative design solutions should be used to 
optimise housing density and land use, especially in fine-grained areas (for example, 
through the use of courtyard and mews housing typologies, rooftop and terraced 
amenity spaces, shared spaces and facilities, provision of basement/undercroft 
parking and redevelopment of vacant/underused spaces, such as single- storey 
garages, external service yards and incidental amenity space).  
4. To help facilitate the appropriate development of small sites for housing, including 
through the sensitive intensification of existing buildings and sites, the Council will 
prepare a suite of supplementary planning documents  to illustrate further how this 
policy should be implemented. Propos als will be expected to have regard to this 
planning guidance, where relevant and demonstrate how it has been used to inform 
the development through the design -led approach.   
 
   Policy DM 
H4: Small sites and small housing development 
204 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
8.4.1 This policy presents a new strategic approach to meeting housing need locally. Small 
sites and small housing development will play an important role in the delivery of new 
homes and the enhancement of existing neighbourhoods in the Borough and this 
policy is intended to promote well -designed housing developments on small sites of 
up to 0.25 hectares and can accommodate up to 25 homes. This includes apartment buildings, backland and infill developments and communal forms of living. 
8.4.2 Development of small sites will be particularly supported in areas with good access to public transport and close to existing local infrastructure and services offered within 
town centres. There may also be places with good local infrastructure, for instance 
local centres, which could support intensification of small sites nearby and/or where 
future planned infrastructure improvements will improve public transport accessibility 
and walking and cycling networks over time. The Council is exploring a range of 
mechanisms to support intensification of small sites, especially within town centres, including land assembly powers, housing renewal schemes, acquisition of sites 
through housing companies, direct funding and the designation of housing zones.  Developers and landowners will be encouraged to work together to bring forward a 
cluster of small sites through an area-based design code or masterplanning exercise 
and maximise potential redevelopment and intensification opportunities along the 
borough’s linear high street corridors and town centres. Applicants should also draw 
on design guidance on the Mayor of London and relevant supplementary planning 
documents to inform the design and layout of small -scale housing developments in 
suburban and urban areas of the borough.  
8.4.3 The Enfield small sites register sets out up-to-date information on the supply of small 
sites of up to 0.25 hectares in size in the borough (including sites with extant 
planning permission, outline planning permissions and sites without planning 
permission) which have sufficient capacity to accommodate up to 25 new dwellings. 
This register will be reviewed on an annual basis.   
8.4.4 This policy aims to encourage high quality housing that is sensitive to the character 
of the borough and meets a range of different needs. There are a variety of 
opportunities and types of small sites that can support new housing development. 
Vacant and underused brownfield sites along with redundant ancillary facilities, such 
as garages or residential storage units, present relatively straightforward options for 
redevelopment. However, these types of sites are limited in availability and are often 
constrained, such as by irregular plot forms, site access issues or land-use 
designations (including those that protect land for commercial uses i.e. Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites and Strategic Industrial Locations). It is therefore expected 
that the majority of small sites development will occur in existing residential areas, 
where new homes can be sensitively integrated with other compatible uses. Housing 
development on small sites can take a number of forms including: new build, infill and 
backland development, conversion (subdivision of houses into flats), demolition and 
redevelopment or extension of existing buildings (including upward, rear and side 
extension, and basement development).  Policy DM  
H4: Small sites and small housing development  
 
205 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.4.5  The Borough’s approach to housing development on small sites is expected to 
facilitate the incremental intensification of existing residential areas, particularly 
where sites are within 800 metres of a station or town centre. It is imperative that 
future growth and development occurs in a way that respects and enhances the 
positive evolving local character of Enfield’s neighbourhoods, with the distinctive 
features of Enfield’s neighbourhoods at the heart of the design-led approach.  
8.4.6  The Enfield Character of Growth Study (2021)  identifies areas that are positioned to 
facilitate an uplift in small housing development, recognising that the physical 
character of some areas may need to evolve gradually over time, for example, to 
accommodate new housing and investment in infrastructure. The study defines areas 
on a spectrum of sensitivity to change, based on local character, taking into account 
factors such as existing urban grain, historic evolution, building typologies, and 
spatial strategic growth and regeneration priorities across  the borough. All proposals 
for small housing development will be expected to refer this document, as a starting 
point, to understand the scope for intensification in a given area and to gain an 
appreciation of the key features of local character. 
8.4.7  The study must be read in conjunction with other design guidance to ensure that 
development is appropriate to the site and surrounding area. The Council will prepare 
and make available a suite of guidance documents to assist with the implementation 
of this policy, which includes existing and future Conservation Area Appraisals and 
Management Plans. The Council will also produce a Borough-wide Design Guide that 
will include guidance on the sensitive intensification of suburban neighbourhoods  to 
illustrate how this policy should be implemented .  
8.4.8  Where small housing development is proposed it should not have an unacceptable 
adverse impact on biodiversity and green infrastructure. Applications will be expected 
to identify potential impacts in this regard, and clearly set out measures to minimise 
and mitigate these. Measures may include the return of hard standing to green 
space, installation of green and brown roofs and green walls, tree planting, the 
creation of habitats that encourage biodiversity (for instance bird boxes) and 
sustainable landscaping. In exceptional circumstances, where site constraints 
demonstrably preclude the implementation of on -site measures, then off- site 
provision (for example, tree planting) may be acceptable in order to ensure policy 
compliance. Off -site provision will be secured on a case-by -case basis through the 
use legal agreements and/or planning contributions. 
8.4.9  Small site development forms significant part of the Local Plan housing trajectory. 
The Council will monitor progress towards the s mall site housing target through the 
Authority Monitoring Report and consider this policy’s effectiveness through the 
ELP’s review process. Monitoring will also provide us with information to understand 
the spatial distribution of new small sites housing development and consider whether 
interventions are necessary, for example, to ensure those areas where this type of 
development is concentrated are appropriately supported by community facilities and 
other strategic infrastructure via the Council’s Infrastr ucture Delivery Plan. 
   Policy DM 
H6: Community led housing  
206 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.5 Policy DM H5: Supported and specialist housing 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM H5 Supported and specialist housing 
1. The Council  will support the provision of appropriate housing to meet the specialis t
and s
upported needs of vulnerable people in Enfield, including specialist housing for
elderly people. This  will be achieved by:
a.supporting development that allows people to live as independently as possibl e
w
hilst meeting the identified local needs within the borough and being tar geted at
E
nfield residents ;
b.pr
oviding options at a range of costs to suit resident’s different financial
circumstances in line with evidenced local need, including a proportion o f
affor
dable specialist units on site or a contribution towards addressing th e
i
dentified need for affordable specialist housing elsewhere in the borough; and
c.requiring affordable housing from sheltered and extra care accommodation falli ng
w
ithin use class C3.
2.Supported and specialist housing development should :
a.contr
ibute to creating a mixed, balanced, inclusive and sustainable neighbourhood;
b.be well integrated with the wider neighbourhood and protect the amenity of
nei
ghbouring occupiers in line with the a gent of change principle;
c.be delivered through partnership arrangements between the developer  and an
appr
opriate support service provider;
d.be suitable for the intended occupiers in terms of the standards of facilities, desi gn
of bui
ldings, density, parking; internal space and amenity space;
e.provide the necessary level of supervision, management, care and support;
f.have arrangements in place for appropriate long- term management; and
g.offer easy access to community facilities, is accessible to public transpor t,
w
orkplaces, shops and services appropriate to the needs of the i ntended
oc
cupiers.
3. Spec ialist older persons housing will be expected to deliver  both:
a.affordable housing ; and
b.ac
cessible housing, in accordance with policies H2 and H3, respectively .
4.The l
oss of supported and specialist accommodation will be resisted, unless:
a.adequate replacement accommodation can be provided; or
b.it can be demonstrated that there is a surplus of specialist accommodation i n the
ar
ea; or
c.it can be demonstrated that the existing care home is incapable of meeti ng
r
elevant industry standards for suitable accommodation in a cost-effective manner.
5.Where the loss of supported and specialist accommodation is acceptable in line withPart 4 above, proposals will be expected to secure the re-provision of an equival
ent
am
ount of floorspace for residential use, including affordable housing, wher e
appr
opriate.
6.Proposals for care homes accommodation will be supported in appropriate sustainabl e
locations and designed to a high-quality  standard  taking into account local housi ng Policy DM 
H6: Community led housing  
207 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 needs and having regard to other policies in the p lan. In addition, proposals must 
ensure that 100% of habitable rooms are wheelchair accessible.  
7.Development resulting in the net loss of floorspace for care home accommodation will
be assessed having regard to the requirements set out in Par t 4.
8.In or
der to ensure inclusive and mixed neighbourhoods and communities, proposals
must not result in a harmful overconcentration of care home accommodation within th e
l
ocality .
Explanation 
8.5.1 The ELP seeks to deliver a wide variety of high quality homes that will provide all tenures, types and sizes of housing to meet the needs and demands of different people in the community. This will include housing for older people and people with disabilities (this policy DM H5) the gypsy and travelling community (policy DM H10), students (policy DM H9) and others in the community with specialist housing needs. 
The provision of new dwellings will take account of local need to allow for a genuine 
choice of housing options and the creation of sustainable, balanced and mixed commu nities.  
Supported and specialist housing need 
8.5.2 The PPG identifies a number of groups which may have housing needs which differ from those of the wider population. From the LHNA 2020, by 2039:  
•there is an increasing need for specialist housing for older, disabled or vulnerabl
e
peopl
e in Enfield ;
•the
 number of older person households (aged 65 and over) is expected to
increase by 50 per cent and households aged 75 and over, who are most likely  to
m
ove into specialist older persons housing, increasing by 56 p er cent22 over the
pl
an period ; and
•the ov
erall need for residential care (C2 use class) between 2020 and 2036 is
projected to increase by 755 units and specialist older person by 1,242 units.
However, the London Plan sets an annual benchmark of 195 specialist olderpersons housing, but this is up to 20
29.
8.5.3 Supported and specialist accommodation need can also come from vulnerable adults and young people including: those with a disability, those with a recent history of 
violence, domestic abuse, mental health issues or rough sleeping. 
22 Enfield Local Housing Needs Assessment 2020  Policy DM 
H6: Community led housing  
208 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Types of supported and specialist housing 
8.5.4 The majority of over 65s and many disabled and vulnerable people will continue to 
live in mainstream housing and not all will require specialist housing. However, many may require changes to their accommodation at some point in their life, depending on changing levels of need for care, support and safeguarding. Therefore, proposals for 
supported and specialist residential accommodation will be expected to meet the 
latest industry standards. The Council will require applicants to ensure development 
is informed by the latest good practice guidance. Planning statements should refer 
this guidance and clearly indicate how this has been taken into consideration.  
8.5.5 Although a high proportion of people in the borough may have their own resources to 
meet their accommodation and care needs, some residents may need financial support to enable them to access housing support services or appropriate accommodation. The council will support proposals that enable older, disabled and 
vulnerable people to live independently in mainstream housing for as long as they want, as well as the delivery of appropriate tailored specialist accommodation, to 
enable residents to move when they wish to or require greater support to remain safe 
and independent. 
Affordable housing 
8.5.6 Where market housing is proposed for older people or vulnerable people,  the Council 
will apply policy H2 Affordable housing as far as possible to seek affordable provision 
for older people or vulnerable people, to meet more general  needs. However, it is  
acknowledged that such forms of housing are likely to have distinctive financial 
viability characteristics, particularly if an element of care is involved. In these 
circumstances  the Council will take a flexible approach to the scale and nature of 
provision and whether the affordable provision should be made on site.  
Agent of change principle23 
8.5.7 Providing different types of specialist and supported housing to meet identified local demand, especially in new higher density developments, will require careful planning, 
design and an appropriate location to ensure residents’ needs are accounted for and 
integrated into the new development. In some cases, the C ouncil may require the 
developer to be responsible for future costs of soundproofing, secured by a legal 
agreement. 
23 London Plan sets out how new developments can mitigate impacts from existing noise and other nuisance generating 
activities or uses on the proposed new noise-sensitive development. This is referred to as the ‘agent of change principle’.  Policy DM 
H6: Community led housing  
209 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.6 Policy DM  H6: Community led housing 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM H6 Community led housing 
1.Proposals for community -led housing will be supported in appropriate locations where:
a.a local  need for this  type of provision is clearly establis hed;
b.opti
mal use is made of the site, contributing to the delivery of the strategic housi ng
tar
get (including in relation to the mix of unit sizes), with a development density
that is appropriate to the site, having regard to other policies in the pl an;
c.pr
ovision is made for affordable housing; and
d.the s
cheme is designed to a high standard (including sustainable desi gn
pr
inciples), integrates adequate amenity space, and makes a positive contributi on
to the l
ocal neighbourho od.
Explanation 
8.6.1 Community led housing is a growing trend in London, both being driven by Community Groups supported by the Mayor of London (Community Led Housing Hub) and locally in Enfield as well (Naked House). Community led housing can take several forms including housing co-operatives, Community Land Trusts (CLTs), 
cohousing, and self/custom build housing. These approaches are not mutually 
exclusive, and in many cases a mixture of approaches may be employed in the setup 
and running of community led homes to suit specific circumstances. This type of development demonstrates our commitment to seek to meet demand within the borough, and we will continue to monitor our register in line with the relevant statutory requirements. 
8.6.2 Community led housing can provide a more affordable route to home ownership, and has the potential to build more cohesive communities and allow for specific uses to be explored as shown by Older Woman’s Housing Cooperatives such as OWCH. There is a demonstrable demand in Enfield to go beyond what the market or the council can deliver in terms of housing affordability and typology.  
8.6.3 Community led housing Self-build and custom build housing units provide an additional source of supply of conventional housing and a further housing choice, and will therefore be considered as housing for policy implementation.  
8.6.4 The Council has a statutory duty to maintain a register for self-build and custom -build 
housing and have regard to this register in its planning, housing and related functions. The register forms part of the evidence base informing Local Plan 
preparation. It provides an indication of demand for serviced plots for self-build and 
custom -build housing from individuals or groups who meet specific eligibility 
considerations. The LHNA has also considered demand for this type of provision. This research indicates the council should encourage provision of self and custom build plots through policy and major allocations identified in the ELP. It also recommends the use of suitable council land or other available land controlled by a willing landowner or developer to make provision for serviced plots to meet demand.   Policy DM 
H6: Community led housing  
210 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.6.5 Community led housing projects can be delivered in a number of ways, including 
through:  
•start-up community led housing organisations responding to housing need ordemand, or groups of people seeking to deliver their own homes
;
•the ex
tension of existing community -based organisations to provide housing i n
addi
tion to their existing activities, for and on behalf of the community; and
•par
tnerships with developers, housing associations, and councils supporti ng a
c
ommunity group to deliver their ambition. Councils and developers can also hel p
i
nitiate a gro up.
8.6.6 This policy supports proposals for self-build and custom -build housing where they 
respond positively to the locality and support delivery of the spatial strategy for the borough. All proposals must be designed to a high-quality standard and make provision for an element of affordable housing, where appropriate. Given Enfi eld’s 
challenging future requirement for conventional housing it is imperative that all development, including self-build and custom build housing, optimises the use of sites including through densities that are appropriate to the site location.   Policy DM 
H7: Build to rent 
211 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.7 Policy  DM H7: Build to rent 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM H7 Build to rent 
1.Proposals involving standalone build-to-rent (BTR) developments or build-to-r ent
bl
ocks on large mixed tenure schemes will be supported where they:
a. provide high quality housing and a mix of dwelling si zes that meet identified local
and strategic housing needs ;
b.offer tenancies over at least a three-year period;
c.provide on-site affordable housing in perpetuity in the form of Discounted Mark et
R
ent at genuinely affordable rent level ;
d.provide homes held over at least 15 years under covenant to be secured thr ough a
s
ection 106 legal agreement. A claw -back mechanism will apply in accordanc e
w
ith London Plan policy ;
e.provide a review mechanism in the event that policy compliant levels of affordabl e
hous
ing cannot viably be provided; and
f.pr
ovide a management plan, committing to high standards of ongoi ng
m
anagement of the premises .
2.Wher
e a development proposal involving build to rent has potential to include mor e
than one 
residential core and/or block, applicants should use this  separate core and/or
block to provide low cost rented housing to be managed independently by a register ed
pr
ovider of affordable housing.
Explanation 
8.7.1 Households that rent privately often live in some of the worst quality, poorly man aged 
accommodation. Some private renters face arbitrary evictions and unjustified rent increases.  
However, this is generally not the case for build to rent housing, which forms a relatively new 
type of delivery model providing high quality, purpose -built homes which are collectively 
professionally managed and with longer tenancies for those who want them. Additionally, it provides an opportunity to boost the rate of overall housing delivery, as it does not compete directly with traditional housing which are built for sale. When delivered in line with the 
London Plan build to rent housing can offer a range of benefits, making it a more attractive 
product than traditional private rented sector housing to developers, tenants, councils and stakeholders, as this  sector has grown significantly over recent years while home ownership 
levels have declined.  
8.7.2 Build to rent should provide a proportion of low -cost and London Living Rent homes, which 
are designed to help households on average income levels to save for a deposit to buy their own home. The covenant period for such schemes in Enfield will be at least 15 years to ensure they make a long -term contribution to meeting housing need in the borough across all 
tenures. A claw -back mechanism will be applied in accordance with the policies of the London 
Plan and national guidance on build to rent, in order to protect the value of the affordable housing provision that is withdrawn should affordable housing units in build to rent blocks are 
converted to another tenure after the expiry of the covenant period.  
8.7.3 Build to rent provides a valuable addition in terms of increasing the capacity of the 
development sector to deliver new homes. We are keen to encourage its provision as it widens the type of homes available in Enfield,  assists in producing additional homes to meet  Policy DM 
H7: Build to rent 
212 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 ov
erall targets and is likely to drive up standards for tenants in new and existing market 
rented homes.   Policy DM  
H8: Large scale purpose built  shared housing  
 
213 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.8 Policy DM H8: Large scale purpose built shared housing      
POLICY DM  H8 Large scale purpose built shared housing  
1. Large-scale purpose built shared living development will be supported where:   
a. it is located in an area well -connected to local services and employment by 
walking, cycling and public transport, and its design does not contribute to car 
dependency; 
b. is under single management; 
c. its units are all for rent with minimum tenancy lengths of no less than three months; 
d. communal facilities and services are provided that are sufficient to meet the 
requirements of the intended number of residents and offer  at least:  
e. it provides convenient access to a communal kitchen;  
f. it provides outside communal amenity space (roof terrace and/or garden); 
g. it provides internal communal amenity space (dining rooms, lounges);  
h. it provides laundry and drying facilities;  
i. the private units provide adequate functional living space and layout, and are not 
self-contained homes or capable of being used as self-contained homes; 
j. it complies with any relevant standards for houses in multiple occupation (HMOs);  
k. a management plan is provided with the application; and   
l. it delivers a cash in lieu contribution towards conventional C3 affordable housing in 
the form of upfront cash in lieu payment.   
2. Developments are expected to provide a contribution in lieu of affordable housing in 
line wi th Policy H2.   
3. All large -scale purpose-built shared living schemes will be subject to the viability tested 
route set out in the London Plan. However, developments which provide a contribution 
equal to 35 per cent of the units at a discount of 50 per cent of the market rent will not 
be subject to a late stage viability review.  
Explanation  
8.8.1  Large-scale purpose-built shared living developments are generally of at least 50 
units . This type of housing is regarded as sui generis use class and may provide an 
alternative option for single person households who cannot or choose not to live in 
self-contained homes. Although this type of accommodation does not fall within C3 
use class, it nevertheless represents a form of housing like any student 
accommodation and the number of bedrooms would be counted towards our housing 
targets. This form of accommodation is required to contribute to affordable housing. 
As the units within large- scale purpose-built shared living accommodation do not 
necessarily meet minimum housing space standards it is not considered suitable as a 
form of affordable housing itself. Therefore, in line with the London Plan, the council 
will expect purpose built shared living accommodation to make upfront cash in lieu 
contribution towards affordable housing subject to viability assessment.   
8.8.2  A management plan must be produced and submitted with the planning application 
showing how the whole development will be managed and maintained to ensure the 
continued quality of the accommodation, communal facilities and services, and that it  Policy DM 
H8: Large scale purpose built shared housing  
214 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 will positively integrate into the surrounding communities. The agreed management 
plan should be secured through the use of a s ection 106 agreement.  Policy DM  
H9: Student accommodation  
 
215 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.9 Policy DM H9: Student accommodation           
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  H9 Student accommodation  
 
1. Proposals involving the development, redevelopment and/or intensification of purpose 
built student accommodation will be supported where they: 
a. help to meet an identified strategic need, giving priority to local need;  
b. are secured to the occupation of specific education institutions or where this is not 
the case, providers should, subject to viability, deliver an element of student 
accommodation that is affordable for students in the context of average student 
incomes and rents for broadly com parable accommodation provided by London 
universities24.   
 
2. All proposals for student accommodation must be appropriately located:  
a. at well -connected sites that have good levels of public transport accessibility 
(normally PTAL 4-6) and are easy to access by  walking and cycling; and  
b. within or at the edge of town centres, or other locations that benefit from shops, 
services, leisure and community facilities appropriate to the student population.   
 
3. All proposals involving the development, redevelopment and/or  intensification of 
student accommodation must ensure a high standard of amenity for future occupiers 
of the development and residents in the surrounding area. Proposals must meet all the 
following criteria:   
a. provide a high-quality living environment incl uding size of units, daylight and 
sunlight standards and well -integrated communal areas and facilities that would 
not have a detrimental impact on the amenity and character of the local area; 
b. provide at least 10% of student rooms which are readily adaptabl e for occupation 
by wheelchair users from the outset, consistent with relevant guidance and best 
practice;  
c. provide adequate on-site cycle parking facilities;  
d. demonstrate that the accommodation will only be occupied by students;  
e. protect the amenity of ad joining and neighbouring areas; and   
f. provide a site management and maintenance plan, which demonstrates that the 
accommodation will be managed and maintained over its lifetime so as to ensure 
an acceptable level of amenity and access to facilities for its  occupiers and would 
not give rise to unacceptable impacts on the amenities of existing residents in the 
neighbourhood.  
 
4. The loss of existing student accommodation will be resisted unless it is demonstrated 
that the facility no longer caters for current or future needs and the floorspace is 
replaced by another form of residential accommodation that meets other Local Plan 
housing requirements  
 
                                                 
24 In line with London Plan policy H17: Purpose built student accommodation   Policy DM 
H9: Student accommodation  
216 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
8.9.1 London’s higher education providers make a significant contribution to its economy 
and labour market. The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) emphasises that local 
planning authorities need to plan for a sufficient supply of student accommodation whether it consists of communal halls of residence or self- contained dwellings, and 
whether or not it is on campus. The LHNA 2020 recognised there is a small size of student population in the Borough and therefore did not undertake an assessment of 
the needs of this group.  Whilst there is not a need for student accommodation, 
guidance is needed for consideration of applications that may come about. .  
8.9.2 The provision of new student accommodation will be supported, which will be steered 
in appropriate locations that are accessible to higher education institutions and 
conveniently located within close proximity to existing services and public transport, including those supported by good walking and cycling infrastructure. It is also important that student accommodation is sited so student residents have access to a wide range of services and facilities. During the site selection process applicants should give priority to locations in proximity to the institutions that the development 
will serve. Student accommodation that is intended to meet need arising from outside 
of the borough should be sufficiently justified in respect of the site location, both locally and in the individual site context. 
8.9.3 All student housing should provide a suitable standard of amenity to the occupiers, recognising that they will occupy the accommodation on a non-permanent basis and enjoy the use of recreational and domestic facilities available through the educational institution. The occupation and use of the development should be compatible with the amenity of neighbouring occupiers and character of the area.  
8.9.4 New student accommodation must be developed and secured for occupation by students of one or more specific higher education institutions. This is to guard against speculative development and ensure proposals genuinely help to address identified need. Applications must provide evidence of an end user affiliated with an 
educational institution, and demonstrate appropriate management arrangements are in place so that rooms will be rented solely to students over the lifetime of the development.  
8.9.5 At least 35% of purpose built student accommodation should be secured as 
“affordable student accommodation” to ensure that students with an income 
equivalent to that provided to full -time UK students by state funded sources of 
financial support for living costs can afford to stay in student accommodation. We will apply the definition of affordable student accommodation as set in the London Plan and its supplementary guidance. Affordable rent levels may be subject to periodic 
review over the life of the Local Plan, taking account of any significant changes that 
may be made to the government’s student maintenance loan regime. 
8.9.6 New student accommodation must be of a high standard of design and construction, with functional layouts and well -integrated living and communal spaces and facilities. 
It should meet the latest industry standards. Student unit sizes and layouts should be varied, particularly to cater to the needs of wheelchair users, mature students with families, students who want to live alone and for groups of students using shared facilities. The specific  requirements of educational institutions should be considered 
and accounted for wherever possible.   Policy DM  
H9: Student accommodation  
 
217 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 8.9.7  Whilst many students require accommodation during term time only, some residents 
will use accommodation as their permanent address and therefore developm ent 
should allow for year -round occupation. To help ensure the viability of student 
accommodation, we will provide flexibility to allow the temporary or ancillary use of 
accommodation during term breaks. Proposals will be considered on a case-by -case 
basis , and where acceptable in principle, we will use conditions or legal agreements 
to ensure that any temporary or ancillary uses do not result in a material change of 
use of the building.  
8.9.8  Student accommodation can benefit Enfield’s neighbourhoods and communi ties, for 
example, by attracting a student population that supports the local economy, 
complements the cultural industries and stimulates inward investment. However, an 
overconcentration of student accommodation within a local area can adversely 
impact on the amenity of existing residents and uses, and undermine objectives for 
delivering mixed and balanced communities. Where the scale or concentration of 
student housing is likely to harm local amenity, we will resist proposals or seek a 
range of mitigation measures to ensure development is appropriate.   Policy DM 
H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation 
218 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 8.10 Policy DM H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM H10 Gypsy and Traveller accommodation 
1. The Council will address the need for Gypsy and Traveller accommodation through th e
pr
oposed Gypsy  and Traveller Local Pl an.
2.P
roposals brought forward for transit and permanent pitches over will be requir ed to
dem
onstrate the following :
a.the s
ite is in an area suitable for residential occupation and suitably connected by
sustainable modes of transport with health care, retail and school facilities wi th
c
apacity;
b.the impact of the development would not harm the landscape, heritage assets ,
bi
odiversity or visual character and amenity of the area, particularly the green belt;
c.the site is suitable where required for the undertaking of occupants’ employm ent
and entr
epreneurial activities without detriment to adjacent occupiers’ amenity;
d.the site can be safely accessed by pedestrians, vehicles and caravans ;
e.be l
aid out and incorporate boundary treatments that seek to positively integr ate
w
ith the adjacent townscape/ communities ; and
f.adequate on -
site utilities, including water resources and supply, waste disposal
and treatment, are provided for the benefit of residents and in order to avoi d
adv
erse impacts on the natural environment.
3.Due to the nature of this housing need, there will be continuing cooperation wi th
nei
ghbouring local planning authorities to ensure that the appropriate demand is
identified and provision made. Policy DM  
H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation  
 
219 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation 
8.10.1  Gypsies and T ravell ers form part of the diverse community within the Borough with 
particular housing needs. To plan positively and manage development to meet the 
needs for this group, a separate Local Plan is being developed. This will be informed 
by the Gypsy and Traveller’ s Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) 2020, which 
identifies a need of 21 pitches over the plan period.  
8.10.2  In the meantime, there is a need to provide guidance for consideration of applications 
that may come about before the Gypsy and Traveller Local Plan is adopted. Best 
practice set out in the national Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (PPTS) states that 
locally specific criteria should be used to guide both the allocation of sites in plans, 
and form the policy used to assess applications which come forward on unallocated 
sites.    
Policy options for Gypsy and travellers’ accommodation  
8.10.3  In order to support the delivery of new accommodation to meet local needs, five 
options and their associated pros and cons have been identified in Table 8.5. As part 
of this consultation the Council is inviting stakeholder’s thoughts on these alternatives 
and suggestions of other alternatives through consultation questions. For the next 
draft of the Local Plan the key issues section will be removed from the policy and the 
policy options removed from this section of the Plan to make the document more 
streamlined, but at this stage it was felt helpful to include in this draft for consultation 
to inform stakeholders of the issues being contended with. 
 
   Policy DM 
H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation 
(Options)  
220 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Table 8
.5: Options for Policy H10: Gypsy and T ravellers’ accommodation  
Policy options for H10 Gypsy 
and travellers’ 
accommodation Pros and cons of each option  Preferred 
Option 
Do nothing  Cons  
× The ‘do nothing’ option is not considered. Government policy places a requirement on 
local planning authorities to meet the housing needs of all sections of the community and 
by through the do nothing approach the ELP  will not be in conformity with the London 
Plan.  No 
Meet Enfi eld’s objectively 
assessed needs as part the Local Plan  Pros 
√This option provides the needs for community and if managed well, reduces  the
num
bers of unauthorised encampments .
√E
nsures that the ELP is positively prepared and is based on a strategy that seeks t o
m
eet the borough’s objectively assessed need, where it is reasonable to do s o.
Co
n 
× There are no sites in the Borough . No 
Meet the needs of the Gypsy 
and Traveller accommodation through the proposed Gypsy 
and Traveller Local Plan  Pros 
√Positively plans and manage development to meet the needs for this gro up of the
c
ommunity.  This will be informed by the Gypsy and Traveller’s Accommodati on
Assessment (GTAA) 2020, which identifies a need  of 21 pitches over the plan period .Yes 
Address th e need with the 
Mayor of London through the London-wide gypsy and traveller assessment  Pros 
√The Council could wait for the findings from the Mayor of London’s assessm ent to
em
erge to inform the ELP .
C
ons 
× The timescales of the Study and next London Plan are unknown, which would cause 
delays to the ELP timetable.  
× The London-wide study coul d give rise to additional needs and traveller pitches and the 
borough  could be set a higher pitches target and may have to take on th e gypsy and No  Policy DM  
H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation  
(Options)  
 
221 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Policy options for H10 Gypsy 
and travellers’ 
accommodation  Pros and cons of each option   Preferred 
Option  
traveller needs of other London Boroughs , who do not have the capacity to provide gypsy 
and traveller pitches w ithin their own boundaries.  
Address the need through 
assistance from duty to 
cooperate partners  
 Pro 
√ This option would provide for the needs of the community.  
 
Cons  
× Engagement with duty to cooperate partners in 2020 was not forthcoming and 
concluded that the borough should meet its own needs for gypsy and traveller 
accommodation.   No   Policy DM 
H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation 
(Options)  
222 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021  Chapter 8  
Have your say… 
 
223 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Have your say on  Chapter 8 … 
Policy H2: Affordable housing  
• Do you consider that, if supported by viability evidence, the target for proving 
affordable housing on housing sites should be increased? If so, what percentage 
of affordable housing should the council be seeking?  
• Should the council seek to use the threshold for affordable housing of 10 dwellings 
on site? Are there occasions when it may not be appropriate and if so, what should 
the thresholds be?  
Other policies within this section of the plan: H3, H4, H5, H 6, H7, H8 and H9  
• Do you agree with the draft policy approach set out in H3, H4, H5, H6, H7, H8 and 
H9?  
• If not, what changes would you suggest?   
Policy H10: Gypsy and Traveller accommodation  
Do you agree with the draft policy approach set out in H10 on accommodating gypsy and 
travellers accommodation? If not, please give details as to why not or how the policy could 
be changed  
Should the C ouncil meet its full gypsy and traveller needs of 21 pitches and/or provide a 
transit site to manage unauthorised enc ampment activity across the borough? 
Should the C ouncil wait until the Mayor of London has undertaken his London -wide gypsy 
and traveller and be allocated a gypsy and traveller pitch target? 
In meeting its gypsy and traveller needs should Enfield engage w ith its neighbours and 
provide a joint scheme/ site or should the Council accommodate its own gypsy and 
traveller needs within the Borough boundary? 
If possible, do you think that the C ouncil should allocate all its identified need on a number 
of new sites ? Should this be a large site or range of large and smaller sites? 
 
   Chapter 9 
Economy  
224 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9 Economy 
Introduction  
9.2 The Borough needs to plan for more jobs to meet the needs of our growing population. 
This plan sets out a strategy to make the most of the potential of urban sit es – 
including through mixed uses and intensification – before exploring the selective 
development of Green Belt sites. The ELP’s evidence suggests strongly that we need 
to provide for more – not less – employment floorspace.  
9.3 Ensuring that employment land and premises are appropriately protected and new 
space is provided to meet business needs is key to maximising Enfield’s economic 
potential.  Enfield has a relatively  buoyant supply of industrial land and floorspace and 
high levels of market demand in the face of increasing competition from other land uses, in particular  housing. There are significant employment cluster s in the Upper Lee 
Valley corridor and Great Cambridge Road along key transport networks and these sites need to be protected to meet business needs and support the role of Enfield as a 
strategically important economic hub. 
9.4 The presence of Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL) in the Lee Valley and Southbury is 
testament to Enfield’s strategically important role in London’s business supply chai ns, 
accommodating the second largest stock of industrial space in London. Enfield’s position in the UK Innovation Corridor means the Borough is well placed to take 
advantage of growth in a range of sectors extending between London and Cambridge.  
9.5 Protecting and managing the Borough’s  sites is important because the stock provides 
a range of local employment opportunities for Enfield residents , close to where they 
live.  As other Boroughs have also lost space, local firms are increasingly competing 
with new firms for the remaining stock of property.    
9.6 More strategically, the Borough’s  stock is also vital to the to the efficient operation of 
London. The Borough’s location, with access to the M25, North Circular Road and 
A10, makes Enfield particularly attractive to businesses seeking to service a large part 
of London.  So, the choices Enfield make s concerning the stock of sites have a greater 
impact than just the b orough.   
9.7 Enfield’s office stock is focused on local markets, through businesses like Metaswitch in Enfield Town have a broader reach. Protecting employment space and providing for 
an uplift in floorspace is essential to supporting economic opportunity and overcoming spatial disparities. These policies set out an approach to planning for employment that  
builds on Enfield’s key strengths and capitalises on borough’s future growth potential. They maximise the scope to cement Enfield’s position as the ‘workshop of London’, as 
set out in the plan’s vision. 
9.8 Engagement on a vision for the local plan has revealed support for meeting all or some of the Borough’s employment need. This means the Borough needs, as a minimum, to 
provide for an uplift of employment floorspace over the plan period. Respondents support building a broad -based economy which focuses new growth sectors as well as 
traditional strengths and protects small scale workplaces close to where people live. 
9.9 This plan supports the realisation of the Economic Development Strategy’s objective of 
an expanded business base, encompassing growth sectors such as film an d television  Chapter 9  
Economy  
 
225 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 and low carbon industries, as well as longstanding strengths of manufacturing and 
logistics  activities. 
9.10 The policies set out in this chapter  seek to provide an uplift in the supply of 
employment space whilst realising wider spatial objectives . However, the Borough has 
choices to make on how much employment growth Enfield wants  to accommodate and 
where.  
Need for Land and Floorspace in Enfield  
Industrial  and logistics 
9.11 London Plan Policy E4 requires the Borough to provide sufficient supply of land and 
premises to meet current and future demands for industrial and related functions. This 
considers strategic and local employment land reviews, industrial land audits and the 
potential for intensification, co-location and substitution.  
9.12 In line with the London Plan, the Council has assessed the Borough’s need for 
industrial land and floorspace, drawing on the Employment Land Review (2018)25. This 
has identified a minimum (net additional) need for 251,505 sq.  m of floorspace for 
industrial uses. This could require 56 ha of new land.   
9.13 Reflecting the general principle that the Borough needs to make the best and most 
efficient use of Enfield’s industrial land significant work has been undertaken to 
understand the scope to intensify existing employm ent sites. 
9.14 The evidence demonstrates that there is scope for significant industrial intensification 
in Enfield, but for some uses viability and deliverability remains an issue. In parts of the 
Borough fragmented land ownerships hinder intensification because the most intensive 
formats; including multi deck warehousing, often need a large footprint.  
9.15 To enable intensification the policies in this plan are fully supportive of appropriate 
industrial intensification and the Council will work with landowners who are looking to 
assemble sites for industrial intensification.  
9.16 Even with this positive policy framework it is unlikely that the ELP can rely on 
intensification alone to fully meet the Borough’s needs in this plan.  In this context the 
ELP’s local evidence w ould not support the release of sites nor the use of potential 
intensification capacity for other uses.    
9.17 The preferred option set out in Strategic Policy SP E1 of the ELP would ensure the 
supply of sufficient sites to meet almost all of our needs for industry and logistics, 
though this option entails the development of selected Green Belt sites. Restricting 
development solely to urban sites only meet about half of the borough’s needs for 
industry and logistics . 
Offices  
9.18 Enfield is not a significant office location and Policy E1 of the London Plan does not 
direct strategic scale office floorspace growth to the borough.   The ELP’s local 
                                                 
25 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planni ng/enfield- employment- land- review -report -aecom -planning.pdf  .  Note: the ELR 
reported up to 2036.  The Council has ‘rolled’ this forward per annum to cover the Enfield Plan period.  The ELR did not identify 
a need for additional land for waste, transport or utilities.     Chapter 9 
Economy  
226 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 evidence, as set out in the Employment Land Review (ELR)26, recommends the plan 
provides for an uplift in the provision of office floorspace of 37,000 sq m. The ELR 
recommended that this be addressed in the Borough’s town centres and via mixed use 
development.   
9.19 Since the ELR was published Government has amended the use class order (UCO) and continues to encourage the release of office space to housing.  For the 
assessment of ‘need’ changes to the UCO do not change this – there remains ‘need’ 
for new office space regardless of its use class.  However, wider changes to the market and national policy will continue to complicate the Borough’s ability to positively 
plan for office space. This includes a continuation of permitted development rights to lose smaller office units to other uses (mainly housing) coupled with emerging policy 
that removes local scope to limit these losses via Article 4 directions.   
9.20 The ELP looks to address the Borough’s need for new offices by encouraging new 
provision, including through mixed-use development, using a sequential approach to  
encourage additional provision our town centres.   
Managing Covid  
9.21 The ELP’s  economic evidence base concluded just as the Covid emergency 
commenced in early 2020.  It was not considered appropriate to re-cast the economic 
evidence while the Borough was in period of lockdown.  Nor was it practical given 
limited robust data including baseline statistics and forecasts and without any guidance 
from government at the time.  As the economy recovers the C ouncil recognises there 
is a need to recast an assessment of economic need.  At the time of drafting this plan’s emerging evidence would suggest:  
•For industrial uses demand has significantly strengthened in the emergency.  This
is partly a short-term trend related to firms strengthening their supply chain capacityfor added resilience.   But Covid has dramatically sped up the substitution of hi
gh
s
treet retail with e-commerce and so logistics space.  As more data becomes
available this is likely to increase the need for additional industrial space.
•For office uses the picture is especially unclear.  For industrial uses all evidence
suggests post Covid need / demand may be higher than previously estim ated.
H
owever, for offices two post C ovid trends move in opposite directions.  Increas ed
hom
eworking suggests demand for less formal office provision but the need for l ong
ter
m social distancing in offices could increase dem and.
9.22
 The Council will keep this under review and will provide an update to the ELP’s Employment Land Review as soon as is practical.   
26 The ELR addressed the period up to 2036.  The Council has rolled forward this assessment to 2039.  Strategic Policy 
SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth  
227 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9.1 Strategic Policy SP E1: Employment and growth 
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  E1 Employment and growth 
1.To meet the Borough’s identified economic needs this plan looks to provide for  a
mi
nimum of:
a.251,500 sqm of net additional industrial and logistics floorspac e; and
b.37,000 s
qm for off net additional office floorspac e.
2.To ensure the provision of additional floorspace to support business grow th up to
2039, the 
Council will work with landowners to deliver:
a.intensified development of industrial, logistics and related functions in existi ng
em
ployment areas ;
b.the pr
ovision of new sites for  industry and logistics and related functions (includi ng
m
ixed use developments) in urban areas accessible to the strategic road network
alongside new locations for industrial and logistics development in appropri ate
par
ts of the Green Bel t; and
c.an upl
ift in office floorspace in Enfield’s major and district centres and Meridi an
Water
.
3.Sites set out in Table 9.1 are allocated for employment-led development and defi ned
on the P
olicies Map. Further information on site allocations is presented on the si te
pr
oformas in Appendix C . The proformas  carry the status of policy and indicate key
requirements and considerations that need to be taken into account as sites com e
for
ward for developmen t.
Table 9.1:
 Sites allocated for employment related uses 
SA ID Site address Estimated capacity (sq.m) 
Southbury 
SA8 Sainsburys Baird Road  20,865  
SA46  Crown Road Lorry Park  4,530  
Meridian Water  
SA47  Ravenside Retail Park  21,645  
Crews Hill 
SA48  Land at 135 Theobalds Park Road  3,250  
Other sites outside of the place making areas 
SA39  Travis Perkins Palmers Green  3,209  
SA49  Land to the south of Millmarsh Lane, 
Brimsdown Industrial Estate  10,500  
SA32  Sainsburys Green Lanes  13,325 
SA50 6 Morson Road  2,600  
SA51  Montagu Industrial Estate  6,613  
SA30  Claverings Industrial Estate  TBC 
SA52  Land West of Rammey Marsh  70,200  
SA53  Car Park Site, Wharf Road  5,115  
SA54  Land East of Junction 24  30,550  Strategic Policy 
SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth  
228 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 SA55  Land to the North West of I nnova Park  16,445  
Explanation 
9.1.1 Enfield has an identified net additional need for both industrial/ logistics space and 
office space over the plan period. This means the Borough needs to provide for more –not less – employment floorspace going forward. This raises the challenge of how
best to go about accommodating this anticipated grow
th.
9.1.2 An assessment of potential development sites has demonstrated that the Borough cannot accommodate all our anticipated employment needs solely within the urban area. By  confining industrial and logistics development to the urban area Enfield 
would only meet approximately 48% of the borough’s additional need for these types 
of businesses. Duty to Cooperate (DtC) discussions with local authorities within 
Enfield’s Functional Economic Market Area (FEMA) have revealed, unsurprisingly, that many face the same challenges as Enfield and they are unable to provide 
industrial capacity on the Borough’s behalf.  
9.1.3 By developing selected Green Belt sites in addition to urban sites there is the 
potential to meet approximately 98% of industrial and logistics needs. Two sites in 
particular – Land West of Rammey Marsh and Land East of J24 of the M25 – have 
most potential to deliver an uplift in floorspace.  
9.1.4 In order to support the delivery of new floorspace to meet the Borough’s needs, the 
Council has identified two policy options and their associated benefits and dis -
benefits, set out Table 9.2. As part of this consultation, the Council is  inviting 
stakeholder’s thoughts on these alternatives and suggestions of other alternatives through consultation questions. For the next draft of the Local Plan the key issues 
section will be removed from the policy and the policy options removed from this 
section of the Plan to make the document more streamlined, but at this stage it was 
felt helpful to include in this draft for consultation to inform stakeholders of the issues 
being contended with.  Strategic Policy 
SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth  
229 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Table 9.2:
 Policy options for E1: Employment and growth 
Policy options: SP E1 Employment and growth  Preferred 
option 
A.Meet the Borough’s industrial and logistics needs in the ur ban
area
P
ros
Thi
s option would provide additional capacity through the us e of
ur
ban sites and intensificati on.
C
ons
It would safeguard the Green Belt from development but would onlyresult in approximately half of our needs for industry and logisticsbeing m
et.
Thi
s option would not provide enough space for businesses t o
ex
pand, limiting economic growth and risk displacing jobs an d
bus
inesses outside the bor ough.No  
B.Meet the Borough’s industrial and logistics needs in the ur ban
ar
ea and selected Green Belt sit es
P
ro
This option would provide additional capacity thr ough the
s
elective development of a small number of Green Belt sites ,
al
ongside maximising the potential of urban sites .
Thi
s option would involve the loss of small areas of Green Bel t
l
and but would allow the borough to meet almost all of our
anticipated needs for industry and l ogistics .
Thi
s would allow sufficient capacity to come forward to mee t
bus
iness needs, allowing Enfield to capitalise on jobs  and
bus
iness growth.Yes Strategic Policy 
SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth  
230 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9.2 Strategic Policy SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business 
growth    
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  E2 Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth  
1.The Council will support a growing and diversifying economy, enabling development i n
our
 industrial areas alongside Enfield’s thriving town centres. Sustainable economic
growth is key to addressing the climate emergency and tackling deprivation. Planni ng
pol
icies will be used to realise the opportunities set out in the Economic Developme nt
S
trategy and enable good growth throughout the Borough.
2.Proposals which supports, protects and enhances the role and function of  the
B
orough’s employment locations (as defined on the Policies Map) and maximises  the
pr
ovision of employment floorspace (through the intensification of existing
sites/floorspace) will be supported in line with the principles set out in Table 9.3:
Table 9.3:
 Employment locations 
Employment locations 
Designation Role and function Location 
Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL)   Strategically important industrial locations critical to the effective functioning of 
London’s economy. These will be 
safeguarded in accordance with London Plan policies and intensification will be encouraged.  14 sites as set out on the Policies Map.  
Locally Significant Industrial  Sites (LSIS) Locally important industrial locations, complementing SILs in meeting local 
business needs. These sites can deliver a 
broader range of activities than SILs, but the business function of these sites will be safeguarded and intensification will be encouraged.  9 sites as set out on the Policies Map. 
Enfield’s town centres: 
Enfield Town, 
Southgate, Palmers Green, Edmonton Green and Angel Edmonton  The most accessible and sustainable 
locations for jobs, town centres have the 
potential to accommodate diverse employment activities.  These are areas where will look to encourage new office uses and we will look to make the most efficient re-use of surplus retail space.   Defined on the Policies Map  
Other employment sites  These are employment sites or units outside of the areas 
described above. Taken together they provide significant Strategic Policy  
SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth  
 
231 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 floorspace and accommodate a range of jobs across a 
variety of sectors.  Many of our mixed used site allocations 
will provide new employment opportunities.  
Co-working and remote 
working Ranging from serviced co-working spaces 
in established employment areas to more 
local co-working hubs servicing local 
communities, and infrastructure to support 
home working. Throughout the 
Borough 
3. Proposals will be supported which provi de opportunities to maximise and deliver 
investment and job creation in the borough through the following measures:  
a. property development and investment to enable economic development in 
employment areas, major and district centres and Meridian Water, incl uding 
developing the UK Innovation Corridor; 
b. diversification of town centre activities, including making space for knowledge 
intensive and creative industries;  
c. intensification of employment generating activities in SILs and LSIS;  
d. improved skills and training opportunities; and  
e. encouraging a broad-based economy which serves the needs of residents and 
businesses, including through supporting growth in health, education and other 
‘foundational economy’ sectors.  
4. Proposals will be supported which provide opportunities to promote the creation of a 
growing and diverse economy through ensuring availability of a range of workspaces 
and unit sizes, start-up space, co-working space and ‘grow -on’ space and  protecting 
existing floorspace and encouraging the provision of new floorspace.  
 
  Strategic Policy 
SP E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth  
232 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
9.2.1 This policy sets out the Borough’s approach to enabling a growing and diversifying 
economy, designating employment locations and putting in place the right conditions 
for investment and job creation, helping to deliver 135,00027 jobs by 2041 and secure 
a broader employment base.  
9.2.2 The Borough’s large supply of industrial and logistics sites allows Enfield to meet the 
needs of a wide range of successful and growing sectors.  For many industrial and 
logistics firms Enfield’s location means occupiers will pay a market premium to locate 
in the borough, though cost efficient space is important for fostering innovation and 
entrepreneurship in the borough.  Overall Enfield’s package of sites and property 
makes Enfield an outstanding business  and investment proposition.    
9.2.3 Part 1  of the policy supports Enfield’s economic diversity, highlighting the role that 
industrial areas and town centres will play in achieving sustainable economic growth. 
9.2.4 Part 2  designates and protects  Strategic Industrial Location (SIL) and Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites (LSIS)  to support the long-term growth of industrial 
businesses and related services in the borough. Town centres  are able to offer 
smaller spaces which meet the needs of a range of businesses.  
9.2.5 Part 3  sets out the means by which a diverse and thriving economy will be supported 
–through key partnerships at the local and strategic level, by diversifying tow n
c
entres to meet the changing needs of the Borough’s growing population, by
optimising the performance and magnifying the agglomeration benefits of the
B
orough’s industrial areas through intensification, and planning for and valui ng the
foundati
onal economy sectors (such as health, social care and education) crucial to
the everyday needs of existing and future residents .
9.2.6 Part 4  describes how development should contribute to meeting our long- term 
objectives to support investment and job creation in the borough, by delivering space 
to meet the needs of a range of businesses to support existing and future needs, 
enhancing economic resilience.  
9.2.7 Employment uses, for the purposes of this plan, are defined office, research and development, light industrial, general industrial and storage and distribution uses 
(those uses falling within classes E(g), B2 and B8 of the Use Classes Order ), as well 
as related s ui generis uses  including secondary materials, waste management and 
aggregates, utilities infrastructure, and wholesale markets , as detailed in Policy E4 
part a of the London Plan.  
27 GLA Economics ‘ London Long Term Labour Market Projections ’ Strategic Policy  
SP E3: Protecting employment locations and managing change  
 
233 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 9.3 Strategic Poli cy SP E3: Protecting employment locations and 
managing change    
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  E3 Protecting employment locations and managing 
change  
1. Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL)  
a. The Council will safeguard the borough’s Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL) as 
identified in the London Plan and on the Policies Map to meet strategic economic 
needs and accommodate increases in employment floorspace.   
 
b. General and light industrial, storage and distribution, research and development 
and related sui generi s uses (such as wholesale markets, waste management, 
utilities infrastructure) are encouraged in SIL, alongside ancillary office use and 
land for sustainable transport functions . Small scale food and drink and leisure 
uses which meet the day -to-day needs of workers  and do not adversely affect the 
industrial status or operation of the area will be supported. Residential uses are not 
permitted in SIL. 
 
c. Proposals which result in a net loss of l ight and general industrial, storage and 
distribution, research and development and related sui generis floorspace in SILs 
will be refused. 
 
d. Proposals within or adjacent to SILs should not compromise the integrity or 
effectiveness of these locations in accommodating industrial type activities and 
their ability to operate on a 24-hour basis  
2. Locally Significant Industrial Locations (LSIS)  
a. The Council will safeguard Locally Significant Industrial Locations (LSIS)  to 
meet local business needs as shown on the Policies Map.  
b. General and light industrial, storage and distribution, research and development 
and related sui generis uses are encouraged in LSIS. Proposals for non- industrial 
type uses in LSIS must not compromise the business function of the site. 
c. Proposals which result in a net loss of light and general industrial, storage and 
distribution, research and development and related sui generis floorspace in LSIS s 
will be refused.  
3. Redevelopment of SIL s and LSIS  
a. Proposals for the redevelopment of designated employment areas will be 
supported where they meet the criteria set out above in parts 1 (in the case of SIL), 
and 2 (in the case of LSIS ).  
b. Where sites are redeveloped scope for intensified industrial floorspace should be 
prioritised over other forms of development.   
4. Non-designated industrial sites  
a. Within non- designated industrial sites, general and light industrial, storage and 
distribution, research and development and related sui generis uses  will be Strategic Policy 
SP E3: Protecting employment locations and managing change  
234 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 protected. Any proposals involving the net loss of such floorspace should meet the 
requirements set out in policy E5 par t B.  
Explanation 
9.3.1 This policy seeks to protect and increase the capacity of SILs . These sites benefit 
from good access to the road network and enjoy good links to local and regional 
supply chains and access to an appropriately skilled workforce. They are of regional 
importance and accommodate activities essential to the functioning of London‘s 
economy. The policy also seeks to safeguard LSISs and non -designated industrial 
sites in meeting boroughwide and local needs. These help to support local supply chains and provide employment opportunities close to where people live.  
9.3.2 Part 1  of the policy promotes and protects SILs for industrial -type activities. Related 
sui generis uses include waste management facilities, utilities and transport depots, with other supporting facilities including office uses where ancillary in scale and 
function. However, these must be compatible with the industrial function of SILs and 
not compromise the ability of businesses to carry out intensive, round-the-clock 
industrial activities within SILs .  
9.3.3 Part 2  promotes and protects Locally Significant Industrial Sites (LSIS) as 
employment locations suitable for industrial -type activities. A broader range of uses, 
including non-ancillary office and residential uses, may be acceptable in LSIS, 
subject to other policies in this Plan. Proposals for non-light and general industrial, 
research and development and storage and distribution uses in LSISs must ensure 
that industrial -type activities are not compromised. Mixed use redevelopment 
schemes in LSIS must ensure that phasing secure s the completion and operation of 
the employment components of the scheme before first occupation of non-
employment uses.   
9.3.4 For the avoidance of doubt, banqueting suites are not permitted in SILs or LSIS, but will be directed to areas where there is good access to public transport, as set out in 
other policies in the Plan . 
9.3.5 Part 3  supports the improvement of the Borough’s designated employment sites. 
Where redevelopment of a site releases intensification capacity; for  example, by 
redeveloping single storey formats with multi floor development, this capacity should 
first be used to meet our economic needs.   
9.3.6 Part 4  sets out a protective approach to non-designated industrial sites. Non-
designated industrial sites are an important part of the borough’s employment offer, often providing small -scale workshops close to where people live.   Policy DM  
E7: Providing for workspaces  
 
235 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 9.4 Strategic Policy SP E4: Supporting offices   
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  E4 Supporting offices 
1. Proposals  for new office floorspace will be supp orted in town centre locations, 
including at Meridian Water.   
2. Proposals which result in the net loss of office floorspace will be resisted unless there 
is no current or future market demand for the site as evidenced through a period of at 
least 24 months of active marketing for office employment uses at realistic market 
rates. Applicants should seek to maximise the re-provision of office floorspace as part 
of any redevelopment scheme.  
Explanation  
9.4.1  Evidence suggests we need to plan for around 37,000 sqm of net additional 
floorspace by 2039.28  This policy seeks to support the delivery of new office 
floorspace and resist losses. The Employment Land Review (2018) found a very low 
level of vacant stock supporting the need for more –  not less – space. Part 1 of the 
policy encourages provision of new office floorspace in town centres (including 
Meridian Water), well connected locations where office growth can be 
accommodated sustainably, and where office workers can provide the footfall needed 
to help these places to thrive. 
9.4.2  The London Plan identifies Enfield Town and Southgate as locations where small 
office capacity is to be protected. Given the Borough’s identified need for office 
floorspace, the Council will apply a protectionists stance across the borough. Part 2 
of this policy, in line with the London Plan, requires robust marketing to justify 
releasing office stock. This testing will need to reflect the Boroughs strengths as a 
more affordable office location and reflect the value that secondary stock has in the 
borough.  
9.4.3  At the time of drafting national legislation allows the loss of some office space to 
housing without seeking planning consent. Where planning powers can be used to 
resist losses, and proposals meet the requirements set out in Part 2  of the policy, 
applicants should demonstrate that they have maximised the opportunity to provide 
replacement office floorspace on site, including through the provision of small units 
suitable for SMEs.   
  
                                                 
28 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/enfield- employment- land- review -report -aecom -planning.pdf    Policy DM 
E7: Providing for workspaces  
236 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9.5 Strategic Policy SP E5: Transforming Strategic Industrial Locations 
and Locally Significant Industrial Sites  
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  E5 Transforming Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally Significant Industrial Sites 
1.The Council  will encourage the intensification of industrial uses within SIL s and LSIS
through the more efficient use of space, higher plot ratios, the development of multi -
storey schemes, and the assembling of sites within  designated employment areas  to
as
sist with the delivery of more intensive formats  will be supported.
2.Proposals involving the intensification of industrial uses within SILs and LSISs will  be
s
upported where proposals:
a.as a minimum result in a net increase in employment floorspace and seek  to
m
aximise industrial development potential;
b.are phased to secure the completion and operation of the employm ent
c
omponents of the scheme before first occupation of any non-employment uses;
c.are conceived with proactive engagement with the local planning authority  and
G
reater London Authority;
d.are informed by engagement with existing businesses to seek to retain them  on
s
ite where possible, implement effective transitional arrangements and provi de
s
upport for any businesses that cannot be incorporated to relocate off si te; and
e.i
nvolve effective mitigation of potential negative impacts on surrounding areas
(including increased noise and traffic resulting from intensified development) ,
es
pecially to nearby residential occupiers. Proposals should utilise high quality  and
i
nnovative design approaches to create a buffer and separation between any
heavy or intensive uses (especially B2 or B8) and nearby sensitive uses.
3.Proposals within SILs and LSIS should provide environmental improvements, includin g
w
alking and cycling links  and improved amenities for workers, and take opportunities
to incorporate urban greening and SuDS, and integrate with and enhance bl ue and
gr
een networks.
Explanation 
9.5.1 The Borough’s stock of SIL and LSIS is one of the Enfield’s  most important assets.  
Enfield plays a major role in securing industrial intensification and successfully 
delivering policy E7 of the London Plan. Maintaining these policy designations should 
help secure industrial intensification. 
9.5.2 Development proposals which seek to intensify industrial and logistics uses in SILs  
and LSISs  will be supported in principle. AECO M and Stantec’s industrial 
intensification studies for the Council have identified several sites which have the 
most potential to provided intensified space and reduce our need to rely on new land 
to meet economic needs.29   
29 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/planning/evidence-base/   Policy DM  
E7: Providing for workspaces  
 
237 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 9.5.3  Figure 9.1 show areas of SIL which have the potential to deliver a significant uplift in 
industrial floorspace through intensification. The ELP’s intensification evidence base 
demonstrates that larger sites offer the most scope for accommodating i ntensive 
formats and the council encourages developers to work with us to formulate schemes 
which can deliver substantial increases in floorspace whilst meeting wider spatial 
planning objectives.  
9.5.4  All intensification proposals should actively explore scope for vertical extension and 
maximise the employment development potential of sites. Proposals  must align with 
the London Plan and associated guidance, such as the Mayor of London’s Industrial 
intensification and co-location through plan-led and masterplan approaches  practice 
note.30  The Mayor of London’s Intensification Primer  can helpfully signpost 
promoters to the types of intensified formats that the C ouncil , in applying London 
Plan Policy E 7, would expect promoters to explore.31   
9.5.5  The ELP’s evidence can assist anyone looking how best to intensify space –  the 
evidence base sets out what type of intensified formats may be most suitable in the 
Enfield context and where intensification may be most viable and deliverable.  
However, this approach should not lim it innovation and new formats which meet the 
needs of firms in the borough are encouraged.   
9.5.6  Proposals to improve environmental quality and mak e SILs and LSISs  more 
attractive and competitive to businesses  are strongly supported. Proposals should in 
partic ular take opportunities to ‘green the industrial valley’. More broadly, there is 
scope for  better placemaking and improved walking and cycling links, supporting 
activities to create thriving business hubs. Proposals should explore improved links to 
blue and green networks, and use biophilic design principles (such as planting, trees 
and green roofs) to link employment areas into wider networks. Improved amenities 
for workers, including places for employees to eat and drink  and nursery/creche 
facilities , sho uld also form part of redevelopment proposals.  
Figure 9.1: Areas for SIL intensification 
Placeholder for diagram  
 
  
                                                 
30 https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/practice_note_- _industrial_intensification.pdf   
31 https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/industrialintensificationprimer.pdf    Policy DM 
E7: Providing for workspaces  
238 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9.6 Policy DM E6: Redevelopment of non-designated industrial sites 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  E6 Redevelopment of non-designated industrial sites 
1.Non- designated sites used for industrial type actives will be protected.
2.Proposals that result in a loss of industrial type floorspace should be accompani ed
w
ith evidence that demonstrates:
a.there is no current or  future market demand for the site as evidenced thr ough a
per
iod of at least 24 months of active marketing for industrial employment uses  at
r
ealistic market rates ;
b.ther
e is a strategy in place to deal with the relocation requirements of existi ng
bus
iness es that cannot be incorporated within the redevelopment and all
reasonable efforts have been made to secure a suitable alternative site(s) ,
i
ncluding transitional arrangements;
c.redevelopment will not compromise the function, access, servicing or  operation of
any
 remaining or neighbouring employment uses ; and
d.i
n town centre locations, efforts have been made to accommodate employm ent
fl
oorspace as part of any redevelopment scheme. Applicants should seek to
m
aximise the provision of replacement employment space where it is viabl e and
pr
actical to do so.
Explanation 
9.6.1 The Borough is considering using new land to meet its economic needs in full. Non-
designated sites accommodate a network of firms including many, such as garages and motor repair, that residents value in their local communities, close to where they live.  However, not all non-designated industrial sites are ideally located and many are in need for renewal.  There may be cases where, through a robust d evelopment 
management process, a case can be made to release sites for other uses.   
9.6.2 Given demand for industrial sites we will continue to protect industrial space as part of the vibrant mix of town centre activities. However, as the Borough also has a need for office floorspace, redevelopment or conversion of industrial space to office uses in town centres will be supported where proposals meet the requirements of Part 2 of 
the policy.   Policy DM  
E7: Providing for workspaces  
 
239 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 9.7 Policy DM7: Providing  for workspaces  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  E7 Providing for workspaces 
1. Proposals involving new workspace w ill be supported where they provide:   
a. a range of unit sizes, including co-working, incubator and accelerator space; and  
b. spaces that are flexible, suitable for subdivision and a range of configurations.  
2. The provision of affordable workspace will be suppor ted, having regard to: 
a. the viability of the development (taking account of prevailing market conditions);  
b. the nature of the occupants; and  
c. the quality and size of the proposed units.  
 
3. Proposals that result in the net loss of affordable workspaces will be r esisted.  
4. The provision of co-working spaces will be supported in Enfield’s centres. Larger 
residential schemes should consider the provision of shared workspaces to meet 
resident’s needs. Residential units should be designed to support home working.  
Explanation  
9.7.1  Given the importance of microbusinesses to Enfield’s economy, part 1 of the policy 
supports the provision of a range of workspace types to meet the needs of 
entrepreneurs and small and growing businesses. Policy E3 of the London Plan 
encourages the use of affordable workspace policies to secure a supply of space 
which is maintained below the market rate for that space for a specific social, cultural, 
or economic development purpose.  The ELP’s Employment Land Review (ELR) did 
not directly address Policy E3 of the London Plan and further work is ongoing to 
understand the scale of need and confirm affordable rents for the Borough’s priority 
sectors. The ELR also predated recent changes to permitted development rights that 
means that our small stock of flexible units is vulnerable to uncontrolled loss.   
9.7.2  Given the importance of securing a supply of cost-efficient space in the Borough it is 
likely the provisions of Part 2 of this policy may be revised to require affordable 
workspace provision in the cir cumstances set out in policy E3 –  as opposed to simply 
‘encourage.’  Where affordable workspace is proposed, the applicant must submit an 
affordable workspace statement setting how it will be delivered, including evidence of 
engagement with affordable work space providers and address each of the criteria set 
out in part 2 of this policy . 
9.7.3  To support future economic resilience, part 4 of the policy supports co-working and 
remote working. Larger co-working spaces can form part of a mix of uses in town 
centres, providing footfall and vitality which supports the diversity of centres. There is 
scope for smaller co-working hubs serving local neighbourhoods and larger 
residential developments. The potential for home and remote working should be 
considered as part of the design of homes, including access to digital infrastructure.   Policy DM 
E9: Fostering a successful evening and night -time economy  
240 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9.8 Policy DM E8: Local jobs, skills and local procurement     
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  E8 Local jobs, skills and local procurement 
1.Proposals comprising ten or more residential units or on sites of 0.5 hectares in siz e
w
ill be required to secure local employment at both the construction and end-us e
phas
es and provide appropriate work -based training/apprenticeships through secti on
106 obl
igations where appropriate. In such circumstances, applicants will be required
to submit a site-specific employment and skills plan alongside the planning applicati on
s
etting out how they will engage with local contractors/subcontractors, how many
trainees will be employed on site and how many weeks training will be provided pertrai
nee.
2.P
roposals that results in a net loss of employment (land, floorspace, uses or jobs)
where there is a justification to approve the scheme will be required to enter i nto a
s
ection 106 agreement. In such cases, developers will be expected to:
a.relocate the existing businesses to suitable premises in the locality; or
b.provide the equivalent number of jobs elsewhere within the Borough; or
c.make a financial contribution towards industrial land regeneration projects ,
em
ployment training schemes, job brokerage services or business support initiatives
(which will be calculated on the basis of the formula set out in Appendix D).
Explanation 
9.8.1 Enfield has an above average unemployment level within London and a relatively low 
ratio of jobs to working age residents. While the borough has experienced strong 
employment and population growth in recent years, many local employers face acute 
and growing skills shortages with new employment opportunities requiring skills that 
are not widely available within the workforce especially among first-time job hunters 
and those returning to work after a period of absence.  
9.8.2 This policy seeks to ensure that new development in the Borough contributes towards employment and training initiatives to help support those sections of the 
local workforce (in particular young people and long-term unemployed) who are 
struggling to access jobs due to the lack of skills, qualifications or experience.  
9.8.3 For the purposes of this policy, employment and training initiatives include: 
•work experience placements;
•apprenticeships;
•direct employment;
•employment skills training;
•job brokerage;
•local supply chains;
•business support to small and medium enterprises; and
•other requirements to mitigate the loss of employment, such as industrial l and
regener
ation. Policy DM  
E9: Fostering a successful evening and night -time economy  
 
241 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 9.8.4  Section 106 agreements and planning conditions will be used to secure contributions 
from developments as appropriate to support local training and employment 
initiatives in the Borough.  The level and nature of the contribution will be deter mined 
at the pre-application stage and prior to the determination of the planning application.  
9.8.5  The employment and skills plan will need to explain how the developers intends to 
deliver:  
• at least 25% of the workforce should be local labour (in both the 
construction/demolition phase and for the first two years of end-use occupation of 
the development);  
• at least one apprentice or trainee should be employed per £1 million of contract 
value. Where this is not feasible, financial contributions will be required in lieu of 
provision to support other training and employment initiatives; and  
• at least 10% of the value of goods, services and supplies are procured from local 
businesses.  
 
9.8.6  Other work placement or apprenticeship opportunities could be created during 
decoration of newly -constructed developments and fitting of appliances etc; and 
additional work placements and training opportunities could be available through 
back office functions (e.g. business administration). 
9.8.7  Developments that meet the threshold criteria in part 1 of this policy will be required 
to prepare a site-specific employment and skills plan alongside the submission of a 
planning application. The plan will outline the site-specific measures that will be used 
to facilitate training and employment opportunities arising from the proposed 
development (subject to agreement prior to the commencement of constriction 
works).  
9.8.8  Employment and skills plans will help raise the skill levels of the Borough’s workforce 
and increase their employability in the labour market. It is also important to build on 
the borough’s economic strengths and ensure that local people have the right skills 
and training to access both existing and emerging growth sectors, particularly 
advanced manufacturing, sustainable construction and digital businesses.  
9.8.9  Maximising local labour will also help reduce the need to travel and reduce the risk of 
unnecessary or unforeseen delays. During the demolition and construction phases of 
the development, developers will be expected to make best efforts to employ local 
contractors, subcontractors and local trainees and create apprenticeship placements 
which are available to local residents as well as employ local businesses in the 
supply chain or in its end use, including the supply of materials, goods and services.  
9.8.10  All apprenticeships must be safeguarded against the possibility that the development 
will finish before the apprenticeship. Where possible, the developer should seek 
opportunities to accommodate the apprenticeship in house. If this is not possible, the 
developer should work with a suitable apprenticeship training agency (which has 
accreditation from the National Apprenticeship Service) to secure an appropriate 
apprenticeship completion.  
   Policy DM 
E9: Fostering a successful evening and night -time economy  
242 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9.8.11 Enfield has agreements with neighbouring London boroughs to share 
apprenticeships against section 106 targets where a developer places an apprentice 
in sites across different boroughs to ensure an apprenticeship or higher 
apprenticeship can be completed beyond the lifetime of the construction of a 
development.  
9.8.12 Where it is not possible to provide apprenticeships on site, developers will be required to make a financial contribution to support training, employment and local 
procurement initiatives (based on the activities defined in paragraph 9.8.3 above) to 
enhance the prospects of the use of local employment during the construction/demolition of the development.  Apprenticeships will be based on a 
minimum duration of a minimum of 12 months in line with the relevant qualification 
being obtained. Where this is not possible, a contribution will be sought to help fund 
our job brokerage service, in-lieu of creating apprenticeships.   
9.8.13 In the event it is not possible to employ a trainee over a full -year term, upon 
completion of the development, a fee will be charged for each week for which a trainee place has not been provided on site, equivalent to the current London Living 
Wage (which will be calculated on the formula set out in Appendix C) 
9.8.14 Part 2c of this policy sets out a requirement to either relocate business resulting from 
the loss of employment or jobs resulting from development to suitable premises in the borough, provide the equivalent number of jobs elsewhere within the Borough or 
make a financial contribution based on the number of jobs lost. Loss will be calculated at the point of submission of the planning application (see Appendix  D). 
Where development involves the loss of vacant employment space, employment densities and evidence on vacancy periods and marketing will be used to establish 
the potential number of jobs lost.  
9.8.15 This policy applies to major developments, but local employment and training 
opportunities will also be sought within smaller developments where an opportunity 
arises.  
9.8.16 Once construction has started, developers will be required to monitor and report on the progress of the training and employment initiatives set out in the employment and 
skills plan (in line with the targets set out in the signed Section 106 agreement). 
Evidence includes details of the relevant workers, the total number of workers and 
details of the relevant apprentices, apprenticeship placements and apprenticeship 
courses.   Policy DM  
E9: Fostering a successful evening and night -time economy  
 
243 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 9.9 Policy DM E9: Fostering a successful evening and night -time 
economy      
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  E9 Fostering a successful evening and night -time 
economy  
1. The Council will support development that contributes to the vitality and viability of 
Enfield’s town centres and Meridian Water, and supports a balanced and socially 
inclusive evening and night-time economy, subject to the following considerations:  
a. Cumulative impact  – in areas where a concentration of night-time uses may be 
detrimental to the character or vitality and viability of the centre, there will be a 
presumption against the expansion of existing facilities and the development of 
new facilities. 
b. Residential amenity  – the proposed use should not create an unacceptable 
impact on neighbouring uses in terms of noise, traffic and disturbance taking 
account of the type and characteristics of other uses, such as housing, shops and 
public houses; as well as any known unresolved amenity, traffic or safety issues 
arising from existing uses in the area.  
c. Balance – new uses in centres should support both the day -time and evening and 
night-time economy whilst not undermining the role and function of town centres.  
 
2. Evening and night-time activities will be supported outside town centres (including in 
smaller centres and parks) subject to the agent of change principle.  
Explanation  
9.9.1  The evening and night -time economy is an important driver of economic development and 
provide opportunities to improve social interaction and wellbeing and improve safety through 
increased activity and passive surveillance. Evening and night -time economy activities include 
arts, cultural and entertainment venues, restaurants and pubs.  Howe ver, evening and night -
time activities have the potential to adversely affect the health and well -being of local 
communities, the local environment and the amenity of neighbouring properties.  All 
development must include measures to safeguard established neighbouring uses including 
mitigatory measures and management protocols, such as licensing.   
9.9.2  Where appropriate, planning conditions will be used to control opening and closing times of 
premises to carefully manage and mitigate the impact of the amenity of the area, taking 
account of the type of use, hours of operation, means of access, level of car parking demand 
on surrounding streets and the cumulative impact of neighbouring uses and other factors. 
Noise impacts should be controlled through various meas ures such as acoustic limits on 
extraction and ventilation, acoustic glazing and acoustic insulation between floors and 
properties, where appropriate.  
9.9.3  A mitigatory management plan may be required by condition to secure measures to 
satisfactorily address c ommunity safety, litter collection and wayfinding.  Where new 
residential properties are proposed within mixed- use schemes or nearby established or 
planned uses with late night licences, the proposed use will need to demonstrate that it is 
capable of mitigating against the impact of late- night established or planned use so that the 
amenity of future residents is protected. Proposals should also clearly demonstrate how noise 
attenuation measures have been included and designed to the highest standards.   Policy DM 
E10: Creating a smart and digitally connected Borough  
244 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 9.10 Polic y DM E10: Creating a smart and digitally connected B orough  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  E10 Creating a smart and digitally connected Borough 
1.New development will be expected to provide access to high quality digital connectivityservices from a range of providers (especially within areas of deficiency), enable smar
t
tec
h use, reduce the need to travel and support smart city concepts .
2.Im
proved connectivity will be encouraged in major and district centres and designat ed
em
ployment locations (Enfield Town, Southgate, Palmers Green, Angel Edm onton,
E
dmonton Green, Meridian Water, Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally
Significant Industrial Locations) to support a thriving and resilient economy.
3.Proposals will be expected to:
a.address digital connectivity from the start and secure the provision of the most up-
to-date communications infrastructure (including the fastest available broadband)in line with latest standards, preferably on site;
b.incorporate full -fibre connections, including sufficient open-access ducting c apacity
to accommodate different digital infrastructure providers;
c.not interfere with existing digital, communications and aviation infrastructur
e,
unl
ess adequate mitigation can be provi ded;
d.ex
plore opportunities to co-locate or share facilities and digital innovations ,
es
pecially on large, masterplanned sites ; and
e.enabl
e easy access for servicing and maintenance (including future upgrading as
technology and standards improve).
4.Development involving the provision of telecommunications infrastructure (exc luding
per
mitted development) will be expec ted to:
a.dem
onstrate where new sites are proposed that co-location and/or site shari ng on
ex
isting structures has been explor ed;
b.not c
reate any unacceptable risks to the health and well -being of residents  and
user
s and the amenity of the surrounding area, having regard to the sensitivity  of
the l
ocation and its capacity to accommodate new equipment;
c.not result in the International Commission guidelines on non-ionising radiati on
pr
otection being exceeded; and
d. not cause interference with other electrical equipment, air traffic services or
instrumentation operated in the national interest.
5.Telecommunications development will not be permitted within the Green Bel t and
ar
eas designated as Metropolitan Open Land unless it can be demonstrated that ther e
ar
e no other suitable sites available and the proposed use will maintain the openness
of the Green Belt or the objectives of Metropolitan Open Land (as set out i n the
London P
lan). Policy DM  
E10:  Creating a smart and digitally connected Borough  
 
245 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
9.10.1  Enfield is committed to b ecoming a leading smart Borough with world-class digital 
infrastructure, services and connections, including high-speed broadband and 
storage facilities. This policy sets out how this network will be safeguarded, 
maintained and expanded as a key part of the borough’s wider digital strategy to 
support its long-term prosperity and growth.  
9.10.2  Digital connectivity depends on the availability of fibre and the speeds delivered. 
Enfield has some of the fastest broadband connections in the UK, but the overall 
picture is more mixed: broadband speeds are generally faster in more urban 
locations, like town centres and suburban residential areas, but lower in more remote 
locations, including parts of the Lee Valley and Green Belt.  
9.10.3  This policy aims to secure full -fibre br oadband connections within both existing and 
new development. This includes the installation of appropriate cabling within dwelling 
or business units as well as a fully enabled connection of the developed areas to the 
full main telecommunications network. New residential development should ensure 
good levels of connectivity to support home working.    
9.10.4  Some forms of telecommunications infrastructure (e.g. small -scale mobile masts) fall 
under permitted development rights. Where planning permission is required, 
applicants will need to demonstrate that the new apparatus will not have a 
detrimental impact on the amenity and public safety of the surrounding area. All 
planning applications are encouraged to consider how the current and future needs 
of the occupiers  (taking account of increasing demands) will be addressed. Sensitive 
and innovative design and integration/dual use will be required to reduce impact, 
minimise street/skyline clutter and the proliferation of infrastructure on top of or 
attached to buildings or structures. New apparatus (e.g. boxes) that enable the roll 
out of the latest wireless network should be sited away from listed buildings, 
scheduled monuments and other important heritage assets, wherever possible.  
9.10.5  Developers will need to have special  regard to the sensitivity of the Green Belt, 
Metropolitan Open Land and other locations where the quality of the 
landscape/townscape may be particularly sensitive to the intrusion of 
communications infrastructure, including conservation areas and listed b uildings. 
Proposals involving new telecommunications equipment need to demonstrate that 
exceptional circumstances exist to justify inappropriate development in the Green 
Belt and Metropolitan Open Land. It will also be important to ensure that new 
buildings do not prevent residents from accessing strong and unbroken television 
receptionChapter 9 
Have your say… 
246 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Have your say on Chapter 9…    
E1: Employment and growth  
Is this the right approach for promoting jobs and inclusive business growth? 
E2: Promoting jobs and inclusive business growth   
Is this the right approach for promoting jobs and inclusive business growth? 
E3: Protecting employment locations and managing change  
Is this the right way to protect industrial businesses in the Borough? 
E4: Supporting offices 
Should we encourage the provision of new offices in town centre locations? 
Should we use what planning powers we have to resist the loss of offices? 
E5: Transforming Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally Significant Industrial Sites 
Do you support intensification as  a means of making better use of our industrial areas? 
Should the plan encourage better placemaking and environmental improvements in our 
industrial areas? 
E6: Redevelopment of non- designated industrial sites 
Is this the right approach for non-designated industrial sites?  
E7: Providing for workspaces  
Is this the right way of supporting the delivery of the range of workspaces that our 
businesses need? 
E8: Local jobs, skills and local procurement  
Do you agree with the draft policy? If not, what changes would you suggest? 
E9: Fostering a successful evening and night -time economy 
Is this the best way to manage the evening and night-time economy?  
E10: Creating a smart and digitally connected economy  
Do you agree with the draft policy? If not, what changes would you suggest? Chapter 10  
Town centres and high streets  
 
247 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 10 Town centres and high streets  
Introduction  
10.2 Town centres offer an accessible focal point of commercial premises, shops, 
community, leisure and recreation facilities for the surrounding communities. Atrractive 
town centres can contribute to the image and character of an area and help to attract 
business and investment.  
10.3 Changes in the retail sector combined with the continued growth of online shopping 
mean that the role of town centres is evolving. It is essential that the attractiveness of 
town centres is supported by planning policy in order to maintain their vitality and 
viability.  
10.4 The retail offer in the Borough is dominated by Enfield Town where a range of 
comparison goods shops, leisure services and services are provided. The four district 
centres at Angel Edmonton, Edmonton Green, Palmers Green and Southgate and a 
number of large local centres provide for predominantly convenience based shopping 
and service needs in other locations  across the b orough.  
10.5 It is important that the ELP prov ides for customer choice and diverse retail offer within 
town centres, as well as other uses that encourage people to visit town centres and 
enhance their experience of visiting and staying longer. Securing a town centre as a 
desirable place to shop and spend time is fundamental to its future success and the 
improvement of local image and character.  
10.6 The ELP’s strategy is to promote and maintain a range of uses within town centres, 
promote an evening and night-time economy, and define a hierarchy of centre 
including a strong, central core of retail and supporting uses, to support their vitality 
and viability and promote customer choice. The ELP sets out a positive approach 
towards main town centre uses and defines a hierarchy of centres. It sets out the 
operation of the sequential test and impact assessment and provides a context within 
which to assess the appropriateness of development proposals.  
  Strategic Policy 
SP TC1: Promoting town centres  
24
8 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 10.1 Strategic Policy SP TC1: Promoting town centres 
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  TC1 Promoting town centres 
1.The l ong-term vitality and viability of Enfield’s  town centres (as defined on the Policies
Map) will be secured by:
a.focussing future growth and investment within and around town centres ;
b.pr
omoting a balance of residential and main town centre uses to help town centres
function as multifunctional hubs, supporting the provision of facilities, services, jobs
and homes ;
c.maintaining and enhancing their distinctive features and characteristics wher e
thes
e make a positive contribution to the locality, including their built form, historic
and cultural character;
d.managing streets and spaces to facilitate pedestrian and cycle movement, improv e
l
inks to surrounding areas and reduce traffic flows along key routes ;
e.reinforcing the diversity and breath of activity within town centres through:
i. c
reating a public welcome through public realm improvements and cultural
attractions to activate the street and support a welcoming and s afe
env
ironment;
ii. supporting the delivery of a range of workspaces, helping to provide footfalland s upport a resilient economy; an
d
iii. enc
ouraging connected communities by improving social, civic and cultural
infrastructure.
f.s
upporting evening and night time economy activities in town centres whils t
m
itigating their potential impacts; and
g.pr
otecting and promoting commercial activities serving neighbourhood needs i n
l
ocal centres and parades.
Explanation 
10.1.1 Town centres are well connected hubs of daytime, evening and night-time activity, 
and offer a variety of accessible retail, commercial, cultural, leisure and civic facilities 
to visitors and residents. The ELP seeks to ensure that town centres continue to 
have an important role in supporting our local communities, including by directing 
future growth and investment to town centre locations.  
10.1.2 There is a need to ensure that town centres remain adaptable in the face of 
challenges to UK high streets. Whilst retail will be needed in town centres, it is also 
crucial that we seek to ensure that centres are able to evolve and adapt over time, so 
that they continue to support the communities in which they are situated. Town 
centre locations provide opportunities for the re- use of buildings, including for other 
commercial, cultural, leisure and community activities which help to attract visitors. Furthermore, town centres are now becoming a focal point for higher -density 
sustainable mixed-use development, including housing.  Strategic Policy  
SP TC1: Promoting town centres  
 
249 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 10.1.3  Enfield’s town centres have distinctive characteristics that are reflected in their built 
form, historic fabric, cultural vibrancy and setting. Enfield’s Characterisation Study is 
helpful in articulating this. Where new development is proposed it is important that 
this contributes positively to the character of the townscape, as articulated in 
Enfield’s Character of Growth study (2021). Furthermor e, development will be 
expected to deliver high quality urban environments that are safe and accessible to 
all, and which promote the health and well -being of the population.  
10.1.4  Town centres accommodate workers, traders, visitors and residents, and host a 
range of civic, cultural and leisure activities. A well -designed and appropriately 
managed public realm network is therefore essential. It is also imperative that town 
centres remain lively and active places that can support a variety of uses, and where 
people have opportunities for leisure and relaxation throughout the daytime and 
evening, throughout the week and throughout different seasons. Enfield’s town 
centres will be the focus of coordinated public realm improvements, particularly 
around gateways such as stations and high streets.   
10.1.5  Local centres and parades provide essential shops, facilities and services close to 
where people live. They are valuable capillaries serving suburban communities, 
enabling residents to access everyday essentials within walki ng distance. Where 
possible we will use our planning powers to protect ground floor commercial 
frontages.  
 
  Strategic Policy 
SP TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres  
250 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 10.2.  Strategic Policy SP TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town 
centres  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP  TC2 Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres 
1.Town centres should develop as vibrant and economically successful hubs which m eet
the needs
 of residents, workers and visitors in line with the following principles (s ee
the H
ierarchy of Town Centres set out in Table 10. 1):
a.E
nfield Town and the district centres of Angel Edmonton, Edmonton Gr een,
P
almers Green and Southgate (as shown on the Policies Map) will accomm odate
a di
verse range of town centre and community uses, and new residential  and
em
ployment developme nt.
b.P
roposals for commercial, business and service activities are acceptable i n
P
rimary Shopping Areas (as shown on the Policies Map) within Enfield Tow n and
the di
strict centres. Proposals must provide active frontages to the public realm .
P
ropos als for residential uses at ground floor level will be refused.
c.Local centres and parades (as shown on the Policies Map) will serv e
nei
ghbourhood retail, food and drink, business and service and community needs .
C
hanges of use at ground floor level must retain a shopfront and provide activ e
fr
ontages to the public realm. Proposals for residential uses at ground floor level
will be refused.  New local centres will be designated within some strategic mixed-
use site allocations to serve the day to day needs of new residents and workers.
2.A
ll development must contribute positively to placemaking in town centres, including
through supporting an attractive and accessible public realm, enhancing ur ban
gr
eening and links to blue and green networks, and addressing anti -social behaviour
and crime. New development should safeguard the historic environment and protec t
and enhanc e her
itage assets and their settings .
3.P
roposals for town centre uses are appropriate in designated centres. In line wi th the
s
equential approach set out in the NPPF, proposals for town centre uses outsi de of
des
ignated centres must be able to demonstrate that sites firstly within, a nd then on
the edge of 
existing centres are not available.
4.O
utside designated centres, retail and leisure developments (including extensions ,
c
reation of mezzanine floors and changes of use) exceeding 400 square metres will  be
s
ubject to an impact assessm ent.
5.Co-
working spaces in town and local centre locations will be supported.Strategic Policy 
SP TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres  
251 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
10.2.1 This policy seeks to support the development of diverse and thriving town centres 
responding to the plan’s objective to create the workshop of London. It establishes a 
hierarchy of town centres and directs development to designated centres, as described in part 1 of the pol icy above and Table 10.1 . Town centre uses are defined 
in the NPPF. 
10.2.2 The Policies Map defines the extent of Enfield Town and the district centres, and the 
Primary Shopping Area within these centres. It also defines the local centres and 
parades.  
Table 10.1: Hierarchy of town centres 
Tier Name of centre  Role and function  
Major Centre  Enfield Town  This centre will continue to be the 
main focus of town centre uses 
and other uses which generate a high level of people movements, reflecting its wide catchment area and role as a sub-regional centre.  
District Centres  Angel Edmonton  
Edmonton Green  
Southgate Palmers Green Promote as vibrant and accessible 
hubs containing a wide range of convenience goods, community services and employment uses, serving the needs of the 
immediate catchment and beyond 
The Primary Shopping Area is the 
same as the boundary of the town 
centre  
Large Local 
Centres  Baker Street  
Bounces Road 
Bowes Road 
Bush Hill Park  
Chase Side Cockfosters  
Enfield Highway  
Enfield Wash 
Green Lanes  
Hertford Road Central  
Lancaster Road 
Meridian Water  
Oakwood 
Ordnance Road, Enfield Lock 
Ponders End Winchmore Hill, Broadway  
Winchmore Hill, Green 
Winchmore Hill, Green Dragon  Safeguard and promote the 
provision of day -to-day goods, 
services and community uses to meet the needs of local residents.  
E
ach typically accommodate over 
40 outlets and over 4,000 sq m of gross  floorspace.  
Small Local 
Centres  Aldermans Hill  
Arnos Grov e 
Bush Hill Parade  As above. Each centre typically 
accommodates 20 – 40 outlets Strategic Policy 
SP TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres  
252 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Tier Name of centre  Role and function  
Cambridge Circus  
Freezywater  
Hertford Road South 
Main Avenue New Southgate 
Silver Street  
Windmill Hill  
Enfield Island Village  and less than 4,000 sq m of gross 
floorspace.  
Local Shopping 
Parades  Barrowell Green  
Brimsdown 
Bullsmoor  
Bury Street West 
Carterhatch Lane 
Chaseville Park  
Durants Road Dysons Road Empire Parade  
Enfield Lock  
Enfield Road Linkside  
Firs Lane  
Green Street Hadley Wood Hazelbury Road, Edmonton 
Hertford Road, N orth 
High Street, Southgate 
Hoppers Road Huxley Parade Kempe Road 
Mottingham Road 
Nightingale Road Percival Road South Street Ponders End Southbury Road Southbury Road/Kingsway, 
Ponders End 
Southgate Green  
The Grangeway  
Town Road Victoria Road 
Westerham Av enue  
Whittington Road, Bowes Park  
Winchester Road 
Bowes Road West  
Chequers Way  
Craig Park Road 
Fillebrook Avenue 
Highlands Village  
Lincoln Court 
Clock Parade  As above. Each centre typically 
accommodates 6 – 2 0 outlets  (no 
floorspace defined). Strategic Policy  
SP TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres  
 
253 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 10.2.3  This poli cy seeks to maintain and enhance the role and function of the borough’s 
centres, as defined above. The scale of development should also be appropriate to 
the size and function of the centre and its catchment area. New development will be 
expected to contri bute positively to the vitality and vibrancy of our town centres 
through successful placemaking. Biophilic design principles should be incorporated 
where possible to maximise urban greening and integration with blue and green 
networks. In line with part 3, proposals for main town centre uses (as defined in the 
NPPF), will be directed towards existing centres rather than unsustainable out-of-
centre locations . Outside the borough’s defined centres, retail, leisure and office 
developments will need to carry out a sequential assessment in line with the NPPF.  
10.2.4  Where there are no suitable or available sites within the boundary of a centre, retail 
and leisure developments within edge of centre locations that are accessible by 
public transport, walking and cycling and well connected to and up to 300 metres 
from the centre will be permitted. In addition, retail and leisure developments within 
out-of-centre locations above 400 square metres floorspace (gross) will need to 
demonstrate that they will have no significant i mpact on the viability and vitality of 
these centres. In preparing these assessments, applicants will need to give due 
regard to: 
• the scale of the proposal relative to existing centres; 
• the cumulative impacts of recent developments; and 
• the impact of the proposed development on the vitality and viability of the centre, 
(including local customer choice and trade in the centre and wider catchment 
area). 
 
10.2.5  Planning conditions will be imposed on developments outside centres to ensure that 
potential changes of us e to town centre uses are restricted.  Policy DM 
TC6: Managing the clustering of town centre uses  
254 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Policy DM  
TC3: Floorspace above commercial premises  
 
255 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 10.3 Policy DM TC3: Floorspace above commercial premises    
DARFT 
POLICY DM  TC3 Floorspace above commercial premises  
1. Proposals to re-use or refurbish the upper floors of shops and/ or commercial 
premises within Enfield’s town centres (as defined on the Policies Map) will be 
encouraged.  
2. Proposals resulting in the net loss of residential or employment floorspace will be 
refused.  
3. All residential development above shops and other commercial premises must meet all 
of the fol lowing criteria:  
a. the proposal must provide separate and adequate access to the upper floor; 
b. the proposal must not harm the existing commercial servicing and parking 
arrangements; 
c. adequate arrangements for refuse storage and collection should be made; and 
d. the proposal must not adversely affect the functioning or appearance of the units 
or surrounding residential amenity . 
 
Explanation  
10.3.1  Town centres host commercial and residential  functions  as part of a vibrant mix of 
activities . Commercial premises in town c entres with vacant units above present an 
ideal opportunity  to increase the numbers of people living within sustainable locations 
while contributing towards the borough's housing requirements. Encouraging the re-
use or refurbishment of units above shops and  other commercial premises for 
appropriate town centre uses has the benefit of enhancing the character and 
broadening the range of town centre services, increasing natural surveillance, 
contributing to regeneration and promoting sustainable utilisation of town centres, 
while reducing the pressure for out of centre development. 
 
  Policy DM 
TC4: Markets 
256 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 10.4 Policy DM TC4: Markets 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  TC4 Markets  
1.Proposals affecting existing markets will only be supported where:
a.they result in a qualitative improvement to the market and public realm;
b.the number of pitches will not be reduc ed; and
c.ex
isting traders have the opportunity to take up pitches at the same or lower rents.
2.P
roposals for new markets will be encouraged where they support Enfield’s tow n
c
entre network and hierarchy and improve the cultural vibrancy of the borough.
3.All proposals must make adequate arrangements to avoid or mitigate unreasonabl e
i
mpacts on the amenity of adjoining and neighbouring occupiers, and wider local area .
4.O
utdoor trading will be supported where it can be demonstrated that goods will  not
negati
vely impact the appearance or functioning of the public realm.
Explanation 
10.4.1 Markets add to the vibrancy of the Borough’s town centres. To safeguard existing 
markets, the policy seeks to ensure that market provision is not reduced and that 
existing occupiers are protected from displacement. 
10.4.2 New markets are welcomed in centres where they can add to the draw of centres. 
Proposals for new markets should be accompanied by a design and management 
strategy to ensure they contribute to a safe, clean and attractive public realm and do 
not impede pedestrian movement.  
10.4.3 All proposals must make adequate arrangements to avoid or mitigate unreasonable 
impacts on the amenity of adjoining and neighbouring occupiers, and wider local 
area. This includes consideration of congestion on footpaths and the road network, 
refuse storage and collection, noise and odour. Proposals for street markets must 
demonstrate that there will be no detrimental effect on the functioning of the r oad 
network. Policy DM 
TC5: Meanwhile uses 
257 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 10.5 Policy DM TC5: Meanwhile uses  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  TC5 Meanwhile uses 
1.Meanwhile uses should enhance the character and vitality of the area, main tain active
gr
ound floor frontages and retain any existing shopfronts. Meanwhile uses shoul d
ideal
ly be precursors to the permanent development that follows, providing positiv e
ac
tivation of sites for the economic, social and/or environmental benefit of an area.
2.M
eanwhile creative, exhibition and performance spaces that align with Cultur e
C
onnects32 (or any updating successor)  will be supported, subject to the a gent of
c
hange principle.
Explanation 
10.5.1 Meanwhile uses are defined as the temporary use of land or buildings before a 
permanent use is introduced. They have the potential to support the vibrancy of 
centres by encouraging new business, community, cultural and environmental 
initiatives, attracting visitors and footfall. They can help address vacant units and 
sites, especially in the early phases of major developments. Developers are 
encouraged to open up vacant land or buildings to meanwhile activities wherever 
possible.  
10.5.2 Through occupying land, buildings or units on a temporary basis, meanwhile uses can be low cost and low risk, making them attractive to business start-ups, 
community groups and the creative and cultural sectors. Meanwhile uses can act as productive testing ground for ideas that can be incorporated into the permanent 
developments that follow. Developers are required to put in place appropriate 
mechanisms to support occupiers of meanwhile spaces to secure permanent 
accommodation, including through signposting to appropriate opportunities including 
potentially locating within the permanent development. 
10.5.3 Meanwhile uses outside town centre locations will be supported subject to the agen t 
of change principle. Uses which are not considered suitable meanwhile uses include 
vehicle parking. 
32 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/your-council/culture-connects-strategy-2020-25.pdf  Policy DM 
TC6: Managing the clustering of town centre uses 
258 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 10.6 Policy DM TC6: Managing the  clustering of town centre uses 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  TC6 Managing the clustering of town centres uses 
1.All development should contribute to the delivery of inclusive and mixed communities ,
i
ncluding the vitality and viability of the Borough’s centres. Proposals will be resis ted
w
here they result in an overconcentration of hot food takeaways, betting shops ,
paw
nbrokers, pay day l oan shops, amusement centres and casinos .
2.Proposals for hot food takeaways, betting shops, pawnbrokers, pay day loan shops ,
am
usement centres and casinos will only be supported where it can be demonstr ated
that:
a.the s
ite is within a designated centre and will not result in an over -concentrati on of
s
uch uses in any designated centre; and
b.they would not cause harm to amenity and the character of the area.
A
pplicants will be expected to submit a Cumulative Impact Assessment as part of any 
planning application.  
3.Proposals for the provision or expansion of banqueting suites will be supported in tow n
c
entres and resisted in out of town locations, including in former retail parks .
D
evelopment must:
a.have no impact on neighbouring residential properties in terms of nois e and
di
sturbance; and
b.have adequate servicing arrangements and does not result in an increase of on-
street parking and traffic congestion in the surrounding area.
Explanation 
10.6.1 As the Borough continues to grow and develop in the future, it is important that 
communities can benefit from an appropriate mix and balance of uses. The ELP 
seeks to carefully manage the location of uses recognising that over concentration of 
particular uses can have harmful impacts, including on the amenity of residential 
areas, the vitality of town centres and the well -being of the local population. In line 
with the London Plan, this policy seeks to manage the concentration and proliferation of hot food takeaways, betting shops, pawnbrokers, pay -day loan shops and 
amusement c entres, and their potentially harmful effects on individuals and 
communities. However, proposals will be considered on their individual merits.  
10.6.2 Applications for hot food takeaways, betting shops, pawnbrokers, pay day loan 
shops, amusement centres and casinos will be assessed having regard to the 
number and location of units within the major, district or local centre. Applications 
must be accompanied with sufficient information assess the potential impacts arising 
from the proposed use, including a Cumulative Impact Assessment. Policy DM  
TC6: Managing the clustering of town centre uses 
 
259 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 10.6.3  Hot food takeaways can have detrimental impacts on the health and well -being of 
local communities. This policy helps give effect to the London Plan Policy E9 (Retail, 
markets and hot food takeaways), which encourages Boroughs manage the 
concentration of such uses.  
10.6.4  The London Plan indicates that hot food takeaway uses should not be permitted 
where these are within 400 metres walking distance from the entrances and exits of 
an existing or proposed primary or secondary school. 
10.6.5  Where applications for hot food takeaways are permitted, conditions may be used to 
ensure compliance with Healthier Catering Commitment standards.  
10.6.6  Banqueting suites can add to the vitality of town centres where they can be 
accommodated sustainably, offering ready access by foot, cycle and public transport. 
They are not appropriate in out-of-centre locations. Banqueting suites should not lead 
to negative impacts on the surrounding area. Chapter 10 
Have your say… 
260 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Have your say on Chapter 10…. 
Policy TC1: Promoting town centre 
1.Does this policy set a positive framework to promote our town centres?
Policy TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres
2.Is this the best framework for supporting the borough’s centres ?
TC3: floorspace above commercial premises
3.How else can we make the most of town centre properties?
TC4: Markets
4.Is this the right way of protecting and managing markets?
TC5: Meanwhile uses
5.Is this the right way to encourage meanwhile uses?
TC6: Managing clustering in town centres
6.Does this framework properly manage the impacts associated wi th hot food
tak
eaways, betting shops, pawnbrokers, pay day loan shops, amusement centres ,
c
asinos and banqueting suites?Chapter 11  
Rural Enfield  
 
261 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 11 Rural Enfield  
11.1 The ELP supports the delivery of more homes that meets local needs and supplying 
a housing mix  that adds diversity and affordability to the housing stock. The ELP also 
supports greater diversity in the rural parts of Enfield recognising that greater 
sustainability and resilience is achieved through encouraging a broader base of 
activities than has traditionally been accessible in rural areas. Policy DM 
RE1: Character of the Green Belt and open countryside  
262 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 11.1 Policy DM RE1: Character of the Green Belt and open countryside  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  RE1 Character of the Green Belt and open countryside 
1.Development adjoining or within close proximity to the Green Belt (as show n on the
P
olicies Map) will only be permitted wher e:
a.i
t does not have a detrimental impact on the visual amenity of the landsc ape and
G
reen Belt;
b.there is a clear distinction between the Green Belt and the edge of the urban ar ea;
and
c.v
iews and vistas from the Green Belt into urban areas and vice versa, especially  at
i
mportant access points, are maintai ned;
d.i
t establishes  and/or extend the b orough’s greenways  network and green corridors ,
r
etains features of landscape value and provide trees along transport routes ,
where possible ;
e.i
t complements and improves the quality of existing open space uses and
landscaping; and
f.it enhances the blue and  green infrastructure network through better connectivity
and the creation of new publicly accessible open spaces , whilst also conservi ng
thei
r natural and historic value.
2.Development within or adjoining the Green Belt and open countryside will be expec ted
to:
a.i
ncorporate measures to improve the character of the Green Belt and landsc ape
thr
ough environmental improvements (e.g. tree- planting and earth moulding)  and
the r
emoval or replacement of visually intrusive elements, such as buildings ,
s
tructures, hard standings, walls, fences or advertisements, where feasibl e;
b.r
etain existing features of landscape and townscape value;
c.contribute towards the principles of good place-making set out in policy SS2;
d.respond to the wider development opportunities, movement and environmental
enhancements within the London National Park City designation (PL8), wher e
feas
ible; an d
e. conserve and not detract from the open character of Green Belt and surroundi ng
landscape .Policy DM  
RE1: Character of the Green Belt and open country side 
 
263 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
11.1.1  This policy seeks to protect and enhance the character of the landscape within or 
close proximity to the Green Belt.  Enfield has an array of attractive l andscapes close 
to its urban edge, but the quality of the “urban fringe” –  the interface between the 
rural character of the Green Belt and the urban area –  is very mixed. This policy will 
ensure that a clear distinction between the character of the Green B elt and the urban 
area is maintained and where possible strengthened. 
11.1.2  Compensatory measures  (including the creation of new woodland areas and active 
travel routes into existing open spaces)  will be sought at the urban-rural fringe to 
offset the impact of new development on the Green Belt and improve the quality and 
amenity value of the landscape.  
  Policy DM 
RE2: Improving access to the countryside and green corridors  
264 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 11.2 Policy DM RE2: Improving access to the countryside and green 
corridors 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  RE2 Improving access to the countryside and green corridors  
1.New development will be expected to protect, maintain and improve the borough’snetwork of walking and cycling routes to meet the needs of all users, with priority giv
en
to:
a.i
mproving public access to key attractions (including the Lee Valley Regional Park ,
E
nfield Chase, Forty Hall, Capel Manor and Chingford Reservoirs)  and the
c
onnections between them ;
b.c
reating interconnected routes with spurs to open spaces along the lengt h of the
r
iver corridors, including the Lee Navigation, New River Path and Green Loop;
c.providing or enhancing way-finding across the network, including clear si gnage
and gates
/stiles to improve legibility of arrival routes and designation points, suc h
as
 heritage trails and discovery walks; and
d.extending links and the right of access into the open countryside (includi ng
i
mproved links to important viewing points, such as the London Loop and  Lee
V
alley Walk) to facilitate the creation of a major green corridor from Lee Valley
Regional Park to Enfield Chase (London National Park City designation PL8).
2.Development within a five -minute walk or 400 metre radius from a  strategic green link
(as shown on the Policies Map) must integrate with the wider  footpath / cycle network.
3.Development will only be supported where it protects and, where possible, enhances
the strategic link route on behalf of cyclists, equestrians and pedestrians and does no t
hav
e an adverse impact on the green grid network33.
Explanation 
11.2.1  Enfield has an extensive network of walking and cycling routes, ranging from long distance 
footpaths (e.g. London Loop, New River Path and Lee Navigation towpath) to a number of 
urban circular routes and local country paths. Future challenges include increasing activity 
levels such as walking, cycling and horse riding, improving links from deprived areas to open spaces (e.g. Lee Valley) and reducing physical severance.  Public rights of way and footpaths 
are listed on the Definitive Map
34.  
11.2.2  The Council has a legal duty to protect and assert the rights of the public to use rights of way 
in the borough, working with landowners and voluntary groups to ensure that footpaths are 
clear and properly maintained (for example, through the removal of vegetation, provision of 
signage and maintenance of gates and stiles) so that everyone can use them.   
11.2.3  This policy seeks to provide an integrated network of convenient and well -maintained routes 
that offer good access to the open countryside/visitor attractions and meet the needs of all users, including equestrians, walkers, cyclists, people with visual or mobility impairments and 
those with pushchairs. It also aims to ensure that new development facilitates access to open 
space and nature, especially along strategic links.   
33 New routes will be identified as part of the next stage of the plan. 
34https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/roads -a nd-transport/public -rights -of-way/  Policy DM  
RE3: Supporting the rural economy  
 
265 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 11.3 Strategic Policy SP RE3 : Supporting the rural economy  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  RE3 Suppor ting the rural economy  
Support will be given to proposals in suitable locations which seek to improve the balance 
of jobs within the rural areas and diversify the rural economy. The following provisions 
apply: 
1. Appropriate and proportionate expansion of existing employment sites in order to 
support the retention and growth of local employers will be supported, subject to an 
assessment that demonstrates no adverse residual impacts on neighbouring uses and 
the environment.  
2. Business start-ups, home working, small scale employment and the development and 
expansion of small business in residential and rural areas will generally be supported, 
subject to an assessment that demonstrates no residual adverse impacts on 
neighbouring uses and the environment.  
3. Proposals should explore opportunities to improve internet connectivity for rural 
communities where appropriate. 
4. Support will be given to the reuse of suitable buildings for employment uses.  
5. The creation of new, or extensions to existing, garden centres or farm shops in the 
open countryside will only be permitted if the proposed development is ancillary to, 
and on the site of, an existing horticultural business or existing farming operation.  
6. Development will be supported which meets the essential needs of agriculture or 
forestry interests.  
7. The loss of tourist or leisure development will only be permitted where there is no 
proven demand for the facility.  
8. Camping, caravan, chalet or similar facilities that respond to an identified local need 
will be supported, provided the proposal is compatible with the existing road network, 
and has no adverse environmental impact.  
9. Development proposals should:  
a. demonstrate safe access to the existing highway network;  
b. avoid a significant increase in the number of trips requiring the private car and 
facilitate the use of sustainable transport, including walking and cycling, where 
appropriate. Sustainable Travel Plans will be required to demonstrate how the 
traffic impacts of the development have been considered and mitigated;  
c. demonstrate how a positive relationship with existing buildings has  been achieved, 
including scale, design, massing and orientation; and  
d. avoid incongruous or isolated new buildings. If there are unused existing buildings 
within the site, applicants are requi red to demonstrate why these cannot be used 
for the uses proposed before new buildings  will be considered. 
  
 Policy DM 
RE3: Supporting the rural economy  
266 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Policy DM  
RE3: Supporting the rural economy  
 
267 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
11.3.1 To support the economic growth and diversification in the rural parts of the borough, 
it is important that land is made available for business use. It is recognised that some 
economic activities do not have a land requirement, for example where small 
businesses can be established from home, and permitted development rights also 
enable some home working use. However, to support the rural economy to grow and 
become more prosperous, land is needed to provide premises for businesses to 
expand, and to accommodate new businesses. Supporting rural entrepreneurial 
culture and setting aside land to support start up survival rates will help bui ld 
resilience in the rural economy.  
11.3.2 This policy provides some flexibility to enable carefully selected development outside 
settlements where it can be demonstrated that this could be achieved sustainably, 
taking into account how the proposal might reduce r ural isolation, provide jobs for 
residents of the immediate area reducing commuting, and foster vitality  without 
significant adverse effects on the local character and environmental quality.  
11.3.3 The uses of the rural environment have changed over time and some buildings  which 
have become redundant offer opportunities for redevelopment. This policy  supports 
that where it can be demonstrated that it meets the sustainable development criteria 
set out in other policies of this plan.  
  Policy DM 
RE4: Farm diversification and rural employment 
268 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 11.4 Policy DM RE4: Farm diversification and rural employment    
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  RE4 Farm diversification and rural employment 
1.Proposals involving a change of use / diversification of use from agriculture to other
business uses or sport and recreation activities will be supported where:
a.the proposed use would not harm the openness and character of the Green Belt i n
ter
ms of scale, location and desi gn;
b.the pr
oposed use does not unacceptably impact upon surrounding amenities or
cause an unacceptable level of noise, light, air or water pol lution;
c.the proposed use provides adequate landscaping and screening to minimise its
visual impact;
d.there is no detrimental impact on nature conservation, wildlife habitats and historicfeatures
;
e.the pr
oposed use does not generate a significant number of additional vehicl e
tr
ips; and
f.c
ontribute to regeneration / strategic objectives / policies in this plan (e.g. re-
wilding, culture and tourism etc).
2.Farm diversification schemes should be additional to the main agricultural functi on
and agr
iculture should remain the dominant use within the holding. The proposed us e
s
hould also not prejudice future opportunities to revert the land back into agricultur e
use.
3.P
roposals which promote sustainable agriculture and public participation i n food
gr
owing, especially those which contribute to education, training and the developm ent
of l
ocal supply chains, will be supported.
4.For equine-related development, adequate arrangements should be made for  the
m
anagement of grazing areas. Hard-surfaced areas should be kept to a m inimum .
Explanation 
11.4.1 Diversification to non-agricultural uses is vital to the continuing viability of many farm 
enterprises. The Council will support well -conceived farm diversification schemes 
towards business purposes that contribute to sustainable development objectives 
and help to sustain the agricultural enterprise.  
11.4.2 Proposed diversification schemes must avoid unnecessary buildings that would be detrim ental to the Green Belt setting. Proposals should also have regard to Green 
Belt policies set out in this plan and the London Plan. 
11.4.3 The policy seeks to protect land for agricultural purposes and promote sustainable agriculture and wider public benefits (e.g. food production) associated with other relevant policies in the plan.  
11.4.4 Horse riding is a popular recreational activity and a number of sites in the Borough 
are used for the keeping and breeding of horses. The policy seeks to manage potentially negative impacts, as the paraphernalia associated with horse keeping can 
be inappropriate if they detract from  the openness of the Green Belt.  Chapter 11  
Have your say… 
 
269 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Have your say on Chapter 11 …    
Policies: RE1, RE2, RE3 and RE4 
1. Do you agree with the draft policy approach set out in RE1 to RE4?  
2. If not, what changes would you suggest?  
 
  Chapter 12 
Culture, leisure and recreation 
270 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12 Culture, leisure and recreation 
Introducti on 
12.1 Enfield has a wealth of historic and culturally significant buildings, a thriving artistic 
community and a diverse range of leisure opportunities, green spaces, parks and watercourse, making it an atrractive location for visitors. Creativity has the power to 
drive positive economic and social change in the borough and is intrinsic to our local 
identity.  
12.2 Shared experiences and varied heritage, our talents, skills and interests are central to making Enfield a vibrant, distinctive and healthy place to live and work in. Arts and cultural experiences, whether rooted in a cultural or community venue, at home or at school, have intrinsic value to our well -being and our sense of belonging. Access to 
culture across the borough, and the many ways in which culture meets wider strategic 
objectives that contribute to and enrich our lives, underpins the Local Plan.  
12.3 Every year, the UK’s creative industries contribute £111.7 b illion gross GVA to the 
economy and culture contributes £5.2 billion to London. C reative industries are 
successful throughout the world, creating 1 in 6 jobs35. Enfield’s local cultural offer, in 
venues, heritage houses and gardens, in parks, open spaces, high streets, cafés and neighbourhood halls, underpins the Borough’s appeal and ability to build community 
and attract visitors. Investment in culture is reaped in so many ways that are vital to our social and civic fabric including addressing inequality and growing the economy.  
35 Source GLA & Creative Industries Federation Strategic Policy 
SP CL1: Promoting culture and creativity 
271 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.1 Strategic Policy CL1: Promoting culture and creativity  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  CL1 Promoting culture and creativity 
1.Development will be supported which can deliver on the focus areas of Cultur e
C
onnects (or any updating successor), through the provision of cultural infrastructur e
and c
reative workspace, especially within the borough’s regeneration areas, such as
Meridian Water, public housing estates and town centres .
2.P
roposals to replace existing arts, cultural and entertainment uses including theatres ,
pubs
, music venues, nightclubs, gallery and museum spaces, cinemas and community
halls will not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that:
a.the use is identified as surplus to requirements and is no longer economically
viable;
b.alternative provision has been made in the vicinity to an equal or better standar d,
in
 line with the priorities set out in Culture Connects ; and
c.appr
opriate marketing has been undertaken over a continuous period of at leas t 18
m
onths.
3.N
ew arts, culture and entertainment uses will be directed to Enfield Town, the four
District Centres and Meridian Water in line with the town centre hierarchy, as well asother locations of excellent accessibility via public transport, walking and cycli
ng.
O
utdoor arts, culture and performance activities will be supported where it c an be
dem
onstrated that residential amenity can be protected.  Major cultural and ar t
dev
elopments will be expected to set out how they will contribute to the cultural offer i n
E
nfield.
4.C
reative industry uses will be supported in Strategic Industrial Locations (SILs)  and
Loc
ally Significant Industrial Sites (LSISs) .
5.P
lanning contributions will be sought towards the provision and maintenance of public
art installations and cultural facilities from developments comprising 50 or mor e
r
esidential units. Contributions from non-residential schemes will be assess ed on a
s
ite-by -site basis, taking account of the location, nature and scale of the propos ed
dev
elopment and extent of public accessibility to the site.
Explanation 
12.1.1 This policy seeks to expand and promote the Borough’s cultural offer to help connect 
our diverse communities and improve the places in which they live, work and enjoy 
leisure. This will involve:  
•protecting existing venues (e.g. theatres) ;
•encouraging the refurbishment of existing venues ;
•r
eusing vacant and underused buildings and spaces; and
•encouraging new venues in suitable locations (e.g. town centres and areas  of
good tr
ansport connectivity) which support the creation of vibrant and creativ e
pl
aces .Strategic Policy 
SP CL1: Promoting culture and creativity 
272 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.1.2 As part of the UK Cambridge Innovation Corridor within close proximity to the 
emerging Thames Estuary Production Corridor, Enfield is well placed to generate 
exciting new creative initiatives and partnerships within and beyond its boundaries, in 
particular largescale film and TV production facilities, gamer and maker spaces and 
associated support services (e.g. training)36. These activities can form part of a 
diversity of uses in the Borough’s SILs and LSISs set out in Chapter 9 of the ELP. 
12.1.3 Funds from developments will be ringfenced into a cultural fund to support projects 
identified through the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. Where possible, residents, artists 
and other groups should be involved at an early stage of the creative process.  
36 In line with the Cultural Strategy Policy DM 
CL2: Leisure and tourism 
273 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.2 Policy DM CL2: Leisure and tourism 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM CL2 Leisure and tourism  
1. Proposals that will continue to develop a high-quality  visitor experience to increas e the
c
ontribution that tourism, arts and cultural heritage and sport make to our quality of life
and social well -being will be supported, in particular :
a.the pr
ovision of new and enhanced visitor attractions, including arts and cultural
facilities, in accordance with the sequential test outlined in the NPPF for main tow n
c
entre uses;
b.the provision of new and improved accommodation and conference facilities fortourist and business visitors in accordance with the sequential tes
t;
c.s
ustainable rural tourism and leisure developments that benefit businesses ,
c
ommunities and visitors in the rural areas as long as they respect the siz e,
c
haracter and function of their setting and comply with national Green Belt policy .
Thi
s support extends to the re-use of suitable rural buildings for visitor
accommodation and other small scale rural development ; and
d.pr
oposals which promote greater use of rural parts of Enfield and the Lee Valley as
a leisure and recreational resource without harming local biodiversity or water
quality .
2.The l
oss of existing visitor, leisure and cultural attractions, including arts and
enter
tainment facilities, hotels and sport venues will be strongly resisted unless
replacement facilities of an equivalent or better standard and provision are proposed i n
a l
ocation equally accessible to the facility’s current catchment area. Robust evidenc e
m
ust be provided that demonstrates that the facility causes significant detriment to the
am
enity of the locality or that:
a.there is no longer a need for the existing facility or an alternative leisure or visitoruse; or
b.the existing use is unviable and its retention has been fully explored, includi
ng
ac
tive and comprehensive marketing (for a period of at least 18 months) the facility
for its existing and alternative leisure or visitor use prior to the submissio n of a
pl
anning application.
E
xplanation 
12.2.1 The Council considers that the leisure and visitor experience in the borough has the 
potential to contribute significantly to Enfield’s economic growth. It can contribute to 
enhancing quality of life through delivering experiences for visitors and a greater 
variety of jobs and training opportunities. Importantly, it can help support 
regeneration, and diversify and develop the rural economy. Policies in relation to 
sport are covered in policies CL4 and CL5 of this plan.  Policy DM 
CL2: Leisure and tourism 
274 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.2.2 One of the objectives of the ELP is to actively promote and sustainably develop 
Enfield’s visitor economy. To work with this objective the Council will continue to 
protect existing visitor and leisure facilities whilst promoting to a sustainable expansion of the sector. The provision of arts and cultural facilities in particular can 
broaden the borough’s offer and increase its appeal to visitors. An integrated 
approach will be taken to ensure that these objectives are reflected in local activities 
such as town centre management and regeneration, open space strategies, heritage 
enhancement initiatives, countryside management and environmental stewardship. 
This policy encourages development which supports the sustainable growth of the 
tourism industry. 
12.2.3 Visitor related development by its nature is often located in sensitive areas and its benefits need to be carefully balanced against the need to protect the rural parts of 
Enfield and heritage assets from overcrowding and degradation. The plan seeks to 
ensure that the borough’s natural landscapes and heritage, which make significant 
contributions to its appeal as leisure and visitor destinations are preserved. Any new 
built development must complement the natural attractions of the landscape and 
reflect the character of the surrounding area. Landscaping, careful siting of 
development, re-use of buildings and attention to detail can help developments to 
respect their environments.  
12.2.4 The Council also recognises that tourism is an important sector of the rural economy and has great potential for further growth. Appropriate development can help sustain 
rural services and create significant benefits for local communities. The NPPF 
suggests that we should support sustainable rural tourism and leisure developments, 
including the provision and expansion of visitor facilities in appropriate locations, 
where identified needs are not met by existing facilities in rural service centres. 
Small -scale development proposing additional floor space for leisure/visitor use in 
rural areas will therefore not be subject to the sequential test. Policy DM  
CL3: Visitor accommodation  
 
275 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 12.3 Policy DM CL3: Visitor accommodation  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  CL3 Visitor accommodation    
1. Support will be given for proposals which protect and deliver growth for the visitor 
economy. Hotels and other strategically important visitor accommodation will be 
directed towards Enfield Town and the district centres , and other  accessible locations 
which are within walking distances of public transport interchanges and/or stations.  
2. Proposals involving new or extended visitor accommodations will be supported where 
they: 
a. do not result in the net loss of existing housing and design and servicing 
arrangements can safeguard the amenities of nearby residential occupiers;  
b. are proportionate to their location in terms of size, scale and function;  
c. do not result in an overconcentration of similar uses in the locality; 
d. provide active ground floor frontages and incorporate ancillary uses and facilities 
that are accessible for public use, particularly in town centre locations;  
e. provide a level of car parking that is appropriate to the public transport accessibility 
level of the site, whilst s eeking to minimise car parking wherever possible; 
f. ensure adequate access, drop off / pick up and servicing arrangements 
appropriate to the size and location of the accommodation;  
g. maximise opportunities for walking, cycling and use of public transport  
h. are sympathetic to the character of the area, but also able to create new places 
which reflect current times and needs and which are fit for purpose;  
i. provide adequate standard of amenity for occupants and provision of accessible 
accommodation, in line with London Plan requirements; and 
j. make appropriate arrangements for long-term adaptability and sustainability. 
3. Proposals which deliver visitor accommodation on appropriate sites, including small 
hotels, bed and breakfast and self- catering accommodation will be supported.  
4. Proposals for camping facilities and the conversion of existing buildings to 
accommodate visitors in rural parts of Enfield will be supported especially within 
Enfield Chase in line with p olicies RE4 and PL8.  
5. Development proposals which result i n the loss of important facilities for the visitor 
economy, including visitor accommodation, will not be permitted unless:  
a. There are over -riding sustainability and regeneration benefits from the proposal.  
b. The existing use is demonstrated to be unviable and with no reasonable prospect 
of becoming viable. 
 
Explanation  
12.3.1  Hotels and short stay accommodation can form part of a mix of uses that support 
vibrant town centres, the evening and night-time economy and tourist-based 
activities.  For the purpose of this policy, visitor accommodation includes hotels, bed 
and breakfasts, traveller / youth hostels, short-term holiday lets and ser viced self-
catering apartments. 
  Policy DM 
CL3: Visitor accommodation  
276 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.3.2 Visitor accommodation, like all new development, must positively contribute to the 
character and setting of its site. The nature and scale of the accommodation should 
be proportionate to its surroundings, recognising the various typologies of visitor 
accommodation within the C1 use class. For instance, a large format hotel may be 
more appropriate at a prominent town centre location or at a key transport 
interchange, whereas a smaller scale boutique hotel or serviced apartment may be more sensitively integrated elsewhere in the borough. 
12.3.3 Major visitor accommodation (e.g. hotels) outside town centres will  be subject to the 
sequential test in line with the NPPF.  In urban locations, new visitor accommodation 
will be expected to maximise opportunities to deliver active ground floor frontages 
and appropriate ancillary uses. Ancillary uses may include receptions, cafés and 
restaurants, conference facilities, salons, fitness studios and other space that can be 
made available to the local community as well as visitors using the accommodation.  
12.3.4 In recent years, the visitor economy has benefited from the growth in s hort-term 
serviced accommodation,37 often offering a more unique and affordable alternative to 
conventional hotel rooms. Short term serviced accommodation must not compromise 
the supply of conventional housing or the amenity/balance of uses in the area. 
Applicants will be required to submit details of a management plan as part of the 
short term letting agreement, so to ensure rooms will not be occupied for periods of 90 days or more. We expect the use will be secured in the form of a licence and not a 
lease.  
12.3.5 Visitor accommodation in rural parts of Enfield can facilitate greater public access to 
the countryside and the leisure and historic attractions of the north of the borough. 
Proposals should not run counter to Green Belt purposes and must demonstrate 
acce ptable access and servicing arrangements. Proposals should not harm 
biodiversity or the character of the area. The offer of many hotels providing such service is often dependent on a scenic rural location and/or spacious settings. To 
encourage the provision of more hotels and the diversification of the rural economy, 
proposals involving the re-use of suitable rural buildings (those considered by the 
Council to be of a permanent and substantial construction) or the comprehensive 
redevelopment of previously developed land for visitor accommodation in rural areas 
will generally be supported where their locational requirements are well justified. This 
approach accords with the NPPG’s recognition that the market and locational 
requirements of some main town centre uses means they may only be 
accommodated in specific locations.  
12.3.6 Proposed development for visitor accommodation in rural areas should, where 
possible and relevant to its function and location and facilitate the use of sustainable 
transport, including walking and cycling, where appropriate as set out in Policy RE4.  
37 https://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/housing_research_note_4-_short-term_and_holiday_letting_in_london.pdf  Strategic Policy  
SP CL 4: Promoting sporting excellence  
 
277 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 12.4 Strategic Policy SP CL4 : Promoting  sporting excellence  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  CL4 Promoting sporting excellence   
1. As a means of improving the health and well -being of the Borough, development and 
investment decisions will be supported which contribute to the objectives of the Enfield 
Health and Well Being Strategy  and in particular:   
a. promote, celebrate the borough’s gr owing reputation as a sporting and recreational 
hub of national and international importance, especially in aquatic/water sports and 
mass participation outdoor sports;  
b. facilitate and contribute towards the development of first-class, publicly accessible 
strategic sport and leisure facilities to meet the needs of the growing population, 
based on the following hierarchy of priority locations (as shown on the Policies 
Map):  
 
i. Tottenham Hotspur ’s training centre (SA62 );  
ii. Picketts Lock / Lee Valley Leisure Centr e (SA56 );  
iii. Enfield Playing Fields; and 
iv. Firs Farm .  
c. seeking opportunities to expand and improve the quality and condition of Enfield’s 
sport and physical health facilities, with better public transport and active travel 
connections to residential areas and open spaces, in line with the priorities set out 
in the Playing Pitch Strategy and Blue and Green Strategy;  
d. facilitate outdoor sports provision (including camping sites, small stables, training 
academies, golf centres and changing facilities) within locati ons that offer good 
access to public transport, cycling and walking in the open countryside, especially 
within the Enfield Chase , in line with national Green Belt policies; and  
e. secure new sport and leisure facilities within public parks (e.g. green gyms) and 
large-scale mixed-use developments to meet the identified needs.  
2. The Tottenham Hotspurs Training Centre and surrounding land as shown on the 
Policies Map  and as Site Allocation policy SA 62 continues to be designated as Green 
Belt and is identified for the potential development of professional and community 
sports, recreation and leisure facilities, including ancillary and related uses, in line with 
Green Belt policies in this plan and the following:  
1. Any development for professional and community sports , recreation, and leisure 
facilities, including both appropriate and inappropriate Green Belt development, will 
need to satisfy the following development management considerations:  
i. Strategic and local transport considerations, including potential improvements 
to the site’s connectivity with the surrounding public transport network ; 
ii. Optimise access to, and through, the designated site by pedestrian and cycle; 
and  
iii. High-quality design standards, including high sustainable construction and 
operational standards.  
iv. The site’s heritage context and the impact upon any relevant statutorily or 
locally listed asset, including but not limited to, the Forty Hall Conservation 
Area ;  Strategic Policy 
SP CL4: P romoting sporting excellence  
278 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 v. No built development will be permitted on the small paddock field to the nor th
of Myddleton House, or at Beggars Hollow;
vi. Preserve and enhance:
•those parts of the Registered Parks and Gardens of Myddleton Hall  and
Lee V
alley Regional Park which fall in the designated site, or where ther e
ar
e key aspects of their setting in the designated site ;
•The l
ocal heritage assets of Myddelton and Whitewebbs Park ; and
•R
etain existing watercourses, ponds, trees and other biodiversity features ,
w
here necessary for biodiversity reasons.
vii. Ensure no unacceptable visual and landscaping impacts, whilst protectin g
i
mportant views and gaps, including those from Forty Hall Conservation Area;
viii. All new landscaping to include appropriate species selection and managem ent
to pr
ovide biodiversity and climate change resilience;
ix. Deliver community access, education, and socio -economic improvements
available to all sectors of the community ; and
x. A
ccord with other relevant policies of the Local Plan.
Explanation 
12.4.1 Located within easy reach of the open countryside and central London, Enfield offers 
unrivalled access to sporting attractions, including: 
•golf courses (e.g. Whitewebbs Park)
•leisure centres (e.g. Picketts Lock is the largest indoor and outdoor athletics centre i n
S
outh East England) ;
•c
amp and visitor sites;
•water-based activities;
•adventure playgrounds (e.g. Trent Park);
•training grounds (e.g. Hotspur Way Training Ground) ; and
•a w
ell-established community network of football, rugby, hockey and tennis facilities.
12.4.2 Sport forms a key part of the Borough’s leisure and visitor offer and contributes 
significantly to London’s economy and cultural life. Enfield is already home to world 
class facilities (e.g. Lee Valley Regional Park) but we want to build on this success and 
support the Mayor of London’s ambition to become the most physically active city in the world.   
12.4.3 Levels of physical activity and active sport participation in the Borough are increasing 
but remain below the London average, especially among lower social economic groups. Latent demand remains high and presents opportunities to improve the quality 
and range of sport and outdoor leisure facilities. However, the prevalence of obesity 
and mental health illness among audits and young children remains too high, with 
attendant healthcare costs. 
12.4.4 This policy seeks to promote and encourage sporting excellence across the borough, 
including the development of world -class sport villages at Hotspur training ground, 
Picketts Lock, Enfield Playing Fields and Firs Farm. In turn, this will:  
•improve the health and wellbeing of residents, helping residents become mor e
phy
sicall y active;
•provide new sports, recreation and leisure facilities which are open to the wider
community in accessible locations;Strategic Policy  
SP CL 4: Promoting sporting excellence  
 
279 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 • encourage social inclusion and increased community safety and security;  
• support economic growth, providing employment opportunities to local residents;  
• support sustainable travel choices and links with surrounding public transport 
nodes;  
• improve accessibility to the open countryside, nature and key attractions, 
including east– west connectivity through the borough; 
• improve green and blue networks; and 
• sustain and enhancing the significance of heritage assets and open character of 
the landscape.  
12.4.5  Outdoor sport and recreational uses are in principle deemed to be appropriate 
development within the Green Belt, so long as the uses and the facilities associated 
with those uses preserve the openness of the Green Belt and do not conflict with any 
of the five purposes of including the land within it. The proposed policy designation 
supports the delivery of such uses, where they satisfy the development management 
criteria.  
12.4.6  Those uses or facilities which do not fall within the definition of appropriate 
development (i.e. by definition they are inappropriate development in the Green Belt) 
but are deemed acceptable in principle within the polic y designation, must satisfy 
both the V ery Special Circumstances  test of national  Green Belt policy and meet the 
development management criteria. The policy designation provides a range of 
development management criteria (see part 2 of the policy ) which are to be satisfied 
by any development which comes forward under the designation, whether that 
development is deemed appropriate or inappropriate under Green Belt policy. 
 
  Policy DM 
CL5: S port, open space and recreation  
280 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.5 Policy DM CL5 : Sport, open space and recreation 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  CL5 Sport , open space and recreation 
1.Proposals involving the creation of new or enhancing existing sports facilities wher e a
need has been identified, including bringing private and education related sports  will
be s
upported.
2.D
evelopment proposals that result in the loss  of sports and recreational buildings an d
l
and will be resisted unless:
a.an assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the facilitiesto be surplus to requirements; or
b.the loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced byequival ent or better provision in a suitable location; or
c.the development is for alternative sports and recreational provisi
on, the
needs
 for which clearly outweigh the loss.
3.M
ajor residential development will be required to improve open space provisi on,
c
ompati ble with the needs and demands arising from the development and physical
constraints of the site. Open space enhancements will also be sought on smaller
developments, where feasibl e.
4.New publicly accessible and consolidated open space should be provided on si te,
es
pecially within areas of deficiency and priority locations. Where this is not possible
for reasons such as site constraints, viability and competing policy objectives, off si te
c
ontributions will be sought to enhance open space enhancements in the vicinity  of the
site, based on the priorities set out in the Blue and Green Strategy and policy SP BG 1.
5.O
pen space provision within developments should meet the standard of ‘good to ‘very
good’ quality (in line with the Green Flag Award) and the principles of the Accessibl e
N
atural Greenspace Standard.
6.D
evelopments that enhance or provide open space, sport and leisure provision will be
ex
pected to:
a.meet the standards relating to quality, quantity and accessibility set out in Table
12
.1;
b.be visible and accessible from the public realm surrounding the si te;
c.be w
ell-connected and way -marked to other open spaces and routes, especially  to
publ
ic transport connections;
d.facilitate pedestrian and cycle movement across the site and wider area;
e.be flexible, adaptable and multifunctional in nature, responsive to the needs  of
di
fferent users and changing demands;
f.be co-located with other facilities (e.g. sport and leisure) where possible t o
pr
omote more active and healthy lifestyles;
g.integrate soft landscaping, street furniture and sustainable urban drainage systemsinto its design and layout which can be maintained over the lifetime of the schem
e;
and
h.enhanc
e the biodiversity of the site, contributing to the objectives  identified i n the
E
nfield Biodiversity Action Plan
7.Development should not solely rely upon existing publicly accessible open spac e to
contribute towards on -site communal amenity space and children’s play space.Policy DM 
CL5: S port, open space and recreation  
281 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Playspace 
8.Within areas of children’s play space deficiency or locations over 200 metres from  the
near
est play space, on-site children’s play space must be provided to meet the needs
arising from the development, including a mix of ages and backgrounds.  Major
development should provide a minimum of 10 square metres of playspace per child.
Sport, leisure and recreation 
9.Development involving over 100 homes or 10,000 square metres of floorspace will b e
ex
pected to contribute towards meeting the demand it generates through the provisi on
of on
-site sport, leisure and recreation facilities, or a contribution towards new or
improved facilities within the vicinity of the site, especially where there are existi ng
defi
ciencies (as identified in the Playing Pitch Strategy and Blue and Green Strategy) .
S
port, leisure and recreation facilities must be designed and constructed in line wi th
S
port England and relevant guidance from national sport governing bodies .
10.The C
ouncil will ensure that development and growth is matched by an appropri ate
l
evel of provision for playing pitch facilities. This will be achieved through protecti ng
and i
mproving the stock and capacity of playing pitch facilities, and improvi ng the
qual
ity of existing playing pitches and ancillary facilities.
11.New residential development on larger sites will, where practicable, be expec ted to
del
iver new playing pitch facilities on site as part of an integrated scheme. On smaller
sites or where this is not practicable, a planning obligation will be sought to mitigate forthe impact of new residents through new or improved provision in an appropri
ate
l
ocati on.
12.Wher
ever possible, new playing pitches on existing or proposed school sites (as
shown on the policies map) should include natural grass pitches. Proposals involvi ng
ar
tificial pitches must:
a.not have an adverse impact on the amenity of local residents and neighbouri ng
s
ites in terms of noise and light pollution;
b.avoid light spill from floodlighting within Metropolitan Open Land and the Gr een
B
elt (as shown on the Policies Map) unless very special circumstances can be
dem
onstrated in line with policies SP BG4 and BG5; and
c.ensure that site is level and has suitable ground condition s.
Explanation  
12.5.1 For the purposes of this policy, sport and leisure provision covers: 
•all indoor sports facilities includi ng swimming pools , health and fitness gyms  and
s
port halls ;
•al
l sports pitches identified in the Playing Pitch Strategy ;
•gol
f courses ;
•outdoor waterspac e;
•mul
ti-use games areas  and associated facilities;
•outdoor gyms  and athletic tracks; and
•pl
aying fields and sites on education establishments .Policy DM 
CL5: S port, open space and recreation  
282 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.5.2 Everyone in Enfield, young and old alike, able-bodied and disabled, should have 
equal opportunity to engage in the wide variety of sports, leisure and physical 
activities that are on offer in the borough, in view of the health and wellbeing benefits 
of leading more active lifestyles, from lower levels of cardiovascular disease through 
to maintaining a healthier weight and reducing levels of depression. Levels of 
physical activity and sport participation in Enfield are lower than average and obesity 
rates are higher than average. However, latent demand remains high (e.g. playing 
pitches) and presents opportunities to increase participation, especially in deficient 
areas.  
12.5.3 Playing pitches are a key part of the sporting offer for borough as they make a significant contribution to the health and wellbeing of communities. The need to 
protect, enhance and deliver new facilities is based on an up -to date assessment. 
The Playing Pitch Strategy
38 identifies a number of priorities in respect of sport, 
leisure and recreation pitches, including: 
•protecting and improving the quality of existing sport facilities, especially artificia l
gr
ass hockey  pitches, rugby pitches and cricket pitches;
•increasing public access to sport and leisure facilities (including school playi ng
fi
elds and sport halls ) though the use of community use agreements and
m
anagement contacts;
•securing more full-sized  pitches (including 3G football pitches, junior rugby
pitches and artificial cricket wicket s/squares) and associated improvements  (e.g.
new
/refurbished changing rooms, floodlights and drainage installations ) to m eet
pr
ojected demand .
12.5.4 The policy distinguishes between larger and smaller sites (part 10). This reflects the 
general principle that it is better to provide playing pitches closest to the point of 
need. However, the application of this principle will need to be determined on a case-
by-case basis, having regard not only to the practicality and viability of delivering on-
site provision, but also to the context of the development in relation to other sports infrastructure within the locality. For example, it is more appropriate to deliver sports 
facilities in hubs rather than as isolated facilities. For this reason, the policy does not 
identify a site size threshold to define ‘larger sites’, and instead leaves this to the 
planning application process.  
12.5.5 Sport, leisure and recreation facilities should reflect Sport England and other national 
sport governing bodies guidance. Applicants will be advised to contact Sport England 
and other national sport bodies and active sport and leisure organisations in the 
borough prior to the submission of the planning application.   Developments that 
enhance or provide open space, sport and leisure provision will be expected to meet the standards relating to quality, quantity and accessibility set out in Table 12.1  
below  
38 https://new.enfield.gov.uk/services/leisure -and-culture/sports-facilities/playing_pitch_strategy_sports_180319.pdf  Policy DM  
CL5: Sport, open space and recreation  
 
283 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Table 12.1: Open space standard 
Type  Quantity: the provision 
(measured in hectares) of each 
type of open space which 
should be provided as a 
minimum  Accessibility: the maximum 
distance residents should be 
required to travel to use an 
open space  
Open space  2.15 ha per 1,000 population  
 
  Parks and garde ns / natural and 
semi -natural green space:   
 
Metropolitan: 3.2km  
District: 1.2  
Local: 400m  
Small local: 280m  
 
Amenity green space:  400m  
Allotments or 
community 
garden  0.125 ha per 1,000 population  800m  
Children’s play 
space: formal 
equipped play   0.15 ha per 1,000  
population (aged 19 and under)  
 
1.5m2 per person (aged 19 or 
under)  Doorstep (100m)  
Local (400m)  
Neighbourhood (800m)  
Other play (1km)  
Playing pitches  0.xx hectares per 1,000 residents   
 
12.5.6  Information regarding the quality and value of t he borough’s open spaces (based on the 
Green Flag Award criteria) is provided in the latest audit of existing blue and green 
infrastructure.  
12.5.7  The policy also sets out more detailed requirements relating to the design and layout of new 
or improved open spac e within new development and its relationship with the wider blue -
green network. Open space should form the centrepiece of new developments and the 
surrounding urban form. Individual spaces should also be integrated into the wider public 
realm and green gr id network.  
12.5.8  Estate regeneration schemes should maximise the reuse of existing publicly accessible 
spaces and include areas of new open space (e.g. pocket parks, communal gardens and 
linear verges) to meet the needs of new occupants.  
12.5.9  Where sites are under multiple ownership, developers and landowners will be encouraged to 
work jointly to develop masterplans/design codes covering the entire allocation or 
developable area to secure consolidated publicly accessible open space, taking account of 
technical feasi bility and other planning considerations.  
12.5.10  New publicly accessible open space (e.g. parks) should achieve the national standards of 
green space (Green Flag Award) and natural green space (ANGSt – Accessible Natural 
Greenspace Standard) in line with best pra ctice. These spaces will be assessed against the 
quality and accessibility criteria set out in these standards.  
12.5.11  New children’s play space will be assessed against the principles of good design set out in 
Play England’s “Design for Play” guide. GLA’s child yield calculator should be used to 
determine child numbers in a development.  Policy DM 
CL6: Protecting and attracting public houses  
284 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.6 Policy DM CL6: Protecting and attracting public houses 
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  CL6 Protecting and attracting public houses 
1.Public houses will be protected for their important community, social and economic
role in local communities. There will be a presumption in favour of the retenti on of
publ
ic houses and bars in Enfield. Proposals involving the loss of a public house that
has heritage, social, economic or cultural value to the community, including thr ough
the c
hange of use or redevelopment, will be refused, unless there is robust evidenc e
to dem
onstrate the followi ng:
a.l
egitimate efforts have been made to preserve the facility as a public hous e,
i
ncluding through the evidence of regular maintenance and upkeep of goo d
m
anagement and through business diversificatio n;
b.the publ
ic house is not financially viable and there is no reasonable prospec t of the
pr
emises remaining in this use, or an alternative community use, i n the
for
eseeable future as evidenced through attempts at different business models  and
m
anagement, and an active marketing exercise of a minimum continuous peri od of
thr
ee-years ; and
c.al
l feasible options to re- provide the public house have been investigate d and
s
ufficien t justification is provided where these are not consider ed;
i. the pr
oposed redevelopment would provide sufficient community benefi t to
outw
eigh the loss of existing facility;  and
ii. new
 or replacement facilities can be provided to meet an identified need i n
loc
ations which are easily accessible to the local community .
2.P
roposals affecting a public house, including its operational and ancillary amenity
space, will be refused, unless there is robust evidence to demonstrate that the viability
of the public house and its current and future operation will not be compromis ed and
dev
elopment will not detract from the appearance and character of the buildi ng,
i
ncluding any features of historic or cultural significanc e.
3.P
roposals involving the replacement or re-provi sion of a public house must ensure th e
r
eplacement facility is of comparable character and quality as the existing public hous e
and has
 an appropriate amount and configuration of floorspace to enable  the
c
ontinued viability of the public house.
4.Wher
e the change of use of a public house is considered acceptable, developm ent
pr
oposals will be expected to retain the building and other associated features wher e
thes
e make a positive contribution to local character, including their historic ,
s
treetscape and tow nscape val ue.
5.P
roposals involving new public houses will be encouraged within town centre locations
and other accessible locations as part of wider strategies to promote the eveni ng and
ni
ght-time economy and attract a more diverse range of town centre uses, taki ng
ac
count of agent of change principles .Policy DM  
CL6: Protecting and attracting public houses  
 
285 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Explanation  
12.6.1  Public houses play an important role at the heart of many local communities in 
Enfield. They act as social hubs offering a welcoming environment for people of all 
backgrounds to socialis e and interact. Many pubs are heritage assets and make a 
positive contribution to the historical development of the townscape and identity of 
places. Pubs are more than just a place to drink - they can host cultural events, 
clubs, and provide informal meeting spaces for local interest groups, and thus 
contribute to people’s sense of place and belonging. They are also particularly vital to 
the visitor and evening and night-time economy in Enfield.  
12.6.2  In recent years, like many other London Boroughs , Enfield has lost a significant 
number of public houses and bars.  This policy seek s to protect the loss of these 
important community and cultural facilities. Particular consideration will be given to 
the need to protect historic pubs (built in the 20th century or earlier), especially where 
these are landmark features in the townscape.  
12.6.3  However, exceptions will be made where the site is vacant and has become surplus 
to requirements; the existing use is no longer viable; there is no loss of public house 
provision (e.g. the public house can be relocated as part of a wider redevelopment) 
and the proposed development does not have any significant cumulative impacts. In 
the case of changes of use, existing features of architectural and heritage value in 
the public should be retained as part of any redevelopment.  
12.6.4  As part of any proposal involving the demolition or loss of an existing public house, 
including a change of use, the Council will expect to see full details of patronage 
levels and trading accounts over the past thr ee years, including accounts from 
previous management where appropriate. In addition, applicants must provide a 
statement outlining the steps taken by the owner or operator to respond to viability 
concerns. This might cover considerations given to business  diversification (for 
example, expanding the food and drink offer), promotions or building refurbishment. 
Finally, proposals will need to provide proof of a marketing exercise covering a 
minimum continuous period of three years, including details of commer cial agents, 
advertisements and lease terms offered. During this time the pub must be actively 
marketing at a reasonable local market rent. The Council will consider whether any 
ties or restrictive covenants have affected interest.  
12.6.5  Public houses require d edicated operational spaces. They also feature function 
rooms and/or ancillary amenity space, including outdoor gardens, which are critical to 
supporting their role as places of gathering and community facilities. Where 
proposals involve a reduction or rec onfiguration of operational and ancillary spaces, it 
must be demonstrated that this will not have a detrimental impact on the financial 
viability of the public house. Furthermore, proposals must show that the remaining 
space will be of a sufficient amount and quality to continue to meet the needs of pub 
users.  
12.6.6  Operational and ancillary spaces include, but are not necessarily limited to, beer 
gardens, function rooms, kitchens, cellars and accommodation integrated into the 
building (often used by staff as resting space).  
12.6.7  Where sites are redeveloped, including through comprehensive redevelopment, our 
priority is to protect pubs particularly where they are of historic, cultural or community 
interest. However, in certain circumstances it may be acceptable that a facility is 
replaced or re-provided. 
  Policy DM 
CL6: Protecting and attracting public houses  
286 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 12.6.8 Proposals will be required to demonstrate that they have considered all reasonable 
options for retaining the pub in situ. Where this is not possible, the replacement 
provision must be designed to a sufficient quality and standard to ensure the 
continued viability of the pub.  
12.6.9 The policy ensures that any development proposals that would result in the loss of a 
public house must be subject to an assessment of both existing use and the need for and value of the facility to the community. Where there is evidence that existing provision is not able to meet needs, we will work with partners to seek and where 
possible, enable new facilities . 
Have your say on Chapter 12…   
Policies: CL1 to 6 
3.Do you agree with the draft policy  approach set out in CL1  to CL6?
4.If not, w
hat changes would you sugges t? Chapter 13 
Movement and connectivity 
 
13 Movement and connectivity  
Introduction  
13.1 Transport is fundamental to development in Enfield, but at the same time it has 
profound and personal impact on individual lives. In many cases , transport involves 
choice – whether to walk, cycle, take public transport or use a  private car. However, 
choice in many situations coul d be limited by travel conditions , personal choice, 
inadequate investment or other local circumstances. Transport i s a driver and a maker 
of economic development – as i t connects individuals and commun ities, facilitates 
access to job opportunities and for businesses to connect to go ods and markets, 
linking to London and the sub-regional marketplace.  
13.2 Enfield is committed to meeting the Mayor of London’s Transport  Strategy objectives 
to deliver a transport network that improves the health and wel lbeing of all Londoners 
and to achieve an 80% mode share for active and sustainable tra vel by 2041. To 
achieve this target, a significant shift towards walking, cycli ng and public transport use 
is needed over the next 20 years . Development will be expected to contribute to these 
aims by enhancing local active and public transport networks, a nd minimising need to 
travel through good design and location.  
   Strategic Policy 
SP T1: Promoting sustainable transport 
 
13.1 Promoting sustainable transport      
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC POLICY SP T1 Promoting sustainable transport  
1. Travel choice and sustainable transport connectivity will be  improved throughout the 
Borough and to other parts of London and beyond, including Hert fordshire and Essex, 
through a collaborative approach, in line with the objectives o f the Mayor’s Transport 
Strategy and Enfield Transport Plan. New development will there fore be expected to: 
a. safeguard existing land and buildings where necessary to acc ommodate active 
travel (walking and cycling), public transport or related suppo rt functions and future 
access to future infrastructure projects (including the line of  the planned Crossrail 2 
route); 
b. deliver improvements to the transport network where they con tribute towards 
Enfield’s sustainable regeneration and development, promote sus tainable modes 
of travel, reduce severance, improve safety and environmental q uality and support 
business.  
c. be car-free (or offer a low level of parking provision) and support complementary 
measures, such as car clubs and contribute towards well-designe d walking and 
cycling routes; and  
d. reduce traffic and promote safety of the transport network.   
2. New and planned transport investment will be required to sup port the levels of planned 
growth within the borough over the plan period, as well as to s ubstantially increase the 
proportion of journeys via walking, cycling and public transpor t. These include:  
a. Ensuring that major development contributes to the delivery of four-tracking of the 
West Anglia mainline (between Tottenham Hale and Broxbourne) to  improve 
frequency of train services to eight trains per hour; upgrades to the Piccadilly Line; 
more frequent rail services to at least four trains an hour pea k and three trains an 
hour off-peak on the Enfield Town/Cheshunt services to and from  Liverpool Street; 
more frequent rail services to at least four trains an hour at Meridian Water – 
including capacity improvements, accessibility, public realm or  step-free access to 
mitigate impact of development or to unlock potential for growt h; 
b. Where appropriate contribute to the delivery of new public t ransport infrastructure 
and services where it is located in areas of low public transpo rt accessibility.  
c. Safeguarding space to deliver future improvements to Undergr ound, Overground 
and National Rail including the future inter-urban rail route t hrough Enfield to serve 
London and wider south east (Crossrail 2). 
 
 
   Strategic Policy 
SP T1: Promoting sustainable transport 
 
Explanation  
13.1.1 An effective, resilient and safe transport network is necessary  to ensure equality of 
access to opportunities for Enfield’s residents and facilitate growth in an efficient and 
sustainable way. The integration of land use and transport is a n important 
consideration both at the strategic borough-wide and individual  site level. The Local 
Plan aims to support delivery of the London Mayor’s Transport S trategy by 
rebalancing the transport system away from car use and towards more sustainable 
transport modes. This policy sets out the Council’s approach to  facilitate this ‘modal 
shift’ so that Enfield contributes to the achievement of the Lo ndon Plan target for 80 
per cent of all journeys in London to be made by walking, cycli ng or public transport 
by 2041.  
13.1.2 While the borough has the London Underground Line, Overground, National Rail, 
bus and active travel networks, there is an uneven distribution  of transport provision 
in the borough, particularly in terms of access to public trans port. The borough is 
working proactively with key stakeholders including the Greater  London Authority, 
Transport for London (TfL) and Network Rail along with landowne rs and development 
industry partners to deliver new and improved transport infrast ructure to support 
changing demands of residents, businesses and visitors. To supp ort the Council’s 
plans for regeneration and growth, improvements includes safegu arding of land, 
sites, buildings, space and associated infrastructure required to facilitate the 
construction and safe operation of Enfield’s future transport n etwork.  
13.1.3 In addition, the borough is set to benefit from Crossrail 2, wh ich will unlock 
development potential in the eastern part of the borough. Meanw hile, proposals 
within the legal safeguarding for Crossrail 2 at New Southgate will be required under 
the Department for Transport’s Safeguarding Direction to consul t TfL prior to 
submitting a planning application. However, safeguarding does n ot mean that the 
property or business will be affected from the proposed railway  line. Proposals which 
are contrary to the safeguarding of strategic infrastructure im provement projects will 
be refused. 
13.1.4 Part 2 of the policy sets out the new and planned transport sch emes in Enfield.  
However, a wider programme of investments and interventions are  also needed to 
address the distinct accessibility issues in different parts of  the borough. This list will 
be updated at the next stage of plan preparations following fur ther transport 
modelling and identification of mitigation measures, which will  be linked to the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
13.1.5 High quality public realm underpins the integrated approach to land use and 
transport. By improving the public realm and making places and streets well-
connected, greener, safer and more we can increase the number o f trips via walking, 
cycling and public transport, which in turn has the potential t o lead to improved health 
outcomes. 
13.1.6 The policy also forms part of the Borough’s response to the cli mate emergency as a 
means to significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions along wi th tackling the 
associated issues of poor air quality and noise. 
  Policy DM 
T2: Making active travel the natural choice 
 
13.2 Making active travel the natural choice       
DRAFT 
POLICY DM T2 Making active travel the natural choice  
1. Development will be expected to support the healthy streets approach. Priorities will 
be given to measures that encourage a shift to active transport  modes and an increase 
in cycling and walking particularly journeys under 2 kilometres , along with public 
transport and high-quality public realm. Proposals will be expe cted to demonstrate:  
a. improve walking access and routes to local services, includi ng schools and retail 
locations, with new routes, networks and streets designed to me et regional and local 
guidance and standards, including the healthy streets indicator s set out in Transport 
for London guidance; 
b. improve access to and where appropriate, contribute to the d elivery of the cycling and 
walking route network, including green chains and links as set out on the Policies Map; 
c. provide and ideally exceed minimum standards in respect of h igh quality short and 
long stay cycle parking provision on site or contribute to offs ite provision where this is 
not feasible; 
d. promote road safety and safer cycling and pedestrian movemen t around town centres 
and transport nodes and traffic-ca lming measures within residen tial areas and the 
wider pedestrian environment; and  
e. create or contribute to the creation of quieter neighbourhoo ds throughout the borough, 
through the removal of road traffic and prioritising active tra vel measures over car 
journeys. Streets should also include new pedestrian crossings and 20 mph speed 
limits, where appropriate; and where appropriate require contri butions towards 
creating well-connected, high quality, convenient and safe netw ork of cycling and 
walking routes to local destinations.  
Explanation  
13.2.1 The healthy streets approach, set out in the London Plan and En field Transport Plan, 
and aims to achieve a significant step-change away from car use  to more sustainable 
transport modes such as walking, cycling and public transport.  
13.2.2 Everyone should benefit from safe and convenient access to publ ic transport, local 
services, community facilities, education, training and employm ent opportunities. 
Together these should contribute to making Enfield’s neighbourh oods and streets 
safer, greener and less polluted, more legible and accessible t o all.  
13.2.3 Maintaining the current levels and high proportion of car journ eys is not efficient or 
sustainable. Enfield faces the difficult challenge of shifting from private vehicles to 
more sustainable forms of transport (e.g. cycling and walking) in view of the deficit 
position of current networks and more spacious and lower densit y land use. Many of 
Enfield’s streets are already heavily congested and the road ne twork has limited 
capacity to absorb further increases in the number of vehicles.  In response to this 
situation, we will seek to deliver a more efficient and effecti ve use of land and road 
space through the use of walking, cycling and public transport.   Policy DM 
T2: Making active travel the natural choice 
 
13.2.4 Using the indicators of the healthy streets approach set out in  the Transport for 
London’s healthy streets toolkit, developers should demonstrate  how their scheme 
(including the main access points) will positively interface wi th the street and help 
improve the amenity of the area. In particular, proposals shoul d be developed around 
the needs for pedestrians, cyclists and public transport rather  than just vehicles. 
Financial contributions may be sought, where necessary, to miti gate the impact of 
development on the surrounding streets. Interventions that prio ritise safe movement 
on foot and by cycle and moderate the adverse impact of vehicle s (e.g. reducing 
speeds) are necessary to realise the Mayor of London’s modal sh ift and vision zero 
targets.  
13.2.5 Cycle parking should be secure, well-lit, clearly signed and si tuated in convenient 
locations, preferably close to main entrances and public spaces .  Chapter 13 
Have your say… 
292 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Have your say on Chapter 13…   
Policies: T1 and T2  
Do you agree with the draft policy approaches  set out in T1 and T2? 
If not, what changes would you suggest?   Chapter 14 
Environmental protection  
293 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 14 Environmental protection 
Introduction 
14.1 Most of the Borough has high environmental quality which needs protecting, and some 
areas that would benefit from improvements. Therefore, protection of the environment 
through maintaining or enhancing air quality, minimising or reducing nuisance which affec ts human senses (such as noise and odour), can protect health and safeguard 
residential amenity.  
14.2 Whilst there is legislation to control emissions from polluting activities, the planning system has a complementary role in directing the location of development that may give rise to environmental protection problems. This can manifest itself either directly from the development or indirectly; for example, through the impact of potential traffic it generates  
14.3 There are two strands to all environmental policy; to ensure new development proposals do not generate issues which unduly impact on the surrounding environment, and to ensure they are not the recipients of existing issues. Similarly, it is important that existing lawful uses do not become compromised by vi rtue of 
subsequent new development. 
14.4 Environmental protection is  linked with ELP’s objectives to minimise impact of 
development on climate change and the environment and require new development to 
provide environmental improvements. The Borough is committed to protecting existing 
environmental quality and where possible reducing adverse effects on the local and natural environment as a result of changes in activities or from new development. 
Agent of change principle 
14.5 At the national level, the NPPF articulates how planning policies should contribute to and enhance the natural environment and development which causes adverse impacts should be prevented. Paragraph 181 introduces the “Agent of Change principle” and states both planning policies and decisions should ensure that new development is appropriate for its location taking into account the likely effects (including cumulative 
effects) of pollution on health, living conditions and the natural environment, as well as 
the potential sensitivity of the site or the wider area to impacts that could arise from the development. In doing so they should: a) mitigate and reduce to a minimum, potential adverse impacts resulting from noise from new development and avoid noise giving rise to significant adverse impacts on health and the quality of life.  
14.6 The 'Agent of Change Principle' encapsulates the position that a person or business introducing a new land use is responsible for managing the impact of that change. Developers should consider when proposing residential development there could be a significant adverse effect on future occupiers of that development from any nearby 
source(s) of noise such as pre-existing entertainment venue(s). Where a potential 
significant adverse effect is identified, developers will need to factor into their planning 
applications suitable mitigation measures to avoid any significant adverse impacts on health and the quality of life for future occupiers.   
14.7 The policy in this section of the plan applies to all forms of pollution including noise, vibration, light, odour, dust, as well as water and air pollution. Pollution can reduce the environmental quality of the Borough, amenity, and negatively affect human health and  Chapter 14 
Environmental protection  
294 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 well-being. This policy aims to ensure that all forms of pollution are c onsidered, 
controlled and mitigated against as part of all developments. Strategic Policy 
SP ENV1: Environmental protection  
 
295 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 14.1  Strategic Policy SP ENV1: Local environmental protection      
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  ENV1  Local Environmental Protection   
1. New developments should contribute to the health and wellbeing of existing and future 
occupiers by mitigating the adverse negative impacts of noise and other pollution 
generating nuisances on the environment and on the quality of life of residents by 
applying the following principles:  
A. Air Quality 
i. All majo r developments will need to demonstrate that they are at least “air quality 
neutral”;  
ii. Air quality assessments will be required of all major developments and 
developments in the Air Quality Focus Areas, identified in the Enfield Air Quality 
Action Plan; an d   
iii. Development proposals should i ncorporate  on-site measures to improve air 
quality . In cases where it can be demonstrated that on-site provision is impractical 
or inappropriate, off-site measures  to improve local air quality may be acceptable, 
providing equivalent air quality benefits can be demonstrated.  
 
B. Noise and vibration   
i. Proposals for new noise generating developments must demonstrate that 
measures will be implemented to mitigate the impacts on surrounding occupiers; 
and  
ii. A noise assessment will be required to be submitted if the proposed development 
is a noise sensitive development and or an activity with the potential to generate 
noise.  
 
C. Light pollution  
i. Proposals that include flood lighting or external lighting must mitigate the potential 
impac ts from such lighting, and where appropriate, will need to submit details 
demonstrating external lighting is appropriate for its purpose; and  
ii. Proposals must be designed to minimise the impact of light pollution on adjacent 
occupiers and natural habitats, biodiversity  and on the ecology of watercourses.  
  
D. Water Pollution  
i. New development that adversely affects water quality, including waterways, 
identified Source Protection Zones (SPZ) or Aquifers which pose an unacceptable 
risk to the quality of the water catchment, groundwater or surface water  will not be 
permitted; and  
ii. Proposals should reduc e the runoff of particulates  and other forms of biological 
and chemical pollution to waterways  through sustainable drainage and pollution 
prevention methods such as  incorporation of oil interceptors . 
 
E. Land contamination  
i. All development on land which is or may be affected by contamination and/or 
instability must be accompanied by detailed assessment to ensure that any risks  Strategic Policy 
SP ENV1: Environmental protection  
296 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 are identified ; including harm to human healt h and the environment, can be 
adequately addressed in order to make the development safe.  
5.Wast
e and Hazardous Installations
i. Risk assessments will be required to ensure that appropriate safeguards ar e
i
ncorporated as part of the development of hazardous installations, and proposals
for waste facilities , to adequately mitigate their impact on amenity, air quality, nois e
and other relevant environmental considerations by fully enclosing the facility .
Explanation 
14.1.1 This policy applies to all forms of pollution including noise, vibration, light, odour, 
dust, as well as water and air pollution. Pollution can reduce the environmental quality of the borough, amenity, and negatively affect human health and well -being. 
There is also the potential for adverse impacts on flora and fauna. This policy aims to ensure that all forms of pollution are considered, controlled and mitigated against as 
part of all developments . 
Air quality 
14.1.2 Part IV of the Environment Act 1995 and Part II of the Environment (Northern Ireland) 
Order 2002, require local authorities in the UK to review air quality in their area and 
designate air quality management areas (AQMA’s) if improvements are necessary. 
The NPPF sets out in further detail how planning policy should interplay with local authori ty requirements, making particular references to Air Quality Management 
Areas (AQMA’s) and Clean Air Zones (paragraph 181). Specifically planning policies should sustain and contribute towards compliance with relevant limit values or national objectives, whilst being consistent with the Local Air Quality Action Plan.  
14.1.3 Air pollution levels in large parts of Enfield exceed current EU and World Health Organi sation (WHO) standards. Enfield air quality objectives have been externally 
verified and accepted by DEFRA and the GLA. Existing concentrations of nitrogen 
dioxide and particulates (PM
10) are of considerable concern and pose a significant 
threat to human health. Air quality is a top environmental concern for Enfield and the Council seeks to tackle poor air quality in an integrated way.  
14.1.4 Development that aims to meet air quality neutral standards will be strongly supported and larger scale developments in particular will be expected to be air quality positive in line with the London Plan. Innovative design sol utions, urban 
greening and other mitigation strategies will also be encouraged to improve air quality in all developments. In accordance with the London Plan, air quality assessments will be required for major developments, developments associated with sensitive uses/receptors and where considerable demolition will occur.  
14.1.5 Air quality assessments will also be required where there will be a significant increase in vehicular traffic and the use of more polluting technologies including the 
use of non-road mobile machinery (NRMM) in construction. This will help to identify 
any major sources of pollution, constraints placed on sites by poor air quality, suitable land uses for sites, and design strategies that could improve air quality. Direct exposure to air pollution will be minimised through intelligent design of new development, and the plan will support on/off-site measures where they clearly demonstrate the delivery of air quality improvements in line with the London Plan.  Strategic Policy 
SP ENV1: Environmental protection  
 
297 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs)  
14.1.6  To ensure effectiveness, the policy takes an evidence-based approach to 
determining geographic focus. Planning decision will be made in view of Enfield’ s Air 
Quality Management Area (AQMA) designated by the London Plan,  these are areas 
which not only exc eed air quality limits but are also locations with high human 
exposure. This approach directly correlates to Enfield’s Air Quality Action Plan. 
Noise and Vibration  
14.1.7  Noise is an inherent part of everyday life. It contributes to the character of different 
places (its absence marks places of tranquility and its presence in areas of mixed 
activities contributes to vibrancy). However, high levels of noise can have adverse 
effects on human health, productivity and quality of life. Given the existing mix of land 
uses and activities and the need to make the most sustainable use of land, there is 
the potential for conflict between noise sensitive and noise generating developments.  
14.1.8  In line with the London Plan Sustainable Design and Construction SPG, 
developments should minimise the adverse impacts of noise. Noise sensitive 
developments / land uses should not be located close to major sources of noise, 
such as road, rail, and certain industrial developments unless mitigation measures 
are used effectively to reduce noi se levels. 
14.1.9  Where a proposed development has the potential to negatively impact on a noise 
sensitive development or new noise sensitive development is proposed near major 
sources of noise, the Council will require a noise assessment to investigate noise 
levels and determine the effectiveness of mitigation measures. When assessing 
proposals, the Council will have regard to relevant noise exposure standards and 
internal noise standards which apply to particular uses.  
Light pollution  
14.1.10  Lighting can play a vital role in enhancing community safety, helping people find their 
way and allowing many commercial and recreational activities to be carried out at 
night. However, inappropriate lighting can cause great public nuisance and have a 
significant adverse effect on residential amenities or the character of the countryside. 
This policy seeks to prevent loss of amenity through glare and light spillage whilst 
ensuring that other benefits associated with lighting, such as facilitating opportunity 
for evening activities and increasing the perception and experience of safety and 
security, are realised.  
14.1.11  Other adverse impacts include use of unnecessary amounts of energy and in some 
detrimental effects on road safety or on wildlife such as through disturbance to the 
ecosystems  of nocturnal species. Care should be taken to ensure lighting only 
illuminates intended areas and does not affect or impact on its surroundings. 
Proposals for floodlighting should consider Sport England’s lighting guidance and 
apply the standards and guidelines set out in the Institute of Lighting Engineers 
Guidance Notes for the Reduction of Obtrusive Light.  
   Strategic Policy 
SP ENV1: Environmental protection  
298 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Water Pollution 
14.1.12 Water pollution can come from multiple sources, harms the natural environment, and 
requires a multi -agency approach to tackle. The Council will work with the 
Environment Agency and Thames Water to ensure their technical advice is considered where new development proposals pose a risk to water quality. Improving water quality meets a number of key objectives:  
•it increases the potential for the recreational use of Enfield’s water resources
;
•i
t provides a better quality environment, for all and opportunities to enhanc e
bi
odiversity; and
•it also helps to maintain a good quality supply of drinking water .
14.1.13 Where a Water Framework Directive (WFD) assessment is required the developer 
will need to demonstrate there is no adverse ecological impact on the ability of the waterbody to meet its WFD targets. 
14.1.14 Groundwater is a significant contributor towards our drinking water supply; supporting wetland ecosystems and surface water flows as part of the wider water cycle. There 
are a number of source protection zones and aquifers in the borough, these are areas of groundwater storage or sensitive areas of extraction where the risk to 
groundwater quality may need to be considered. The policy seeks to protect these 
areas. Maps showing the locations of Source Protection Zones in Enfield can be found at: http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk
  
Contaminated land 
14.1.15 There are significant concentrations of industrial uses and infrastructure within the Borough, particularly in the Lee Valley. As well as contamination due to human activities, there may also be natural sources of contamination. Whilst modern 
polluti on control measures are in place to prevent new contamination and reduce the 
impact of existing activities, there is the potential for contaminated land from previous 
land uses.  
14.1.16 Where contaminated sites are identified through the planning system, developer s will 
be required to carry out detailed site investigations, provide a risk assessment, remediation and management strategy considering: 
•Whether the land in question is already affected by contamination throu
gh
s
ource-pathway -receptor pollutant linkages and how these linkages ar e
r
epresented in a conceptual model;
•Whether the development proposed will create new linkages e.g. new pathways
by which existing contaminants might reach existing or posed receptors  and
w
hether it will introduce new vulnerable receptors; and
•What action is needed to break those linkages and avoid new ones, deal with anyunacceptable risks and enable safe development and future occupancy 
of the
s
ite and neighbouring land.
•The standard of remediation should ensure that the site is suitable for itsproposed use, and that all unacceptable risks (to receptors such as livi
ng
or
ganisms, ecological systems – fauna/flora, property, landscape, amenity ,
c
ontrolled surface water and groundwater) have been address ed. Strategic Policy 
SP ENV1: Environmental protection  
299 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Waste and hazardous installations 
14.1.17 As a result of the many industrial estates within Enfield, many sites have been used 
for activities which may have contaminated the soil in ways that could pose health problems for people who are exposed. Hazardous installations comprise a wide range of chemical process sites, fuel and chemical storage sites, and pipelines. It is 
important that any risks from new hazardous installations and development within the 
vicinity of existing installations are appropriately considered through the planning 
process.  
14.1.18 Risk assessments will be required to ensure that appropriate safeguards are 
incorporated as part of the development. The Council will also take the opportunity to 
review existing planning consents granted for hazardous installations to ensure they reflect current conditions and the physical capacity of the site. 
14.1.19 Should the degree of contamination be such that remedial action is required to 
safeguard future users or occupiers of the site or neighbouring land or protect any 
buildings or services from the hazards, then planning permission may be granted subject to conditions specifying the measures to be carried out. Conditions will also be imposed that require the developer to draw to the attention of the Council the presence of suspected contamination encountered during redevelopment. Where it is 
proposed to build on a contaminated site, particular attention should be paid to the requirements of the Building Regulations where they apply.  
Have your say on Chapter 1 4…     
Policy ENV1: Local Environmental Protection 
Do you agree with the draft policy? If not, what changes would you suggest?  Chapter 15 
Delivering and monitoring  
300 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 15 Delivering and monitoring 
Introduction  
15.1 This chapter outlines the ways in which the vision, objectives and policies of the 
Local Plan will be delivered. Once adopted, the ELP will be used to determine 
planning applications and inform investment decisions in the Borough alongside the 
London Plan and any neighbourhood plans.  
15.2 Supplementary planning documents and other relevant guidance such as opportunity 
area planning frameworks and relevant guidance (e.g. Mayor of London) will be used 
to assess planning applications. The Council will make use of tools such planning performance agreements, design reviews and sustainability checklists to improve the quality and the design of new development. 
15.3 Where necessary, the Council will use our enforcement powers to make sure that unacceptable development built without planning permission or other consents do not 
compromise the delivery of the plan. We will also impose conditions alongside 
planning permissions to ensure that development is consistent with the policies set out in this plan and relevant national policy and legislation.  
15.4 Special legislative tools including article 4 directions and highway orders to protect 
the charac ter and appearance of the borough’s built and natural environment will be 
used. 
15.5 This section also explains how the Council  will: 
•use the money generated from development to pay towards the provisi
on of
s
upporting infrastructure and services to mitigate the impact of new development;
•facilitate the timely delivery of sites and associated infrastructure in a coordi nated
m
anner including appropriate phasing, masterplanning and implementation;
•maximise the supply of new housing, services and jobs in line with the spatial
strategy; and
•monitor the delivery of the policies set out in this plan and outline the triggers  that
w
ill instigate a review of the Local Plan. Strategic Policy 
SP D1: Securing contributions to mitigate the impact of development  
 
301 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 15.1 Strategic Policy SP D1: Securing contributions to mitigate the 
impact of development  
DRAFT 
STRATEGIC 
POLICY SP  D1 Securing contributions to mitigate the impact of 
development  
1. Where appropriate, new development proposals  are required to:  
a. pay contributions through the Enfield community  infrastructure levy (based on the 
rates set out  in the latest c harging schedule) or equivalent to support the delivery 
of the borough’s infrastructure, based on the spending priorities set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan; 
b. pay additional contributions through the Mayor of London c ommunity infrastructure 
levy to  support the delivery of Crossrail or other strategic  infrastructure; and 
c. enter into section 106 agreements to provide as  follows (subject to viability):  
Key priority:  
i. Affordable housing.  
Other priorities:  
 
ii. Tackling climate change; 
iii. Parks and open space;  
iv. School and childcare places;  
v. Public transport and highway improvements (healthy streets); 
vi. Healthy facilities and services; 
vii. Training, skills and job brokerage;  
viii. Cultural facilities and heritage at risk;  and  
ix. Other site-specific mitigation (e.g. sustainable dra inage systems) . 
2. Development will be required to meet all of the relevant policy and infrastructure 
requirements set out in the Local Plan in a timely fashion unless it can be clearly 
demonstrated that section 106 contributions would render development unvi able. In 
such instances, applicants will be expected to explore all available opti ons (including 
flexible trigger points or phas ed payment of contributions) to plug the viabi lity gap and 
secure much needed contributions  towards affordable housing and essen tial 
infrastructure.  Contributions will also be sought towards  softer interventions (including 
skills and training programmes and other non-financial obliga tions) to maximise the 
benefits of the scheme. 
3. Development will be expected to provide or deliver infrastructure provision on site to 
meet the demands it generates. Where this is evidenced as not possible (e.g. on 
viability grounds), contributions will be sought towards off-site provision to offset the 
impact of development.  
4. Where appr opriate, review mec hanisms will be put in place to defer or amend planning 
contributions ( including in-kind provision) at agreed trigger points in the event that 
market conditions i mprove over the lifetime of the development (or sales values are 
higher than anticipated) , esp ecially in the case of multi -phased sites.   Strategic Policy 
SP D1: Securing contributions to mitigate the impact of development  
302 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 5.Planning applications will be refused where nil or reduced contributions would render
the development unacceptable in planning terms (following consideration of alternativ e
fundi
ng sources ).
Explanation 
15.1.1 This policy seeks to secure contributions from new development (otherwise known as 
‘planning obligations’) to help fund improvements to infrastructure and service 
provision as well as maximise the benefits and opportunities arising from Enfield’s 
growth. Developer  contributions are necessary to ensure that sufficient infrastructure 
and key services are provided in a timely and efficient manner to meet the needs arising from new development.  
15.1.2 In Enfield, there are two main types of contribution: the community infrastructure levy and section 106 agreements. The levy applies a standard charge to most new 
developments (as specified in the charging schedule) and will be used to fund 
infrastructure needed to support the future growth of the borough. Section 106 
agreements  are used to mitigate the impacts of development through the negotiation 
of planning applications.  
15.1.3 The majority of the funding generated from developer contributions will be used to fund the delivery of projects identified through the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. Each 
year, we will publish an infrastructure funding statement setting out how much CIL 
and section 106 income has been collected, how it has been spent and future 
spending priorities in line with the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.   
15.1.4 The Developer  Contributions Supplementary Planning Document will provide detailed 
guidance on the use of the community infrastructure levy and section 106 agreements. Where appropriate, we will pool contributions from section 106 and CIL 
to facilitate the delivery of necessary infrastructure alongside other sources of 
funding.  
15.1.5 This policy also aims to maximise contributions from development towards the 
delivery of affordable housing and infrastructure, based on the policy thresholds set 
out in this plan. Developers will  be expected to test the quality and capacity of 
existing infrastructure in partnership with relevant providers and service delivery stakeholders and contribute towards the timely provision of improvements and/or 
additional capacity to meet the demands arising from new development.  
15.1.6 As a general rule, direct provision through section 106 agreements will be made on site where practicable. Where this is not feasible, suitable off-site or financial 
contributions of an equivalent standard will be sought to address the needs arising 
from the development and is appropriately related to it, taking account of the 
availability and capacity of existing infrastructure and the accessibility of the site to public transport and local services. Applicants should also explore the opportunities 
to secure the provision of on-site infrastructure including publicly accessible open 
space and active travel connections within smaller developments (especially through 
the use of innovative design and technological solutions) to optimise the use of the site. Appendix D of the plan sets out the thresholds to calculate section 106 
contributions through new development, in line with the priorities set out above.  Strategic Policy 
SP D1: Securing contributions to mitigate the impact of development  
 
303 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 15.1.7  In exceptional cases, a shortfall of contributions towards the provision of 
infrastructure or affordable housing may be justified on viability grounds (for instance, 
land and property values, have changed significantly since the adoption of the Local 
Plan). In such circumstances, applicants will need to provide clear and robust 
evidence through a detailed financial viability appraisal from suitably -qualified experts 
(as identified in our preferred list of consultants) to justify any deviation from the 
policies set out in this plan. The viability appraisal must also be independently  tested 
at the applicant’s expense39.  
15.1.8  Viability will be tested on a case-by -case basis. Where the scheme would be 
rendered unviable, the applicant will be expected to explore all available options to 
plug the viability gap and secure much needed contributi ons towards affordable 
housing and essential infrastructure as part of the negotiation process. Financial 
viability appraisals will need to demonstrate that:  
• the policy requirements set out in the Local Plan (e.g. on-site affordable housing) 
would render the development unviable (due to unforeseen circumstances);  
• the wider benefits of the scheme would outweigh the loss of contributions; and  
• the potential opportunities to defer, reduce or phase contributions have been fully 
explored. 
 
15.1.9  Where a departure from the policy requirements set out in the plan can be justified on 
viability grounds, an appropriate review mechanism (i.e. a reappraisal of financial 
viability) will be incorporated within the section 106 agreement to ensure that any 
uplift in the value of the land that occurs between the granting of planning permission 
and the completion of the development has been captured. Further details on the 
section 106 review process will be provided in the Developer Contributions 
Supplementary Planning Document.   
 
  
                                                 
39 Financial viability appraisals will also be made publicly available on Enfield’s planning register (without redaction) along with 
the other documents supporting the planning application.  
  Policy DM 
D2: Masterplans to achieve comprehensive development 
304 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 15.2 Policy DM D2: Masterplans to achieve comprehensive 
development  
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  D2 Masterplans to achieve comprehensive development 
1.Proposals must be accompanied by a masterplan where they form all or part of a siteallocation. The site masterplan will be expected to set out how development willcontribute to the delivery of the plan’s vision and policies SS1 and SS2. It must als
o
dem
onstrate that the proposal will not prejudice the future development of other parts
of the site and adjoining land, or otherwise compromise the delivery of the si te
al
location and outcomes sought for the wider area.
2.The site masterplan must be submitted at the outline or full planning application stag e.
Wher
e an outline application is submitted, it should be accompanied by a full planni ng
appl
ication for the first phase of the development. The masterplan will be requir ed to
c
omprise of:
a.an assessment of the site and its context to inform the overall developme nt
s
trategy;
b.a detailed site-wide masterplan that responds positively to the spatial strategy forthe borough, site specific development principles and guidelines, and other
relevant planning policies; and
c.a delivery strategy that identifies how the development will be impleme
nted and
m
anaged over its lifetime, including land assembly and preparation, infrastructur e
r
equirements, development phasing and planning obligations and/or planni ng
c
onditions, where appropriate.
3.Applicants must demonstrate that they have appropriately engaged and consulted wit h
the 
local communi ty, other relevant stakeholders, and those parties who control any
other parts of the allocated site, through the masterplanning process.
Explanation 
15.2.1 The majority of site allocations  are comparatively large brownfield sites and can 
therefore add complexity in terms of their  redevelopment. This may include situations  
of multiple land ownership, fragmentation of existing uses and space, land 
remediation and need for new or upgraded infrastructure. We consider  that these 
constraints are more likely to be overcome, and the optimal use of sites realised, 
where development is brought forward comprehensively and in line with a site-wide  
masterplan. 
15.2.2 To help ensure certainty of outcomes, masterplans  must be submitted at the outline 
or full planning application stage. The masterplan should be informed by a baseline 
assessment of the site and its surroundings , drawing on the latest available 
evidence. This may include demographic data, economic and social indicators  and/or 
information on the historical, natural  and built environment. The site-wide masterplan 
itself should establish the overall approach to the function and form of development.   Policy DM  
D2: Masterplans to achieve comprehensive development  
 
305 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 15.2.3  The level of detail included in the masterplan should be proportional to the  nature 
and scale of development proposed, along w ith site specific requirements. 
Depending on individual  circumstances, matters to be addressed may  include:  
• historical and cultural context;  
• land uses, quantum and distribution of development;  
• layout and design;  
• access, circulation and parking;  
• open space and landscaping; and  
• infrastructure (including transport networks , community  facilities  and green 
spaces) . 
15.2.4  One of the key aims of the masterplan process is to ensure that landowners and/or 
developers are liaising with each other and made aware of the planning objectives for 
the site and wider area. Coordination between landowners and other  stakeholders, 
including infrastructure providers, will help to ensure that proposals do not prejudice 
each other, or the wider development aspirations for the b orough. Sites that are 
designed and brought forward comprehensively  through the master planning process 
will help to alleviate issues that may arise through piecemeal  development, are more 
likely to maximise wider  public benefits.  
   Policy DM 
D3: Infrastructure and phasing 
306 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 15.3 Policy DM D3: Infrastructure and phasing    
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  D3 Infrastructure and phasing  
1.Planning applications should provide robust information on the expected phasing and
delivery rates of the proposed development, including the proposed timetabl e,
i
nfrastructure delivery  and maintenance arrangements. Applicants will ne ed to
dem
onstrate that sufficient infrastructure capacity exists or will be made availabl e to
s
upport the development over  its lifetime (taking account of existing deficits as  well as
the needs it will generate) in line with the priorities and phasing requirements set out i n
the
 Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
Explanation 
15.3.1 Applicants will be expected to consult with relevant statutory and infrastructure 
providers at an early stage of the planning application process to demonstrate that 
sufficient capacity exists to accommodate the proposed development and determine 
the extent to which additional provision will be required to meet the demands arising 
from its construction and implementation, having regard to relevant evidence set out in strategies and latest up-to-date information set out in the Enfield Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
15.3.2 The Enfield Infrastructure Delivery Plan identifies the different types of infrastructure that will be required to meet future growth needs of the Borough and how it will be 
delivered and phased to serve new development. This is a living document which will be updated on a regular basis as new  information and evidence become available. 
15.3.3 Site allocations will be the main mechanism through which infrastructure will be 
delivered in the borough. However, the long lead-in times associated with the 
delivery of infrastructure means that the site allocations will need to be carefully phased and planned to ensure new development comes forward in a timely manner alongside supporting infrastructure, particularly transport-related infrastructure.  
15.3.4 In addition, appropriate measures will need to be put in place to secure the ongoing maintenance and management of infrastructure and services as part of new development. Where appropriate, contributions will be sought towards on-going 
revenue costs relating to the physical  upkeep and management of infrastructure 
assets associated with the proposed development, such as publicly accessible open 
space, sustainable drainage systems and highways. Planning applications will be 
expected to explain how this infrastructure will be maintained and managed over 
time. Depending on the scale and nature of the proposed development, the 
developer could either transfer the ownership and responsibility of this infrastructure 
to a public body (e.g. London Borough of Enfield) or third party (e.g. a community -run 
trust) or choose to keep the land in private ownership to maintain and manage it (e.g. 
through a property management company). However, we may choose to not accept a transfer and in these circumstances the developer would be required to retain 
ownership and manage this  infrastructure. Open spaces and community facilities 
(e.g. health centres and cultural hubs) should remai n accessible to the public and 
should be maintained in perpetuity to an acceptable standard.  Policy DM 
D4: Monitoring and review  
307 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 15.4 Policy DM D4: Monitoring and review     
DRAFT 
POLICY DM  D4 Monitoring and review 
1.The policies and proposals set out in the Local Plan will be subject to review, in whol e
or
 in part, at least once every five years  after its adoption.
2.In order to deliver the spatial vision and strategic objectives of the Local Plan, the
C
ouncil  will monitor the implementation of policies, proposals  and infrastructure on an
annual basis. Key indicators are set out in the Local Plan monitoring framework i n
A
ppendix D.
3.Wher
e regular monitoring indicates that the delivery of housing and employm ent
gr
owth is significantly and persistently short of the targets set out in part 2 , the Council
will take appropriate remedial action to increase the supply of land and supporti ng
i
nfrastructure. This will involve:
a. utilising council -owned land and powers (e.g. compulsory purchase orders and site
acquisitions) to assist in the delivery of sites and associated infrastructur e
(
including the direct provision of new housing and employment uses);
b.securing additional funding from various sources (e.g. GLA, Tf L and governm ent
bodi
es) to facilitate the timely delivery of sites and associated infrastructur e and
ac
hieve greater densities than projected in the housing trajectory set out i n
A
uthority Monitoring Report;
c.maintaining a register of suitable and deliverable sites (including small sites  and
s
elf-build projects) to ensure a rolling five-year supply of housing on an annual
basis;
d.exploring opportunities which arise from development proposals to unlock housingand infrastructure delivery across the borough (including the pooli
ng of
c
ontributions and the identification of new projects through the Infrastructur e
D
elivery Plan);
e.working with a range of partners and stakeholder to ensure sustainable grow th and
r
egeneration opportunities are fully explored, including optimising the us e of
pr
eviously developed land and new  delivery vehicles and area-based masterplans ,
es
pecially in opportunity areas and town centres ; and
f.supporting various initiatives such as neighbourhood plans, town centr e
par
tnerships, business networks and business -led and other neighbourho od
m
anagement schemes in order to promote centres, attract inward investm ent, and
co-ordinate and manage improvements to the public realm. Policy DM 
D4: Monitoring and review  
308 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Explanation 
15.4.1 The Local Plan will cover a 15-year period from 2024 to 2039. Plan reviews are 
required at least every five years to take account of changing circumstances, such as 
market conditions, infrastructure shortfalls, future updates or revisions to the London 
Plan, and the existence of unmet needs within wider housing and economic 
functional areas. The extent and timing of the review will depend on the extent to which the policies set out in the plan are working.  
15.4.2 The delivery of the Local Plan will be continuously monitored through a framework of performance indicators and targets (see Appendix B of the plan). Where the policies 
are failing to deliver the growth targets  set out in Chapter 2, the Council  will take 
appropriate action to correct this. Some of the triggers that will instigate a review of 
the plan include the persistent under delivery  of housing and employment growth and 
the inability to secure the timely provision of essential infrastructure.   
15.4.3 Where evidence suggests that changes in land values are likely to significantly 
impact on the viability of different types of development, we will consider the need to 
review the strategic approaches or  policies set out in this plan to ensure they remain 
relevant and up to date. This is particularly in respect of affordable housing and infrastructure requirements. For example, where land values increase as a result of strategic infrastructure investment, the Council will seek to ensure that the maximum 
viable amount of genuinely affordable housing is secured on a site-by -site basis.  
Have your say… on Chapter 15 Delivering and monitoring the plan 
15.1 How best do you think the Local Plan can be effectively delivered in the face of 
limited resources?  
15.2 The Council will continue to work in partnership with the private, public and voluntary 
sector plus neighbouring authorities to secure funding for key infrastructure projects? 
15.3 Set out priorities for project delivery ? What do think these priorities should be and 
how should any phasing be applied?  
15.4 Increase the Community Infrastructure Levy tariffs to fund future projects?  
15.5 Do you have any other issues/ comments?   Appendix A 
Local Plan Evidence Base  
 
309 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 APPENDIX A  
Table A .1: Enfield Local Plan evidence base  
Design and character  
Appropriate locations for tall buildings (LBE) 2021  
Character of growth study (LBE) 2021  
Characterisation study (Urban Practitioners) 2011  
 
Homes for all   
Local housin g needs assessment – full report (Arc4 and AECOM) 2020  
Local housing needs assessment – (Arc4 and AECOM) executive summary (2020)  
Housing Numbers (Stantec and LBE) 2021  
Topic Paper: Housing (LBE) 2021  
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment ( LBE) 2020  
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (DCA) 2015  
Housing and Employment Land Availability Assessment (LBE) 2021  
Gypsy and Travellers Accommodation Assessment (Arc4 and AECOM) 2020  
 
Economy  
Employment Land Review (AECOM) 2018  
Industry in  Enfield (AECOM) 2017  
Socio Economic Assessment (AECOM) 2017  
Functional Economic Market Area Assessment (AECOM) 2020  
Enfield Industrial Intensification (AECOM) 2020  
Enfield Industrial Intensification and Industrial Sites Database (AECOM) 2020  
Market D eliverability Study (Stantec and Grant Mills Wood) 2021  
Topic Paper: Employment (Stantec and LBE) 2021  
 
Town centres and high streets  
Retail needs assessment (Litchfield) 2016  
Retail needs assessment – update (Litchfield) 2018  
Retail needs assessme nt – further update (Litchfield) 2021  
 
Green and Blue Enfield  
Stage s 1 and 2  Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land assessment (LUC) 202 1 
Blue and Green Strategy (LBE) 2021  
Biodiversity Action Plan (LBE) 2021  
Burial Needs Assessment – full report (E nzygo) 2020  
Burial Needs Assessment – cremation and burial spaces (Enzygo) 2020  
 
Movement and connectivity  
Strategic Transport Assessment (WSP)  and supporting  reports  2021  
 
Delivery and implementation  
Infrastructure Delivery Statement (Inner Circle and LBE) 2021  
 
Place Making  
Topic Paper: Place Making – Crews Hill (Hyas) 2021  
Topic Paper: Place Making – Chase Park (Hyas) 2021  
Other   Appendix A 
Local Plan Evidence Base 
310 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment – Level 1 (LBE) 2021 
Sequential Test (BMT Global) 2021  
Air Quality Assessment (WSP) 2021  
Whole Plan Viability (HDH Planning) 2021 
Integrated Impact Assessme nt Scoping Report (AECOM) 2020 
Summary of findings – Integrated Impact Assessment (LUC) 2021  
Integrated Impact Assessment of Regulation 18 (LUC) 2021 
Habitats Regulation Assessment (LUC) 2021  Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
 
311 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 APPENDIX B  
Key  performance indicators  
The followi ng key indicators will be monitored along with commentary on other key social, 
economic and environmental changes that impact on plan delivery and the delivery context 
as part of the authority monitoring report. Informed by the strategy in the local plan they are 
grouped into seven themes: 
• Design and heritage  
• Housing  
• Employment  
• Retail and town centres  
• Environment  
• Infrastructure 
• Place   
  Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
312 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021  Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
313 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Table B .1: Key performance indicators 
Number  Key performance 
indicators Policies in th e plan Target Source of 
monitoring 
information 
Design and heritage 
1. % of appeals allowed on 
design grounds  SS1: Spatial growth and strategy  
SS2: Making good places DE1: Delivering a well -
designed, high quality and resilient environment  N/A Appeal s  
Records from 
Design Review 
Panel  
2. Number of designated or 
non-designated assets: 
Lost 
Subject to harm SS1: Spatial growth and strategy 
SS2: Making good places DE1: Delivering a well -
designed, high quality and resilient environment  
DE4: Putting heritage at the heart of placemaking 
DE10: Conserving and enhancing heritage assets  N/A Planning database 
Heritage at risk 
register  
Housing 
3. Net and gross number of 
new homes completed, 
started and permitted 
within the monitoring 
period SS1: Spatial gr owth and strategy 
H1: Housing development sites  12,460 homes 
between 2019-2029 
including a small 
sites target as set 
out in the London 
Plan Planning database 
On-site monitoring 
4. Capacity for additional 
housing from developable 
sites for years 0-5, 5-10 
and 10+ of the borough’s housing trajectory including small sites  SS1: Spatial growth and strategy 
H1: Housing development sites   Housing 
completions 
including on small 
sites, measured against London Plan 
small sites target 
(set out in the 
London Plan) 
annually, and as a GLA 2017 SHLAA 
Enfield’s SHLAA 
and HELAA   Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
 
314 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Number  Key performance 
indicators Policies in th e plan  Target  Source of 
monitoring 
information  
proportion of overall 
housing  
completions  
 
To demonstrate 
five-year housing 
land supply on a 
rolling basis and a 
fifteen year housing 
trajectory  
5.  Total number of 
completed, started and 
perm itted within the 
monitoring period 
classified as affordable by 
unit size, including a 
breakdown by:  
Low cost rent (social rent 
or affordable rent)  
Intermediate (London 
Living Rent or Shared 
Ownership)  
Market  H1: Housing development sites   
H2: Affordable housing  
  Positive trend in 
percentage of 
housing 
completions that are 
for genuinely 
affordable housing, 
measured against 
the borough wide 
strategic target of 
50% Planning database  
Enfield’s 
Regeneration and 
Housing team  
6.  Affordable housing 
planning contributions  H1: Housing development sites   
H2: Affordable housing  
D1: Securing contributions to manage and mitigate the 
impact of development  
 Planning 
contributions 
secured towards 
affordable housing 
on schemes of less  
than 10 units, 
measured annual ly   Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
315 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Number  Key performance 
indicators Policies in th e plan Target Source of 
monitoring 
information 
7. Percentage of units 
approved and completed 
which are: 
M4(2): accessible and 
adaptable dwellings 
compliant and 
M4(3) wheelchair user 
dwellings compliant H1: Housing development sites  
H3: Housing mix and type 
H5: Supported and specialist housing 
H6: Community -led housing  
H7: Build to rent 
H8: Large scale purpose built shared housing 
H9: Student accommodation N/A Planning database 
8. Number of beds provided 
as part of specialist 
housing schemes 
completed and permitted within the monitoring 
period  H1: Housing development sites   
H8: Large scale purpose built shared housing GLA target for older 
persons housing: 70 
units per annum 
between 2017-2029  Planning database 
Enfield’s 
Regeneration and 
Housing team  
9. Total number of Build -to-
Rent units completed and 
permitted within the 
monitoring period H1: Housing development sites  
H7: Build to rent N/A Planning database 
10. Number of student beds 
completed and permitted within the monitoring period and the proportion of which are considered 
affordable   H1: Housing development sites  
H9: Student accommodation N/A Planning database 
Employment 
11. Net gain and loss (sq.m) 
of SIL and LSIS within the borough (approved and 
completed)  E1: employment and growth   
E3: Protecting employment locations and managing 
change  
E5: Transforming Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally Significant Industrial Sites  Positive trend in 
supply towards a target of 50ha  Planning database 
VOA database  On-site   Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
 
316 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Number  Key performance 
indicators Policies in th e plan  Target  Source of 
monitoring 
information  
12.  Total affordable 
employment floorspace 
proposed and the 
proportion of overall 
employment space  E1: employment and growth   
E3: Protecting employment locations and managing 
change  
E5: Transforming Strategic Industrial Locations and 
Locally Significant Industrial Sites  
E7: Providing for workspaces  
 N/A Planning database  
13.  Number of new hotel 
rooms and floorspace 
granted planning 
permission and completed 
in the monitoring year  SS1: Spatial growth and strategy  
E2: Promoting inclusive business and job growth 
CL3: Visitor accommodation  N/A  Planning database  
Retail and town centres  
14.  Increase in supply of retail 
floorspace, measured 
against the target of net 
additional sqm over the 
plan period (comprising -  
comparison and 
convenience goods)  TC1: Promoting town centres  
TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient tow n centres  
TC6: Managing the clustering of town centre uses  
   
15.  Reduction and 
stabilisation of town 
centre vacancy rates in 
major and district tow n 
centres, towards a target 
of vacancy rates for each 
centre  TC1: Promoting town centres  
TC2: Encouraging vibrant and resilient town centres  
TC6: Managing the clustering of town centre uses    
16.  No net loss of cultural 
infrastructure  CL1: Promoting culture and creativity    
17.  No net loss of public 
houses  CL6: Protecting and attracting public houses     Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
317 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Number  Key performance 
indicators Policies in th e plan Target Source of 
monitoring 
information 
Environmen t 
18. Total amount of new 
publicly accessible open 
space, new parks (part of 
large scale development) 
and play space BG1: Enfield’s blue and green infrastructure network  
DM BG6: Protecting open space  N/A Enfield’s Parks team 
19. Net area of designated 
SINCs through permitted 
schemes  BG2: Protecting nature conservation sites  
BG3: Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and offsetting N/A Planning database 
20. Percentage of permitted 
schemes achieving at 
least 10% Biodiversity Net 
Gain BG2: Protecting nature co nservation sites 
BG3: Biodiversity net gain, rewilding and offsetting N/A Planning database 
21. A positive trend in 
approved major 
applications 
demonstrating that they meet at least air quality neutral standard for 
emissions  SE1: Responding to the climat e emergency 
ENV1: Local environmental protection  
Infrastructure 
22. No net loss of community 
infrastructure  SC1: Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s 
diverse communities  
SC2: Protecting and enhancing social and community 
infrastructure   
SP CL 4: Promoting sporting excellence 
DM CL 5: Sport and recreation  
23. Number of permitted and 
completed major schemes SP19: Responding to the climate emergency  
SP22: Securing contributions to manage and mitigate 
the impact of development in Enfield   Appendix B 
Key performance indicators  
 
318 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Number  Key performance 
indicators Policies in th e plan  Target  Source of 
monitoring 
information  
designed to achieve the 
net zero carbon target  SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon 
energy supply  
24.  Total sum of Carbon 
Offset Funds secured and 
received through S106 
Agreements  SP19: Responding to the climate emergency  
SP22: Securing contributions to manage and mitigate 
the impact of development in Enfield  
SE5: Greenhouse gas emissions and low carbon 
energy supply  N/A  S106 monitoring 
database  
25.  Increasing modal share 
waking, cycling and public 
transport  T1: Promoting sustainable transport  
T2: Making acti ve travel attractive and the natural 
choice  Meeting the Mayor’s 
target of 80% by 
2041   
26.  Number of car -free 
developments permitted  T1: Promoting sustainable transport  
T2: Making active travel attractive and the natural 
choice  N/A  Planning database  
Places  
27.  Allocated sites committed  SS1: Spatial growth and strategy  SP2: Sustainability 
and place making  
SS2: Making good places    
28.  Allocated sites delivered  SS1: Spatial growth and strategy  SP2: Sustainability 
and place making  
SS2: Making good places  
PL1: Enfield Town   
PL2: Southbury  
PL3: Edmonton Green 
PL4: Angel Edmonton  
PL5: Meridian Water  
PL6: Southgate 
PL7: New Southgate 
PL8: London National Park City   
PL9: Crews Hill  
PL10: Chase Park     315 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix C: Site Allocation Proformas  
 
  316 
 Appendix C: Site Proformas 
Introduction  
The following appendix contains site proformas for all the proposed allocated sites.  
The site proformas are organised in order of each placemaking area as they appear  in the plan, 
followed by those allocations which lie outside of the placemaking areas. The below table provides an 
index of all proposed site allocations.  
Table C-1: Site Proforma Index  
Site 
Allocation 
Reference  Site address  Proposed land 
use  
HOUSING AND MIXED -USE SITES  
 Enfield Town (PL1)  
SA1 St Anne’s Catholic High School for Girls  Housing  
SA2 Palace Gardens Shopping Centre  Mixed Use  
SA3 100 Church Street  Housing  
SA4 Enfield Town Station and the Former Enfield Arms  Mixed Use  
SA5 Enfield Civic Centre  Mixed Use  
SA6 Tesco, Southbury Road  Mixed use  
SA7 Oak House, 43 Baker Street  Housing  
 Southbury (PL2)  
SA8 Sainsburys, Crown Road  Mixed use  
SA9 Colosseum Retail Park  Mixed use  
SA10  Morrisons, Southbury Road  Mixed use  
SA11  Southbury Leisure Park  Mixed use  
SA12  Tesco, Ponders End, 288 High Street  Mixed use  
 Edmonton Green (PL3)  
SA13  Edmonton Green Shopping Centre   Mixed use  
SA14  Chiswick Road Estate (Osward and Newdales)  Housing  
 Angel Edmonton (PL4)  
SA15  Joyce Avenue and Snells Park Estate  Housing  
SA16  Public House , 50-56 Fore Street London  Housing  
SA17  Upton Road and Raynham Road  Housing  
SA18  South -east corner of the North Middlesex University Hospital 
Trust , Sterling Way, London  Housing  
 Meridian Water  (PL5)  
SA19  IKEA store;  Tesco Extra, 1 Glover Drive; Meridian Water 
Willoughby Lane And Meridian Way  Mixed use  
 Southgate (PL 6) 
SA20  ASDA Southgate, 130 Chase Side, Southgate  Mixed Use  
SA21  Southgate Office Village , 286 Chase Road  Mixed Use  
SA22  M&S Food , Southgate  Mixed Use  
SA23  Minchenden Car Park and Alan Pullinger Centre, 1 John 
Bradshaw Road, Southgate  Housing  
 New Southgate  (PL7)  
SA24  Arnos Grove Station Car Park  Housing  
SA25  Site between North Circular Road and Station Road  Mixed Use  
SA26  Station  Road, New Southgate  Mixed Use  
 Crews Hill (PL9)  
SA27  Land at Crews Hill  Housing  
 Chase Park (PL10)  
SA28  Land at Chase Park  Housing  
SA29  Arnold House (66 Ridgeway)  Housing  317 
 Site 
Allocation 
Reference  Site address  Proposed land 
use  
 Other proposed site allocations outside of the place making areas (urban areas)  
SA30  Claverings, Centre Way, London N9 0AH  Mixed use  
SA31  Cockfosters Station Car Park (Parcel s a +  b) Cockfosters Road  Housing  
SA32  Sainsburys Green Lanes  Mixed use  
SA33  Blackhorse Tower, Holbrook House And Churchwood House 
and 116 Cockfosters  Road  Housing  
SA34  241 Green Street Enfield  Mixed use  
SA35  Land at former Wessex Hall Building  Housing  
SA36  188-200 Bowes Road  Housing  
SA37  Main Avenue Site  Housing  
SA38  Land at Ritz Parade  Mixed Use  
SA39  Travis Perkins Palmers Green, Bridge Drive , Broomfield Lane  Mixed Use  
SA40  Land known as Brimsdown Sports Ground  Mixed use  
SA41  Albany Leisure Centre and Car Park and 55 Albany Road  Housing  
SA42  Fords Grove Car Park  Housing  
SA43  Lodge Drive Car Park (incl. Depot), Palmers Green  Housing  
 Other proposed site allocations outside of the place making areas (outside urban 
areas)  
SA44  Land opposite Enfield Crematorium (known as The Dell). Great 
Cambridge Road  Mixed Use  
SA45  Land between Camlet Way and Crescent West, Hadley  Housing  
INDUSTRI AL SITES  
 Southbury  (PL2)  
SA46  Crown Road Lorry Park  Industrial  
 Meridian Water (PL5)  
SA47 Ravenside Retail Park  Industrial  
 Crews Hill  (PL9)  
SA48 Land at 135 Theobalds Park Road  Industrial  
 Other sites outside the place making areas  
SA49  Land to the south of Millmarsh Lane, Brimsdown Industrial 
Estate  Industrial  
SA50  6 Morson Road  Industrial  
SA51  Montagu Industrial Estate  Industrial  
SA52  Land West of Rammey Marsh  Industrial  
SA53  Car Park Site, Wharf Road  Industrial  
SA54  Land East of Juncti on 24  Industrial  
SA55  Land to the North West of Innova Park  Industrial  
ALL OTHER USES  
SA56  Land at Picketts Lock  Sporting / Leisure  
SA57  Whitewebbs Golf Course, Beggar's Hollow, Enfield  Nature Recovery  
SA58  Alma Road Open Space  Burial  
SA59  Firs Farm  Recreation Ground (Part)  Burial  
SA60  Sloemans Farm  Burial  
SA61  Church Street Recreation Ground  Burial  
SA62  Land at and within the vicinity of Tottenham Hotspur Football 
Club Training Ground, Hotspur Way, Whitewebbs Lane.  Sporting  
 318 
 Questions  
In relation to the proposed site allocations:  
• Have we identified all appropriate sites within the urban area? – To be considered 
appropriate sites must be available for development (with confirmation from the 
landowner), suitable (should not have any restrict ive planning policy designations, and 
should not be residential gardens), and achievable (there should be a realistic prospect 
that the site can be viably delivered within the plan period)  
 
If you think there are sites we should have considered that we hav e not – please put 
forward your site using call for sites submission form for us to be able to consider it. This is 
available at the following link: https://new.enfield.gov.u k/services/planning/emerging-
plans/#3   
• For each site which have been identified for allocation are there any specific design 
principles or infrastructure requirements that you think we should include as these are 
developed further?  
 
  319 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Housing and Mixed- Use Site Allocations  
 SA1 
320 
 PL1: Enfield Town –  Site Allocations  
SA1: St Anne’s Catholic High School for Girls, Enfield  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  St Anne’s Catholic High School for Girls, Enfield , EN2 6EL  
Site Area  1.76ha 
Existing Use(s)  School  and playing fields  
Current Ownership(s)  Single ownership  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1  
PTAL  4-5 
Heritage Considerations  Within the immediate setting of Enfield Town Conservation 
Area and locally listed churc h. Within wider setting of 
numerous designated and non- designated heritage assets.  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Archaeological Priority Area 
Impacts  Within the immediate setting of APA 6: Enfield Town Centre 
and APA 7: Ermine Street  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment r equired; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  
 Redevelopment of the site must deliver new homes  and re-
provide open space in line with national policy  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X  - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green 
Belt 
Residential Capacity Estimate  236 homes  236 homes  
SA2 
321 PL1: Enfield Town – Site Allocations 
SA2: Palace Gardens Shopping C entre 
Existing Site Information 
Address Palace Gardens Shopping Centre Enfield,  EN2 6SN  
Site Area 3.73ha  
Existing Use(s)  Shopping centre  
Current Ownership(s)  Single freeholder 
Site Considerations 
Flood Zone 1 
PTAL 4-6a
Heritage Consider ations Highly sensitive context. Within Enfield Town Conservation Area and 
the setting of numerous designated and non- designated heritage 
assets including, but not limited to grade I listed church.  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Archaeological Priority 
Area Impacts  Within APA 6: Enfield Town Centre  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigni ng indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal 
Land Use Requirements  Comprehensive mixed -use redevelopment with compatible main town 
centre, commercial and residential uses. Public realm and envi ronmental 
improvements, including improved walking and cycling routes .  
Implementation 
Timeframe for Delivery 0-5 years 5-10 years 10+ years 
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use 
Growth Scenario / 
Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Residential Capacity 
Estimate  350 homes 350 homes  
SA3 
322 PL1: Enfield Town – Site Allocations 
SA3: 100 Church St reet 
Existing Site Information 
Address 100 Church St reet, Enfield , EN2 6BQ  
Site Area 0.28ha 
Exist ing Use(s)  The site is currently used by Metaswitch for office (Use Class B1) 
purposes.  
Current Ownership(s)  Single ownership  
Site Considerations 
Flood Zone 1 
PTAL 5 
Heritage Considerations Within Enfield Town Conservation Area and setting of nume rous 
designated and non -designated heritage assets.  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  Within the setting of APA 6: Enfield Town Centre.  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Proposal 
Land Use Requirement s •Redevelopment of the site should provide approximately 56
homes
Implementation 
Timeframe for Delivery 0-5 years 5-10 years 10+ years 
- X - 
Growth Scenario Baseline  Medium  
Spatial Strategy  Urban Area Only Urban Area + Green Belt  
Residentia l 56 homes  56 homes  
SA4 
323 
 PL1: Enfield Town –  Site Allocations  
SA4: Former Enfield Arms and Enfield Town Station  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Former Enfield Arms Southbury Road and Enfield Town Station, Enfield , 
Genotin R oad 
Site Area  0.57ha  
Existing Use(s)  Station and vacant public house  
Current Ownership(s)  Multiple ownerships  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  6 
Heritage Considerations  Immediately adjacent to Enfield Town Conservation Area and in close 
proximity to numerous de signated and non- designated heritage assets.  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  Immediately adjacent to APA 6: Enfield Town Centre  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new homes  and a renewed station 
entrance , public square and public realm  improvements  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated Capacity by Proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario  Baseli ne Medium  
Spatial Strategy  Urban Area Only  Urban Area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use  100 homes + station and 
associated uses  100 homes + station and 
associated uses  
  
SA5 
324 PL1: Enfield Town – Site Allocations 
SA5: Enfield Civic Centre  
Existing Site Informa tion 
Address Civic Centre  Silver Street  Enfield  EN1 3XA  
Site Area 1.41ha  
Existing Use(s)  Offices and car park  
Current Ownership(s)  Single ownership  
Site Considerations 
Flood Zone 1 
PTAL 4 
Heritage Considerations Civic Centre included on Loc al Heritage List. Within the 
immediate setting of numerous Listed Buildings as well as the 
Enfield Town Conservation Area.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impac t assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within the setting of APA 6: Enfield Town Centre.  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage i mpact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal 
Land Use Requirements  •Redevelopment of the site should provide new homes  and
re-provided office floorspace
Implementation 
Timeframe for Delivery 0-5 years 5-10 years 10+ years 
- X - 
Grow th Scenario Baseline  Medium  
Spatial Strategy  Urban Area Only Urban Area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use 150 homes + office floorspace 150 homes + office floorspace  
SA6 
325 
 PL1: Enfield Town –  Site Allocations  
SA6: Tesco, Southbury Road  
 
 
 
Existing Site Infor mation  
Address  Tesco Superstore. Savoy Parade, Southbury Road, Enfield , EN1 1NW  
Site Area  1.74ha  
Existing Use(s)  Retail food store and car park  
Current 
Ownership(s)  Single ownership  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage 
Considera tions  Within the immediate setting of the Enfield Town Conservation Area as well as 
the setting of numerous designated and non- designated heritage assets.  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for assigning 
indicative density will  not apply; heritage impact assessment required; 
mitigation required.  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  In close proximity to the Ermine Street Archaeological Priority Area and Enfield 
Town Centre Archaeological Priority Area.  Heritage constraints;  potential to 
develop; usual methodology for assigning indicative density may not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  
 Comprehensive mixed use redevelopment with compatible main town centre, 
commercial and residential uses.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
 Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / 
Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity 
Estimate  350 homes + re-provision of 
existing non- residential 
floorspace  350 homes   + re-provision of existing 
non-residential floorspace  
SA7 
326 
 PL1: Enfield Town –  Site Allocations  
SA7: Oak House, 43 Baker Street  
 
Existing Site Informatio n  
Address  Oak House, 43 Baker Street,  EN1 3ET .  
Site Area  0.24ha  
Existing Use(s)  Residential  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage 
Considerations  Within the immediate setting of the Enfield Town Conservation Area as well 
as the set ting of numerous designated and non -designated heritage 
assets. Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required.  
Impacts an 
Archaeologi cal 
Priority Area  In close proximity to the Ermine Street Archaeological Priority Area and 
Enfield Town Centre Archaeological Priority Area.  Heritage constraints; 
potential to develop; usual methodology for assigning indicative density 
may not apply; heri tage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  
 • The site should provide new homes  
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth S cenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Residential Capacity 
Estimate  55 homes  55 homes  
SA8 
327 PL2: Southbury – Site Allocations 
SA8: Sainsburys, Crown Road 
Existing Site Information 
Address Sainsburys C rown Road , EN1 1TH  
Site Area 3.21ha 
Existing Use(s)  Supermarket and car park  
Site Considerations 
Flood Zone 1 
PTAL 3 
Heritage Considerations Not located in immediate proximity to conservation area or listed 
buildings.  
Impacts an Archaeologica l 
Priority Area  Within APA 7: Ermine Street  
Amber  – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal 
Land Use Requirements  Comprehensive mixed -use redevelopment with compatible main 
town centre, commercial and residential uses. Public realm and 
environmental improvements, including improved walking and 
cycling routes.  
Implementation 
Timeframe for Delivery 0-5 years 5-10 ye ars 10+ years 
- X X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use 
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity 
Estimate  1,041 homes + at least 
20,685sqm industrial uses 
and logistic spa ce  1041 homes + at least 20,685sqm 
industrial uses and logistic space  
SA9 
328 PL2: Southbury – Site Allocations 
SA9: Colosseum Retail Park 
Existing Site Information 
Address Colosseum Retail Park , EN1 3FD  
Site Area 4.35ha 
Existing Use(s)  Large form at retail  
Site Considerations 
Flood Zone 1 
PTAL 3 
Heritage Considerations Not located in immediate proximity to conservation area or listed 
buildings.  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA 7: Ermine Street  
Amber  – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal 
Land Use Requirements  Comprehensive mixed -use redevelopment with compatible  
commercial and residential uses. Public realm and environmental 
improvements, including improved walking and cycling routes.  
Implementation 
Timeframe for Delivery 0-5 years 5-10 years 10+ years 
- X X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use 
Growth Scenario / Spat ial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity 
Estimate  1,587 homes + non -
residential floorspace  1,587 homes + non -residential floorspace  
SA10 
329 
 PL2: Southbury –  Site Allocations  
SA10: Morrisons, Southbury Road  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Morrisons, Southbury Road  EN1 1TW  
Site Area  2.75ha  
Existing Use(s)  Supermarket + car park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  Not located in immediate proximity to conservatio n area or listed 
buildings.  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA 7: Ermine Street  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; m itigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  
 Comprehensive mixed -use redevelopment with compatible 
commercial and residential uses. Public realm and environmental 
improvements, including improved walking and cycling routes.  
Implementation  
Timef rame for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity 
Estimate  892 homes + non -
residential f loorspace  892 homes + non -residential floorspace  
  
SA11 
330 
 PL2: Southbury –  Site Allocations  
SA11: Southbury Leisure Park  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Southbury Leisure Park, Enfield EN1 1YQ  
Site Area  2.95ha  
Existing Use(s)  Leisure park  
Site Co nsiderations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  Not located in immediate proximity to conservation area or listed 
buildings.  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA 7: Ermine Street  
Amber  – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  
 Comprehensive mixed -use redevelopment with compatible 
commercial  and residential uses. Public realm and environmental 
improvements, including improved walking and cycling routes.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Basel ine / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  450 homes + non -
residential 
floorspace  450 homes + non -residential floorspace  
  
SA13 
331 PL2: Southbury – Site Allocations 
SA12: Tesco, Ponders End 
Existing Site Information  
Address Tesco, 288 High Street, Ponders End 
Site Area 2.95ha  
Existing Use(s)  Supermarket and car park 
Site Considerations 
Flood Zone 1 
PTAL 3 
Heritage Considerations Not located in immediate proximity to conservation areas or listed 
buildi ngs.  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  In part within APA 10: Southbury Road 
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation re quired  
Proposal 
Land Use Requirements  Comprehensive mixed use redevelopment with compatible main town 
centre, commercial and residential uses. Public realm and environmental 
improvements, including improved walking and cycling routes.  
Implementation 
Timeframe for Delivery 0-5 years 5-10 years 10+ years 
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use 
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  350 homes + non -
residen tial floorspace  350 homes + non -residential floorspace  
SA13 
332 PL3: Edmonton Green – Site Allocations 
SA13: Edmonton Green Shopping Centre 
Existing Site Information 
Address Edmonton Green Shopping  Centre  and adjoining land  
Site Area 10ha  
Existing Use (s) Large shopping centre , covered market, leisure centre, library, health 
centre, community centre, hotel, existing homes, bus station, and a multi -
storey car park with over 1,000 car parking spaces . 
Site Considerations 
Flood Zone Mainly Flood Zone 1,  although the northern part of Hertford Road is Flood 
Zone 2.  
PTAL 4-6a
Heritage 
Considerations Within immediate setting of four conservation areas as well as numerous 
other designated and non- designated heritage assets.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  In part within APA 15: Lower Edmonton  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Proposal 
Land Use 
Requirements  Comprehensive mixed use redevelopment with compatible main town 
centre, commercial and residential uses. Public realm and environmental 
improvements, including improved walking and cycling routes.  
Implementation 
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years 5-10 years 10+ years 
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use 
Growth Sc enario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  1,173 homes + non -
residential floorspace  1,173 homes + non -residential floorspace  
SA14 
333 
 PL3: Edmonton Green –  Site Allocations  
SA14: Chiswick Roa d Estate  comprising Oswards and Newdales  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Chiswick Road Estate (Osward and Newdales)  N9 7AN  
Site Area  2.37ha 
Existing Use(s)  Housing Estate  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1/2  
PTAL  5 
Heritage 
Considerations  Within the immediate setting of The Crescent Conservation Area and 
associated Listed Building; locally listed Baptist church; Fore Street 
Conservation Area; and, Church Street Conservation Area.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to devel op; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA 15: Lower Edmonton  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  Housing estate regeneration, comprehensive redevelopment for residential 
uses.  
Implementation  
Time frame for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  272 homes  272 homes  
  
SA16 
334 
 PL4: Angel Edmonton –  Site Allocations  
SA15: Joyce Avenue and Snells Park Estate  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Joyce Avenue & Snells Park Estate  N18 2SY  
Site Area  9.94ha 
Existing Use(s)  Housing Estate  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage 
Considerations  Within immediate setting of Fore Street Conservation Area and North 
Tottenham High Road Conservation Area as well as numerous other heritage 
assets.  Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assi gning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  In part within APA 20: Upper Edmonton.  Amber – heritage constraints; 
potential to develop; usual methodology for ass igning indicative density will not 
apply; heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  
 Housing estate regeneration, comprehensive redevelopment for residential 
uses and supporting social infrastructure includi ng community / health uses 
and re-provided open space . Affordable workspace will be encouraged.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strateg y Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  1,217 homes1 + social 
infrastructure  1,217 homes1 + social infrastructure.  
                                                      
1 The estimate of capacity indicates the net  number of homes anticip ated to be accommodated on the site 
within the plan period.  This estimate is derived from the overall capacity estimate of the site (within and 
beyond the plan period) contained within the most recent HELAA (June 2021).  
SA16 
335 
 PL4: Angel Edmonton –  Site Allocations  
SA16: 50-56 Fore Street  
 
 
Existing Site Info rmation  
Address  Public House 50 -56 Fore Street N18 2SS  
Site Area  0.19ha  
Existing Use(s)  Public house  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  5 
Heritage 
Considerations  Within immediate setting of Fore Street Conservation Area and 
designated and non-designated heritage assets.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  Within  APA 20: Upper Edmonton.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  Mixed use redevelopme nt with compatible main town centre and 
residential uses. Retention of appropriate re- provision of the public house 
in line with policy CL6.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
-  X -  
Estimated capacity by propos ed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Residential Capacity 
Estimate  68 homes  68 homes  
SA17 
336 
 PL4: Angel Edmonton –  Site Allocations  
SA17: Upton and Raynham  
 
 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Upton Road and Raynham Road  N18 2JU  
Site Area  1.92ha 
Existing Use(s)  Residential  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  0 
Heritage Considerations  Within setting of Fore St Conservation Area and wider setting of 
designated and non designated heritage assets.  This site 
includes non designated C20th housing of heritage significance.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mi tigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within the setting of APA 20: Upper Edmonton  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density may not apply; 
heritage impact assessment requir ed; mitigation require 
 
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  Housing estate regeneration, comprehensive redevelopment for 
residential uses.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Lan d Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Housing  Capacity Estimate  198 homes  198 homes  
  
SA18 
337 
 PL4: Angel Edmonton –  Site Allocations  
SA18: South -east corner of the North Middlesex University Hospi tal  
 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  South -east corner of the North Middlesex University Hospital Trust 
of Sterling Way, London, N18 1QX  
Site Area  1.37ha  
Existing Use(s)  NHS trust facilities and services.  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  Includes a remnant of Union Workshouse Hospital Wing which is a 
non-designated heritage asset. Amber – heritage constraints; 
potential to develop; usual methodology for assigning indicative 
density will not apply; heritage i mpact assessment required; 
mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  Comprehensive redevelopment for residential uses.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Housing  Capacity Estimate  400 homes  400 homes  
 
  
SA19 
338 
 PL5: Meridian Water – Site Allocations   
SA19: Meridian Water West Bank  
 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  IKEA store; Tesco Extra, 1 Glover Drive; Meridian Water 
Willoughby Lane and Meridian Way  
Site Area  38.62ha  
Existing Use(s)  Mixture of uses  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1 but close to Flood zone 2&3  
PTAL  2 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA 4: Lea Valley West Bank. Cranog under Ikea when it 
was built.  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  
• Redevelopment of the site should provide new homes  and 
non- residential uses including social and community 
infrastructure  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
X X X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area on ly Medium / Urban area + Green 
Belt 
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  5,000 homes and non -
residential uses including social 
and community infrastructure  5,000 homes and non -
residential uses including social 
and community infrastructure  
  
SA20 
339 
 PL6: Southgate –  Site Allocations  
SA20: ASDA Southgate  
 
 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  ASDA Southgate, 130 Chase Side, Southgate, N14 5PH  
Site Area  1.651  
Existing Use(s)  A1 Retail, car park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage Considerations  Within the immediate setting of a Listed Building as well as within the 
wider setting of the Southgate Circus Conservation Area and associated 
heritage assets.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  Within setting of APA 25: Grovelands Park and Southgate  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  Comprehensive mixed use redevelopment with compatible town centre 
and residential uses  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delive ry  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  165 homes + non -
residential uses  165 homes + non -residential uses  
  
SA22 
340 
 PL6: Southgate –  Site Allocations  
SA21: Southgate Office Village  
 
 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Southgate Office Village 286 Chase Road London.  
Site Area  0.55 ha  
Existing Use(s)  B1 use class  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage Considerations  Within the immediate setting of Southgate Circus Conservation Area 
and wider setting of numerous designated and non- designated heritage 
assets including Grade II* Station.  Amber – heritage constraints; 
potent ial to develop; usual methodology for assigning indicative density 
will not apply; heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  Within APA 25: Grovelands Park and Southgate  
Amber – heritage constraints;  potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Development should provide new homes  and re-provided office 
space  
Impleme ntation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green 
Belt 
Mixed Use Capacity 
Estimate  125 homes and re -provided 
office space  125 homes and re -provided office 
space  
  
SA22 
341 
 PL6: Southgate –  Site Allocations  
SA22: M&S Food, Southgate  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  M&S Food , N14 6AQ  
Site Area  0.459ha  
Existing Use(s)  Food store  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage Considerations  Within setting of Southgate Circus Conservation Area and wider 
setting of other designated and non -designated heritage assets.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  In part within APA 25: Grovelands Park and Southgate  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Development should provide new homes  and non-
residential floorspace  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  150 homes with mixed use 
floorspace  150 homes with m ixed 
use floorspace  
  
SA23 
342 
 PL6: Southgate –  Site Allocations  
SA23: Minchenden Car Park & Alan Pullinger Centre  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Alan Pullinger Centre, 1 John Bradshaw Road, Southgate N14 
6BT & Minchenden Car Park, N14 6 BT 
Site Area  0.11ha  
Existing Use(s)  Youth Centre  & Car Park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage Considerations  Within setting of Southgate Circus Conservation Area and 
numerous designated and non- designated heritage assets.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA 25: Grovelands Park and Southgate  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Development should provide new homes  and non-
residential floorspace  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 
years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capac ity Estimate  Approximately 48 homes  Approximately 48 homes  
  SA24 
343 
 PL7: New Southgate – Site Allocations  
SA24: Arnos Grove Station Car Park  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Arnos Grove Station Car Park , N11 1AN  
Site Area  1.08ha 
Existing Use(s)  Car Park 
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  6a 
Heritage Considerations  Within setting of Grade II* Listed Building.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact  assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Development should provide new homes  and may provide 
non-residential floorspace  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
X - - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green 
Belt 
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  Approximately 162 homes  Approximately 
162 homes  
  
SA25 
344 
 PL7: Ne w Southgate – Site Allocations  
SA25: Former Gasholder, New Southgate  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Site between North Circular Road and Station Road , N11 1QJ  
Site Area  1.13ha  
Existing Use(s)  Sui Generis/B8 Decommissioned gasworks  
Site Consi derations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage Considerations  Within setting of Grade II* Listed Building.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment requi red; mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment should provide new homes  and non-
residential floorspace  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  Approximately 230 homes  Approximately 230 
homes  
  
SA26 
345 
 PL7: New Southgate – Site Allocations  
SA26: Homebase, New Southgate  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Site between North Circular Road and Station Road , N11 1QJ  
Site Area  1.13ha  
Existing Use(s)  Sui Generis/B8 Decommissioned gasworks  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment should provide new homes   
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity b y proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / 
Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  Approximately 203 homes  Approximately 
203 homes  
  
SA27 
346 
 PL9: Crews Hill –  Site Allocations  
SA27: Land at Crews H ill 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land at Crews Hill  
Site Area  82.40ha   
Existing Use(s)  Mix of uses including paddocks, storage and other uses.  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1-3 
PTAL  1a-1b 
Heritage Considerations  Amber - A number of  nationally listed heritage assets within 
the proposed site allocation. heritage constraints; potential to 
develop; usual methodology for assigning indicative density 
will not apply; heritage impact assessment required; mitigation 
required  
Impacts an Arch aeological Priority 
Area  Amber - Within APA3: Whitewebbs Hill, Bulls Cross and Forty 
Hill. H eritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation requi red 
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment should provide new homes , associated 
community and social infrastructure , and enhanced 
open space  
• Must retain the existing riding school  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  n/a Approximately 3000 
homes  
 
SA28 
347 
 PL10: Chase Park –  Site Allocations  
SA28: Land at Chase Park  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land between Hadley Road & Enfield Rd , EN2, Bramley Road, 
London, N14 4UW  
Site Area  59.74ha  
Existing Use(s)  Mix of uses including equestrian, fields and other uses.  
Site Considerations  
Flood  Zone  1-3 
PTAL  1a-1b 
Heritage Considerations  Within the wider setting of the Trent Park Conservation Area as well as 
the immediate setting of two groups of locally listed buildings. Amber – 
heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology  for 
assigning indicative density may not apply; heritage impact assessment 
required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  Within the setting of APA 2: Enfield Chase and Camlet Moat  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density may not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment should provide new homes  and associated non-
residential uses including  social infr astructure  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estima te n/a Approximately 3000 
homes  
SA29 
348 
 PL10: Chase Park –  Site Allocations  
SA29: Arnold House  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  66 Ridgeway , EN2 8JA . 
Site Area  1.33ha  
Existing Use(s)  Care home and grounds to the rear  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zon e  1 
PTAL  0 
Heritage 
Considerations  None  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  • Development should provide new homes  and re -provision of care 
home  
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 year s 10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  36 homes – only on 
area on previously 
developed land.  Approximately 62 
homes  
  
SA30 
349 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA30: Claverings Industrial Estate  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Claverings, Centre Way, London N9 0AH  
Site Area  2.41ha  
Existing Use(s)  Claverings Industrial Estate compromises of approximately 40 
small offices, light industrial, warehouse and trade units, built 
circa 1951 as flatted factories.  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 2  
PTAL  1b 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should:  
• Deliver an exemplar industrial co-location scheme.  
• Ensure as a minimum no let loss of non -residential 
floorspace.  
• Mixed use employment including new homes   
Implementation  
Timeframe for  Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / 
Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Mixed Use Capacity Estimate  TBC  + 587 
homes  of Mixed 
use TBC + 587  homes  of 
Mixed use  
  
SA31 
350 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA31: Cockfosters Station Car Park  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Cockfosters Station Car Park (Parcel s a & b) Cockfosters Road  
Site Area  1.15ha  
Exist ing Use(s)  Car park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  6a 
Heritage 
Considerations  Within the immediate setting of Trent Park Conservation Area; 
Cockfosters Station (Grade II Listed Building) and Trent Park 
Registered Park and Garden. Within the w ider setting of numerous 
other heritage assets.  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density may not apply; heritage 
impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priori ty Area  Within immediate setting of APA 2: Enfield Chase and Camlet Moat  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density may not apply; heritage 
impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Propos al  
Land Use 
Requirements  • Development of the site should provide new homes    
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  316 homes  316 homes  
  SA32 
351 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA32: Sainsburys, Green Lanes  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Sainsburys Green Lanes , N21 3RS  
Site Area  2.2 
Existing Use(s)  Supermarket + car park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage 
Considerations  Adjacent to a Grade II Listed Building and within the setting of other 
non-designated heritage assets.  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density may not apply; heritage 
impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  Comprehensive mixed -use redevelopment with compatible main 
town centre, commercial and residential uses. Public realm and 
environmental improvements, including improved walking and 
cycling routes.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity b y proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  299 homes  + at 
least 13,325 sqm 
of non- residential 
floorspace  299 homes  + at least 
13,325 sqm of non-
residential floorspace 
  
SA33 
352 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA33: Blackhorse Tower, Cockfosters Road  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Blackhorse Tower, Holbrook House and Churchwood 
House. 116 Cockfosters Road, EN4 0DY  
Site Area  1.25ha 
Existing U se(s)  Non-residential  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  Within the immediate setting of Trent Park Conservation 
Area; Cockfosters Station (Grade II Listed Building) and 
Trent Park Registered Park and Garden. Within the wider 
setting of numerous other heritage assets.  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density may not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological Prio rity 
Area  Within immediate setting of APA 2: Enfield Chase and 
Camlet Moat  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density may not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Prop osal  
Land Use Requirements  • Development of the site should provide new homes and 
non-residential floorspace that is compatible with new 
and existing nearby residential uses.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
X - - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green 
Belt 
Capacity Estimate  200 homes  200 homes  
  
SA34 
353 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA34: 241 Green Street , Brimsdown  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  241 Green Street Enfield , EN3 7HQ  
Site Area  0.45ha 
Existing Use(s)  Employment  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1  
PTAL  2 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority  
Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should provide new homes  
and replacement employment floorspace  with no net 
loss 
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
X - - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green 
Belt 
Capacity Estimate  92 homes + employment 
space re -provision  92 homes + employment space 
re-provision  
  
SA35 
354 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA35: Land at Former Wessex Hall Building  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land at former Wessex Hall Building , EN3 7TU  
Site Area  0.38ha  
Existing Use(s)  Vacant Land  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1  
PTAL  2 
Herita ge Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority 
Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should provide new homes  
and replacement employment floorspace  with no 
net loss  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  110 homes  110 homes  
  
SA36 
355 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA36: 188-200 Bowes Road  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  188-200 Bowes Road, London, N11 2JH  
Site Area  0.48ha  
Existing Use(s)  Mixture of uses  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts a n 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should deliver new homes  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Sc enario / Spatial 
Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green 
Belt 
Capacity Estimate  86 homes  86 homes  
  
SA37 
356 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA37: Main Avenue Estate  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Main Avenue  Site 
Site Area  4.49ha  
Existing Use(s)  Residential  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1a 
Heritage Considerations  Within the setting of numerous non -designated heritage 
assets. Value of existing twentieth century housing estate 
will need further research.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not 
apply; heritage impact assessment required; mitigation 
required  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority 
Area  Within APA 7: Ermine Stree t 
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not 
apply; heritage impact assessment required; mitigation 
required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  Housing estate regeneration, comprehensive 
redevelopment for residential uses  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  82 homes  82 homes  
  
SA38 
357 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA38: Land At Ritz Parade  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land at Ritz Parade  
Site Area  0.65ha  
Existing Use(s)  Commercial / retail  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  4 
Heritage Considerations  Existing building is a locally listed building.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mi tigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should deliver new homes  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by pr oposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  79 homes  79 homes  
 
  
SA39 
358 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA39: Travis Perkins, Palmers Green  
 
Existin g Site Information  
Address  Travis Perkins Palmers Green, Bridge Drive, Broomfield Lane , N13 
4EU 
Site Area  0.62ha 
Existing Use(s)  Builders Merchant  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1  
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should deliver new homes  and non-
residential space  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  76 homes and at least 3,200 
sqm of employment 
floorspace alongside a 
reprovided builders merchant.  76 homes and at least 
3,200 sqm  of 
employment 
floorspace alongside 
a reprovided builders 
merchant.  
  
SA40 
359 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA40: Brimsdown Sports Ground  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land known as Brimsdown Sports Ground EN3 7LL, EN3 
7QZ, EN3 7R N 
Site Area  8.06ha 
Existing Use(s)  SG, C3, F.2, D2  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1a 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority 
Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site could be appropriate to provide re newed 
community uses  alongside a limited amount of other 
enabling uses.  
• Any net loss of open space would need to be 
supported by a masterplan approach  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ 
year
s 
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  Community uses  Community uses  
  
SA41 
360 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA41: Albany Leisure Centre  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Albany Leisure Centre and Car Park,  55 Albany Road, EN3 5XH  
Site Area  0.63ha 
Existing Use(s)  Site is currently a leisure centre  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  2 
Heritage Considerations  Within the wider sett ing of numerous designated and non -designated 
heritage assets.  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density may not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archae ological Priority 
Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide approximately 30 extra care homes   
• The site must offer community floorspace at ground floor level 
with retention/renewal of the existing leisure centre  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ 
years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  Community uses + 30 
homes  Communit y uses + 30 
homes  
  
SA44 
361 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA42: Fords Grove Car Park  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Fords Grove Car Park  
Site Area  0.24ha  
Existing Use(s)  Car Park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  2 
Heritage Considerations  Within the setting of Palmers Green junction which 
includes numerous non- designated heritage assets.  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; 
usual methodology for assigning indicative density 
may not apply; heritage impac t assessment required; 
mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new homes   
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capa city by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green 
Belt 
Capacity Estimate  24 homes  24 homes  
  
SA44 
362 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas –  Site Allocations  
SA43: Lodge Drive Car Park, Palmers Gree n 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Lodge Drive Car Park (incl. Depot), N13 5LB,  
Site Area  0.6ha  
Existing Use(s)  Car Park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  Within the setting of The Lakes Estate Conservation Ar ea and 
numerous other designated and non -designated heritage assets.  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new homes   
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 
years  10+ 
years 
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / 
Urban 
Area only  Medium / 
Urban 
area + 
Green 
Belt 
Capacity Estimate  50 homes  50 homes  
  
SA44 
363 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas (non- urban sites) –  Site Allocatio ns  
SA44: Land Opposite Enfield Crematorium  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land opposite Enfield Crematorium (aka The Dell). Great 
Cambridge Road , EN1 4DS  
Site Area  4.07ha 
Existing Use(s)  Vacant scrubland  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1b 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new homes   
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity  by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  270 homes  270 homes  
  
SA47 
364 
 Outside of the Placemaking Areas (non- urban sites) –  Site Allocations  
SA45: Land Between Camle t Way and Crescent Way  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land between Camlet Way and Crescent West, Hadley  
Site Area  11.05 ha 
Existing Use(s)  Pasture / Grazing land  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1 
Heritage Considerations  Immediately adjacent to Hadley Wood CA. Within immediate 
setting of Grade II Listed Buildings. Within wider setting of 
numerous other heritage assets including, but not limited to: 
Wrotham Park Registered Park and Garden and the Battle of 
Barnet Registered Battlefield and non- designated heritage assets.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA2: Enfield Chase and Camlet Moat  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new homes   
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years                             5 -10 years                  10+ years  
-                                          -                                 X 
Estimated capacity by propo sed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / 
Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  160 homes  160 homes  
 
SA47 
365 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industrial Site Allocations  
  SA47 
366 
 PL2: Southbury –  Site Allocations  
SA46: Crown Road Lorry Park  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Crown Road Lorry Park, Crown Road, Enfield EN1 1TH  
Site Area  0.7ha  
Existing Use(s)  Lorry park and car compound  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  2 
Heritage Considerations  Within immediate setti ng of Grade II Listed Building.  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual 
methodology for assigning indicative density will not apply; 
heritage impact assessment required; mitigation required  
Propo sal  
Land Use Requirements  
• Redevelopment should provide an additional 4,530 sq m of 
employment  floorspace  (light industrial, general 
industrial, storage and distribution, and related sui generis) 
floorspace.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years 5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / 
Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  4530sqm industrial 
floorspace  4530sqm 
industrial 
floorspace  
 
  
SA47 
367 
 PL5: Meridian Water – Site Allocations  
SA47: Ravenside Retail Park, Meridian Water   
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Ravenside Retail Park , Meridian Water   
Site Area  3.7ha  
Existing Use(s)  Retail Park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1-3 
PTAL   1-2 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  No 
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should:  
o Seek to provide a multi -story 
industrial and logistics hub, working 
with stakeholders to deliver an 
innov ative industry -leading scheme.  
o Deliver a minimum of 21,700 sq m 
of new industrial/ logistics 
floorspace.  
o Successfully address any highways 
impacts and mitigate flood risk  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
 x  
Estim ated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban 
area + Green 
Belt 
Capacity Estimate  Approx.  21,645 sq . m of 
Industrial  Approx.  21,645 
sq. m of 
Industrial  
SA48 
368 
 PL9: Crews Hill –  Site Allocations  
SA48: 135 Theobalds Park Road  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land at 135 Theobalds Park Road, Crews Hill, Enfield, EN2 
9BB 
Site Area  1.55ha  
Existing Use(s)  Residential dwelling, detached barn, and former horticultural  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1a 
Heritage Considerations  No   
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  No  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should:  
o Deliver employment (light and general industrial, 
storage and distribution, and related sui generis) 
floorspace.  
o Provide retail floorspace commensurate to its out -
of-centre location.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  - Up to 3,251 sqm of 
industrial/employment.  
 
  
SA49 
369 
 Other sites outside the placemaking areas –  Site Allocations  
SA49: Land to the South of Millmarsh Lane   
 
Existing Site Inform ation  
Address  Land to the south of Millmarsh Lane, Brimsdown 
Industrial Estate,  
Site Area  5.09ha  
Existing Use(s)  Industrial and warehousing (B2 and B8)  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  0 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeolo gical Priority Area  No  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should provide a 
minimum of 32,500 sqm employment (light 
industrial, general industrial, storage and 
distribution, and related sui generis) 
floorspace.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
   
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  X X 
 
  
SA51 
370 
 Other sites outside the placemaking areas –  Site Allocations  
SA50: 6 Morson Road  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  6 Morson Road, Enfield EN3 4NQ  
Site Area  0.5ha  
Existing Use(s)  Concrete production facility.  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1  
PTAL  1b 
Heritage Co nsiderations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  No  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new employment use  
•  This should include a minimum of 2,600 sqm 
employment (light industrial, general industrial, storage 
and distrib ution, and related sui generis) floorspace.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Gree n Belt  
Capacity Estimate  2600sqm industrial  2600sqm industrial  
 
  
SA51 
371 
 Other sites outside the placemaking areas –  Site Allocations  
SA51: Montagu Industrial Estate  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Montagu Ind Est, Montagu Road, Edmonton N18 3PP  
Site Area  5.67ha  
Existing Use(s)  Industrial estate  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1-3 
PTAL  1a 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Provide a minimum of 38,600 sq m of employment  
floorspace (light and general industrial, storage and 
distribution, and related sui generis uses) floorspace, to 
deliver a net increase of 6,615 sq m of employment 
floorspace.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  Approx 6,613 sq m of 
Industrial  Approx 6,613 sq m of 
Industrial  
 
  
SA52 
372 
 Other sites outside the placemaking areas –  Site Allocations  
SA52: Land West of Ram mey Marsh  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Ram mey Marsh Mollison Avenue ,  
Site Area  12.01 ha 
Existing Use(s)  Open land  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1a 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment should provide at least 70,200 
sq m of new employment  floorspace  (light 
industrial, general industrial, storage and 
distribution, and related sui generis) f loorspace.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  - Appro x. 
70,200sqm of 
industrial  
 
  
SA53 
373 
 Other sites outside the placemaking areas –  Site Allocations  
SA53: Car Park Site, Wharf Road  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Car Park Site at Wharf Road, Enfield, EN3 4TA  
Site Area  0.8ha  
Existing Use(s)  Car Park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  Flood zone 1  
PTAL  2 
Heritage Considerations  No listed buildings on site.  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  Within APA4 : Lea Valley West Bank  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should :  
o Provide at least 5,115 sq m of new 
employment  floorspace  (light 
industrial, general industrial, storage 
and distribution, and related sui 
generis) floorspace.  
o Mitigate flood risk.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ 
year
s 
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area only  Medium / Urban area + 
Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  At least 5,115 sq m of new 
employment  At least 5,115 sq m of 
new employment  
  
SA54 
374 
 Other sites outside the placemaking areas –  Site Allocations  
SA54: Land East of Junction 24  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Junction 24 (Part New Cottage and Holly Hill Farm) EN6 5QS  
Site Area  11.08ha  
Existing Use(s)  Agricultural land  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  0 
Heritage 
Considerations  Within wider setting of locally listed building.  
Green – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density may not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mi tigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological Priority 
Area  Within APA 2: Enfield Chase and Camlet Moat  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology 
for assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment requir ed; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  • Redevelopment of the site should:  
o Provide a minimum of 30,550 sq m employment  
floorspace  (light and general industrial, storage and 
distribution, and related sui generis uses) floorspace within 
LB Enfield.  
o Seek to deliver the redevelopment of the wider site (in LB 
Hertsmere) to provide a coordinated employment offer.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
  X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scen ario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  - 30,550sqm 
employment space  
  
SA55 
375 
 Other sites outside the placemaking areas –  Site Allocations  
SA55: Land to the North West of Innova Park  
 
Existing S ite Information  
Address  Land to North West of Innova Park, EN3 7XY  
Site Area  3.2ha  
Existing Use(s)  Unused  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1b 
Heritage 
Considerations  None  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Us e 
Requirements  • Redevelopment should:  
o Provide at least 16,445 sq m of new employment  floorspace 
(light industrial, general industrial,  storage and distribution, and 
related sui generis) floorspace.  
o Address highways impacts of development.  
o Mitigate flood ri sk 
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ 
years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban area + Green 
Belt 
Capacity Estimate  Approx . 16,445 sq 
m of Industrial  Approx . 16,445 sq m of Industrial  
  
SA55 
376 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Other Site Allocations  
  SA56 
377 
 Other Site Allocations  
SA56: Land at Picketts Lock  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land at Picketts Lock , N9 0AS  
Site Area  6.5ha 
Existing Us e(s) Cinema and adjacent land including car park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1  
PTAL  1b 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new sports, leisure 
and recreation facilities  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Capacity Est imate  Sports, leisure and 
recreation facilities  
only Sports, leisure and 
recreation facilities  
only 
 
  
SA57 
378 
 Other Site Allocations  
SA57: Whitewebbs Golf Course  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Whitewebbs Golf Course, Beggar's Hollow, Enfield , 
EN2 9JN  
Site Area  43ha  
Existing Use(s)  Golf Course  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1 
Heritage Considerations  Within locally listed landscape and setting of Forty 
Hill Conservation Area, Clay Hill Conservation Area, 
Forty Hill Registered Park and Gar den as well as 
numerous other designated and non -designed 
heritage assets.  
Red - significant heritage constraints; heritage 
impact assessment required; no/little opportunity to 
develop  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  Within APA 3: Whitewebbs Hil l, Bulls Cross and 
Forty Hill as well as the setting of Scheduled 
Monuments.  Amber – heritage constraints; potential 
to develop; usual methodology for assigning 
indicative density will not apply; heritage impact 
assessment required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide nature recovery uses   
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- - X 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  X X 
 
SA59 
379 
 Other Site Allocations  
SA58: Alma Road Open Space  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Alma Road Open Space  
Site Area  2.648ha  
Existing Use(s)  Open space  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zo ne  1 
PTAL  3 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide new cemetery uses   
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  Cemetery  Cemetery  
 
  
SA59 
380 
 Other Site Allocations  
SA59: Firs Farm Recreation Ground  
 
Existing Site Info rmation  
Address  Firs Farm Recreation Ground (Part)  
Site Area  3.669ha  
Existing Use(s)  Playing fields and car park  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  1a 
Heritage Considerations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  None  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide a new crematorium 
use 
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medi um / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  Crematorium  Crematorium  
 
  
SA61 
381 
 Other Site Allocations  
SA60: Sloemans Farm  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Sloemans Farm , EN2 9HW  
Site Area  47.32ha  
Existing Use(s)  Agricultural land  
Site Consideratio ns 
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  0 
Heritage Considerations  Adjacent to locally listed landscape and within wider 
setting of additional heritage assets including, but 
not limited to, a group of Grade II Listed Buildings to 
the east.  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; 
usual methodology for assigning indicative density 
will not apply; heritage impact assessment required; 
mitigation required  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  Within APA 3: Whitewebbs Hill, Bulls Cross and 
Forty Hill  
Amber – heritage constraints; potential to develop; 
usual methodology for assigning indicative density 
will not apply; heritage impact assessment required; 
mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide natural burial uses  
Implementat ion  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban 
Area only  Medium / Urban 
area + Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  Natural burial uses  Natural bu rial uses  
 
  
SA61 
382 
 Other Site Allocations  
SA61: Church Street Recreation Ground 
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Church Street Recreation Ground  
Site Area  4.43ha  
Existing Use(s)  Open space  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1 
PTAL  2 
Heritage Consid erations  None  
Impacts an Archaeological Priority Area  No 
Proposal  
Land Use Requirements  • The site should provide a crematorium  
Implementation  
Timeframe for Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / 
Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  X X 
 
  
SA62 
383 
 Other Site Allocations  
SA62: Land at Tottenham Hotspurs Football Club Training Ground  
 
Existing Site Information  
Address  Land at  and within the vicinity of Tottenham Hotspur Football Club 
Training Ground, Hotspur Way, Whitewebbs Lane.  
Site Area  42.5ha  
Existing Use(s)  Existing football club training centre and surrounding land, including golf 
course.  
Site Considerations  
Flood Zone  1-2 
PTAL  1a-1b 
Heritage 
Considerations  In close proximity to many designated heritage assets. Amber - Heritage 
constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for assigning 
indicative density will not apply; heritage impact assessment requir ed; 
mitigation required  
Impacts an 
Archaeological 
Priority Area  Within APA 3: Whitewebbs Hill, Bulls Cross and Forty Hill  
Heritage constraints; potential to develop; usual methodology for 
assigning indicative density will not apply; heritage impact asses sment 
required; mitigation required  
Proposal  
Land Use 
Requirements  • The site should provide professional sport, recreation and 
community sports/leisure uses, including ancillary related facilities.  
Implementation  
Timeframe for 
Delivery  0-5 years  5-10 years  10+ years  
- X - 
Estimated capacity by proposed Land Use  
Growth Scenario / Spatial Strategy  Baseline / Urban Area 
only Medium / Urban area 
+ Green Belt  
Capacity Estimate  X X 
 
 Appendix D 
Develop er’s contributions    
 
384 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 APPENDIX  D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Appendix D 
Develop er’s contributions    
 
385 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
  
Table D.1 : Developers' contributions 
Type of 
development  Key priority  Developer contributions formula  Relevant policy  
RESIDENTIAL – 1-9 
units  and site area 
under 0.5 hectares 
(borough wide)  Affordable Housing   50% affordable housing onsite where capable of  
providing onsite affordable housing  
OR A payment of £X per unit  
(Number of units X £X) H2: Affordable housing  
 
RESIDENTIAL – 1-9 
units  & loss of 
employment 
uses/jobs/land 
(borough wide)  Business, Employment and 
Skills  
 Loss of jobs  
£3,500 per j ob loss calcul ated at the time of 
submission  
No. of jobs lost x £3 ,500 = total payable  E8: Local jobs, skills and local procurement  
RESIDENTIAL – 10-
49 units or more than 
1000sqm floorspace  
(borough wide)  
 Affordable Housing  
 35% affordable housing onsit e where capable of  
providing onsite affordable housing  
OR A payment of £X per unit  
(Number of units X £X) H2: Affordable housing  
 
Tackling Climate Change  
 Carbon Fund contributions  
CO² emitted from the development per year (in tonnes) 
x £95 (price per tonne) X 30 (years).  SE5: Greenhouse gas emissi ons and low carbon 
energy supply  
  Appendix D 
Develop er’s contributions    
 
386 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Type of 
development  Key priority  Developer contributions formula  Relevant policy  
  
0% – 35% - Mandatory planning obligation 
35% – 50%  - Allowable Solutions with a price of £500 
per tonne – Band A  
50% – 70%  - Allowable Solutions with a price of £300 
per tonne – Band B  
70% – 100%  - Allowable Solutions with a pri ce of £95 
per tonne – Band C  
CO² emitted from the development per year before any 
mitigation = A  
CO² emitted from the development per year after 
mitigation = B  
Payment into Allowable Solutions Fund for residual 
carbon emissions after mitigation to be:  
Band A  Payment:  
(B/A – 0.5) x A x £500 (price per tonne) X 30 (years)  
if figure is negative or zero, no payment required.  
If (B/A – 0.5) is negative do not include i n Band B and 
Band C calculation  
Band B Payment:   Appendix D 
Developer’s contributions  
387 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’ 
June 2021 Type of 
development Key priority Developer contributions formula Relevant policy 
(B/A – 0.3) – (B/A – 0.5) x A x £300 (price per  tonne) X 
30 (years)  
if figure is negative or zero, no payment required.  
If (B/A – 0.3) is negative do not include in Band C 
calculation  
Band C Payment: 
(B/A) – (B/A – 0.3) – (B/A – 0.5)  x A x £95 (price per 
tonne) X 30 (years)  
S chool and childcare places £253 5 per dwelling  
No. of units being created x £2535 = total payable S C1: Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s 
diverse communities and SC2: Protecting and 
enhancing social and community infrastructure  
Tra ining, skills and job 
brokerage  Submission of an Employm ent & Skills Strategy 
showing;  
30% of workforce as local labour
1 apprenticeship/trainee per £3m of
contract value to be employed for over 5 2
w
eeks
Shortfall of apprentic es E8: Local jobs, skills and local procurement   Appendix D 
Develop er’s contributions    
 
388 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Type of 
development  Key priority  Developer contributions formula  Relevant policy  
London Living Wage (10.85) x 36 (hours worked a 
week) x 2 (incentive to fulfil obligation) x 52 (apprentice 
for ful l year) + 10% admin fee  
RESIDENTIAL – 50+ 
units  
(borough wide)  
 Affordable Housing  
 
 35% affordable housing onsite where capable of  
providing onsite affordable housing  
OR A payment of £X per unit  
(Number of units X £X) H2: Affordable housing  
 
Tackling Climate Change As abov e.  
 Parks and open space  Open space  
An open space payment towards an open space in the 
vicinity of / impacted by the development will be 
required where onsite standards are not met.  
Indicative cost calculation:  
Residential Open Space Shortfall = Residential yield x 
Xsqm  (target for open space provision) – communal 
ameni ty space  
onsite  
Then: Calculate the Residential Open Space payment 
= Open Space Shortfall X £X (cost of provision)  
Playspace  CL4: Promoting sporting excellence and CL5: Sport 
and recreation   Appendix D 
Develop er’s contributions    
 
389 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Type of 
development  Key priority  Developer contributions formula  Relevant policy  
Where play space cannot be provided on site, but 
open space is provided a discounted contribution will 
be sought for play space to  reflect that onsite open 
space contributes to informal play space.  
Indicative cost calculation  
Play Space Shortfall = Child yield x 10sqm X X (build 
cost and 5 year repair charge) X 0.5 (50% discount 
factor)  
School and childcare places  
 As above   
Healthy facilities and services 
 The HUDU formula will be use for the calculation for 
financial contributions:  
 
https://www.healthyurbandevelopment.nhs.uk/our -
services/delivering -healthy -urb 
an-development/hudu -model/.  
 
Health Impact Assessments will be used to identify and 
implement measures to mitigate adverse impacts. This 
analysis and assessment of costs will be calculated by 
Enfield and CCG analysis of demand and supply and SC1: Improving health and wellbeing of Enfield’s 
diverse communities   Appendix D 
Develop er’s contributions    
 
390 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
 Type of 
development  Key priority  Developer contributions formula  Relevant policy  
the NHS strateg y for health care provisions/ estate 
planning.  
 
Training, skills and job 
brokerage  As above    Appendix D 
Develop er’s contributions    
 
391 
Regulation 18 stage: ‘Main Issues and Preferred Approaches’  
June 2021    
 
  Acronym buster and glossary  
 
Terms  Description  
Accessibility  The ability of people to move around an area and to reach places and facilities. 
This includes pensioners and disabled people, those with young children and 
those encumbered with luggage or  shopping.  
Adoption  Development Plan Documents and the Statement of Community Involvement 
are described as being adopted when they have been through an independent 
examination. When they are adopted by the Enfield Council they come into 
force. Supplement ary Planning Documents are adopted by Enfield Council but 
do not have to go through independent examination first.  
Affordable housing   Housing for sale or rent, for those who needs are not met by market 
(including housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership and/or 
is for essential local workers); and which complies with one or more of the 
following definitions:  
 
• Affordable housing  for rent - meets all of the following conditions: (a) 
the rent is set in accordance with the Government’s rent policy for 
Social Rent or Affordable Rent, or is at least 20% below local market 
rents (including service charges where applicable); (b) the land lord is a 
registered provider, except where it is included as part of a Build to 
Rent scheme (in which case the landlord need not be a registered 
provider); and (c) it includes provisions to remain at an affordable 
price for future eligible households, or for the subsidy to be recycled 
for alternative affordable housing provision. For Build to Rent schemes 
affordable housing for rent is expected to be the normal form of 
affordable housing provision (and, in this context, is known as 
Affordable Private Rent)  
• Starter homes - Generally a starter home is a compact house or flat 
specifically designed and built to meet the requirements of young 
people buying their first home per Sections 2 and 3 of the Housing and 
Planning Act 2016 .  
• Discounted market sales housin g- is that sold at a discount of at least 
20% below local market value. Eligibility is based on local incomes and 
local house prices and provisions should be in place to ensure housing 
remains at a discount for future eligible households.  
• Other affordable routes to home ownership - this includes shared 
ownership, relevant equity loans, other low cost homes for sale (at a 
price equivalent to at least 20% below local market value) and rent to 
buy (which includes a period of intermediate rent)  
Affordable 
works pace  Workspace that is provided at rents maintained below the market rate for that 
space for a specific social, cultural, or economic development purpose.  
Agent of change  The principle that places the responsibility of mitigating the impact of  
nuisances from existing nuisance generating uses on the proposed new  
development.  
Air Quality 
Management Area  An area which a local authority has designated for action, based upon a 
prediction that Air Quality Objectives will not be met.  
Amenity  The features of an  area, place, open space, building or habitable room that 
contribute to its attractiveness and comfort. Harm can be caused to amenity though excessive overlooking or enclosure, loss of privacy, loss of outlook and 
loss of daylight and sunlight. The degree of harm will always be assessed on a 
case by case basis.  
Amenity space  Element of a location or neighbourhood that helps to make it attractive or 
enjoyable for residents and visitors.  
Area of nature 
deficiency  Areas where people have to walk more than one kilometre to reach a 
publically accessible Metropolitan or Borough Site of Importance for Nature.  
 
Article 4 Direction  
 A tool used by local planning authorities to remove some or all permitted 
development  rights that apply to a particular site or area. 
Area Action Plan  
(AAP)  A Development Plan Document which sets out a strategy for the future 
planning of  areas with a concentration of proposals for where changes are 
envisaged.  
Authority 
Monitoring Report  
(AMR)  This requirement for a local authority to produce an Authority Monitoring 
Report (AMR) is set out in Section 113 of the Localism Act 2011. The Act 
requires every local authority to produce a set of reports containing 
information on the implementation  of the Local Development Scheme, the 
progress and effectiveness of the Local Plan and the extent to which planning 
policies set out in the Local Plan documents are being achieved.   
 
Biodiversity  Refers to the variety of plants and animals and other livi ng things in a 
particular area or region. It encompasses habitat diversity, species diversity 
and 
genetic diversity.  
Biodiversity Action 
Plan A strategy prepared for a local area aimed at addressing threatened species 
and habitats and is designed to prote ct and restore biological systems.  
  
 
Biodiversity offsets  
 Measures to improve existing or create replacement habitat where there are 
unavoidable impacts on wildlife habitats resulting from development or 
change of land use.  
Build to rent  Purpose built housing  that is typically 100% rented out. Schemes will usually 
offer longer tenancy agreements of three years or more, and will typically be 
professionally managed stock in single ownership and management control  
BREEAM  Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method 
(BREEAM) – The standard for assessing the sustainability and environmental 
performance of buildings.  
Brownfield land  
/sites  Previousl y developed land/sites which are or were occupied by a permanent 
structure, including the curtilage of the developed land and any associated 
fixed surface infrastructure.   
Carbon dioxide 
(CO2)  Principal greenhouse gas related to climate change.  
Climate change  Regional or global -scale changes in historical climate patterns arising  
from natural and/or man- made causes that produce an increasing mean global 
surface temperature  
Commercial waste  Waste arising from premises which are used wholly or mainly for  
trade, business, sport, recreation or entertainment as defined in Schedule 4 of 
the Controlled Waste Regulations 1992.  
Community  A ‘Community’ includes all individuals, groups and organisations that live,  
work and operate within specific geographic areas . Community 
Infrastructure Levy 
(CIL)  A levy allows local authorities to raise funds from owners or developers of land 
undertaking new building projects in their area. The money can be used to 
support development by funding infrastructure that the council , local 
community and neighbourhoods want.  
Community 
facilities?  Buildings which enable a variety of local activity to take place  
including, but not limited to, the following:  
• Schools and other educational facilities  
• Libraries and community centres  
• Doctors surgeries, medical centres and hospitals 
• Museums and art galleries  
• Child care centres  
• Sport and recreational facilities  
• Youth clubs  
• Playgrounds  
• Places of worship 
• Emergency services  
 
Some community activities can also be provided via privately run facilities (e.g. 
pubs  and shops).  
Comparison 
retail/shopping  These refer to shopping for things like clothes,  
electrical items, household and leisure goods. Comparison goods are bought 
relatively  
infrequently, so consumers usually evaluate prices, featur es and quality before  
making a purchase.  
Conservation area  An area of special architectural or historic interest, the character  
or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance, designated 
under  
section 69 s69 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 
1990.  
Conservation area 
appraisal  A document defining the special architectural and  
historic interest which warrants the designation of the conservation area.  
Convenience 
retail/shopping  These refer to shopping for everyday essential items  
like food, drink, newspapers and confectionery  
Core Strategy  A development plan document which sets out the long term spatial vision and 
strategic objectives of the planning framework for an administrative area. It 
identifies wher e new development will take place, its type and scale, protects 
what is valued about the area and includes the policies needed to deliver the 
vision and objectives. It is prepared in line with the sustainable community 
strategy.  
Creative and digital 
indus tries  Industries which have their origin in individual creativity, skill and talent which 
have a potential for wealth and job creation through the generation and 
exploitation of intellectual property (IP) rights.  Potential businesses in the 
following sect ors: visual arts; fashion; architecture; information technology; 
photography; health tech; museums, galleries and libraries; software and 
applications; visual effects; broadcasting; publishing; games; design; film and 
tv; creative tech; performing arts; cr afts; advertising and media; music; and 
animation.  
Crossrail 2  Crossrail 2 (formerly known as the safeguarding Chelsea - Hackney Line) will  
link north east and south -west London. The route alignment is currently being 
considered by TfL  Development  “The carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on, 
over or under land, or the making of any material changes in the use of any 
building or other land.” (Town & Country Planning Act (1990) Part III Section 
55). 
Developer 
contributions  This term refers to planning obligations delivered through section 106 
agreements, section 38 agreements and section 278 Agreements, as well as 
money collected through the community infrastructure levy (CIL). These tools 
are used to secure fi nancial and non -financial contributions (including 
affordable housing and employment, business and skills provision) or other 
works to provide infrastructure to support and mitigate the impact of 
development. However, developments cannot be double charged (section 106 
and CIL) to fund the same item of infrastructure.  
Development Plan  At a local level the development plan sets out the local planning authority’s 
policies and proposals for the development and use of land and buildings in 
the authority’s area and forms the basis for decisions on planning applications.  
 
This includes adopted Local Plans, neighbourhood plans and the London Plan, 
and is defined in section 38 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004.  
Development Plan 
Documents  These incl ude the core strategy, site -specific allocations of land and, where 
needed, area action plans. There will also be an adopted proposals map which 
illustrates the spatial extent of policies. Once adopted, development control 
decisions must be made in accorda nce with them unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise.  
Decentralised 
energy  The local generation of electricity and where appropriate, the recovery of the 
surplus heat (combined heat and power –  CHP) for purposes such as building 
space heating and domestic hot water production. CHP is often used in District 
Heating systems, with the heat generated as a by -product of electricity 
generation being pumped into homes, either as hot water or as steam, 
through  
networks of reinforced pipes.  
 
DEFRA biod iversity 
metric  An effective  tool of accounting for the impacts of a proposal on biodiversity 
and demonstrating that a net gain will be delivered. It also provides flexibility 
and encourages projects to consider biodiversity from the outset. Use of the 
metric rewards schemes that minimise their impacts but also gives options to 
developers in terms of whether necessary mitigation is delivered on or off site. 
A minimum 10% net gain will be expected unless national standards increase 
this in the future. In or der to properly inform applications, surveys will be 
required in line with the latest British Standard (BS42020 2013 or its 
replacement).  
 
Duty to cooperate  The Localism Act (2011) places a ‘duty to cooperate’ on all local authorities 
and a number of other public bodies which requires on-going, constructive and 
effective engagement to develop strategic policies and consider joint 
approaches to plan making.  Early education and 
care facilities  
 
 The terms refer to places where a number of children under  five 
years of age are brought together during part or all of a working day on a 
regular basis where they can play, learn and receive care (e.g. primary school 
nurseries, children’s centres, pre-school and ‘wrap -around’ childcare). In the 
case of further a nd higher education developments, applicants will be 
expected to provide evidence of the relevant certification from the 
Department for Education as well as details of student and staff numbers, 
enrolment criteria and curriculum details.  
 
Energy efficiency  Making the best or most efficient use of energy in order to achieve  a given 
output of goods or services, and of comfort and convenience. This does not  
necessitate the use of less energy, in which respect it differs from the concept 
of energy conservation.  
Energy hierarchy?  A framework guiding UK energy policy as follows: Use Energy  Efficiently (by 
turning off lights and appliances after use); Use Renewable Energy  
(wherever possible); Supply Remaining Energy efficiently (by using 
decentra lised  technology such as CHP systems). Following this hierarchy meets 
energy demand  in the most efficient way and also reduces emissions of carbon 
dioxide (CO2).  
Environment Agency 
(EA) Government agency responsible for environmental regulation. Its legal  duty is 
to protect and improve the environment of England and Wales. Created in 
1996.  
Evidence base  The information and data gathered by local authorities to justify the 
“soundness” of  the policy approach set out in Local Development Documents, 
includin g physical,  economic, and social characteristics of an area.  
Examination  Presided over by a Planning Inspector or a Panel of Inspectors  appointed by 
the Secretary of State; this can consist of hearing sessions, or  consideration of 
written representations  to consider whether the policies and proposals  
of the local planning authority's Development Plan Documents are sound.  
Integrated Impact  
Assessment (IIA)  Integrated Impact Assessment (IIA) is a systematic decision support process, 
aiming to ensure that e nvironmental and possibly other sustainability aspects 
are considered effectively in policy, plan and programme making.  
 
Independent  
Examination  The process by which a Presided over by a Planning Inspector or Panel of 
Inspectors  appointed by the Secretary of State; this may consist of hearing 
sessions, or  consideration of written representations to consider if the policies 
and proposals of the  local planning authority’s Development Plan Document 
are sound.  
 
Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan This is a live prog ramme of the borough’s infrastructure priorities and projects 
over the course of the plan period and beyond.  
Family sized housing  A dwelling that by virtue of its size, layout and design is suitable for a family to 
live in and generally has three, four, five, or more bedrooms.  
Geodiversity  The variety of rocks, fossils, minerals, landforms, soils and natural processes,  
such as weathering, erosion and sedimentation, that underlie and determine 
the character of our natural landscape and environment.  
Grea ter London 
Authority (GLA)  The GLA is the strategic citywide government for London. It is made up of a 
directly elected Mayor (the Mayor of London) and a separately elected 
Assembly (the London Assembly).  Green Belt 
(Metropolitan)  An area of countryside  or land that is protected from inappropriate 
development in order to prevent the sprawl of existing built -up areas and to 
protect the openness of the countryside. Green Belts are not designated for 
their beauty or  
character, although there are many areas of high landscape quality within the 
Green Belt.  The Metropolitan Green Belt is the protected open space that 
surrounds Greater London.  
Green Chain  Green chains are areas of linked open spaces accessible to the public which 
provide way -marked paths and o ther pedestrian and cycle routes. They also 
enable flora and fauna to migrate around the borough and beyond. Some 
green chains are designated as Metropolitan Open Land (MOL). The definition 
covers anything from open spaces, footpaths, river corridors, canals/ 
towpaths, bridleways, disused railways and railway sidings and can 
predominantly be found in or adjacent to the New River, Turkey Brook, 
Salmons Brook and Pymmes Brook and in the vicinity of Boxers Lake.  
Green corridor  Relatively continuous areas of o pen space leading through the built  
environment, which may be linked to each other and to Metropolitan Open 
Land and may not be publicly accessible. They may allow animals and plants to 
be found further into the built -up area than would otherwise be the ca se and 
provide an extension to the habitats of the sites they join.  
Green industries  The business sector that produces goods or services which,  
compared to other more commonly used goods and services, are less harmful 
to the environment.  
Green roofs/wall  Planting on roofs or walls to provide climate change, amenity, food growing 
and recreational benefits.  
Gypsy and traveller 
site Site for settled occupation, temporary stopping place or  
transit for gypsies and travellers.  
Habitable room  A habitable room is any room used or intended to be used for sleeping, 
cooking, living or eating purposes. Enclosed spaces such as bath or toilet 
facilities, corridors, hallways, utility rooms or similar should not be considered 
habitable rooms.  
 
Habitabl e floorspace  
 Habitable floorspace is all floorspace with a floor to ceiling height of 1.5m or 
over within a habitable room. Floorspace within habitable rooms with a floor 
to ceiling height of between 0.9m and 1.5m is counted as 50 per cent of its 
floor area and any floor area with a floor to ceiling height lower than 0.9m is 
not counted as habitable floorspace.  
Habitat Regulation 
Assessment (HRA)  An assessment undertaken for plans and projects which have the potential to 
affect European sites of nature conservation importance.  
Heat island effect  Can also referred to as the urban heat island effect and is an effect where the 
average temperature of an area is higher than nearby rural areas.  
Health Impact 
Assessment  Health Impact Assessment (HIA) is use d as a systematic framework to identify 
the potential impacts of a development proposal, policy or plan on the health 
and wellbeing of the population and highlight any health inequalities that may 
arise. HIA should be undertaken as early as possible in the  plan making or 
design process to identify opportunities for maximising potential health gains, 
minimising harm, and addressing health inequalities. 
 
Historic 
environment  
 All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between people 
and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past 
human activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and 
planted or managed flora.  Heritage asset  A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as  
having a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions,  
because of its heritage interest. Heritage assets include designated heritage 
assets (such as Conservation Areas, statutory listed buildings and registered 
parks and gardens) and und esignated heritage assets identified by the local 
planning authority (such as the Local Heritage List).  
Household waste  All waste collected by Waste Collection Authorities under Section  
45(1) of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, plus all waste arisin g from 
Civic  
Amenity sites and waste collected by third parties for which collection or 
disposal  credits are paid under Section 52 of the Environmental Protection Act 
1990.  Household waste includes waste from collection rounds of domestic 
properties,  street cleansing and litter collection, bulky household waste 
collections, hazardous  household waste collections, household clinical waste 
collections, garden waste  collections, Civic Amenity wastes, drop-off and bring 
systems, clearance of fly- tipped wast es, weekend skip services and any other 
household waste collected by the waste authorities. Household waste 
accounts for approximately four -fifths of  London’s municipal waste.  
Houses in Multiple 
Occupation (HMO)  Shared dwelling houses permanently occupied  by members of more than one 
household as their only or main residence, who share basic amenities such as a 
kitchen or bathroom.  
Housing Association  Independent non -profit making bodies that provide low -cost social housing for 
people in housing need.  
Housing Land 
Availability  The total amount of land reserved for residential use awaiting development.  
Infrastructure  Term used to describe the facilities and services necessary for local  
people to live their everyday lives. Infrastructure can take many for ms; it can 
be 
defined in physical, green and social terms, and can range from strategic 
provision, such as a new road or school, to the creation of a local play -space.  
 
Inclusive design  
 Inclusive design results in an environment which everyone can use, to access 
and benefit from the full range of opportunities available; confidently, 
independently, with choice and dignity, which avoids separation or 
segregation and is made up of places and space  
Issues and Options 
and Preferred 
Options  The "pre -submiss ion" consultation stages on Development Plan Documents 
with the objective of gaining public consensus over proposals ahead of 
submission to government for independent examination.  
Local Development 
Documents (LDD)  These include Development Plan Documents  (which form part of the statutory 
development plan) and Supplementary Planning Documents (which do not 
form part of the statutory development plan).  
Local Development 
Framework  Term used to describe a folder of documents, which includes all 
the local  planning authority's  local development  documents setting out the 
council’s aspirations for the future development.  
Local Nature 
Reserve (LNR)  A statutory designation made under Section 21 of the National Parks and 
Access to the Countryside Act 1949 by pri ncipal local authorities.  
Local Plan  The Local Plan contains a series of local development documents (LDDs)  
that set out how the borough will change and develop in the future and how  
its places and environs will be protected and enhanced, these are drawn  
up by the Local Planning Authority . 
London Plan  The Mayor of London is responsible for producing a planning strategy for the 
capital. This replaces the previous strategic planning guidance for London (known as RPG3), issued by the Secretary of State. The London Plan is the 
name given to the Mayor's spatial development strategy.  
London Plan 
Apportionment  Allocates to each individual borough a given proportion of London’s total 
waste (expressed in tonnes) for which sufficient sites for managing and 
process ing waste must be identified within their Local Development 
Frameworks  
Local Planning 
Authority  The local authority or council that is empowered by law to exercise  
planning functions.  
Locally Significant 
Industrial Sites  Defined in the London Plan, and are important employment generating sites in 
the borough.  
Legibility  The degree to which a place can be easily understood and traversed.  
Lifetime Homes  Ordinary homes designed to provide accessible and convenient  
homes for a large segment of the population from young children to frail older 
people  
and those with temporary or permanent physical or sensory impairments.  
Listed buildings  Statutory Listing means that the building is protected by law. This  
protection extends over the whole building inc luding its interior. It also 
extends to any  object or structure fixed to the building as well as to any 
freestanding objects or  structures, which lie within the curtilage of the building 
and were erected before 1 July  1948. Listed Building Consent is requi red for 
any works that might affect the special  interest of the listed building.  
Liveability  Refers to the suitability and desirability of an environment or dwelling for  
living.  
Locally listed 
buildings  The Council maintains a list of buildings of local architectural  or historic 
interest which it believes are worthy of conservation. Local listing brings with  
it no additional planning controls but is a material consideration when 
planning  
applications are considered.  
London Plan Central 
Activities Zone (C AZ) An area defined in the London Plan  
where planning policy promotes finance, specialist retail, tourist and cultural 
uses  
and activities.  
London Plan 
Opportunity Area  
. London’s principal opportunities for accommodating large scale development 
to provid e substantial numbers of new employment and housing, each 
typically more than 5,000 jobs and/or 2,500 homes, with a mixed and 
intensive use of land and assisted by good public transport accessibility  
Main town centre 
uses  Retail development (including wa rehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); 
leisure, entertainment and more intensive sport and recreation uses (including 
cinemas, restaurants, drive -through restaurants, bars and pubs, night -clubs, 
casinos, health  
and fitness centres, indoor bowling centr es, and bingo halls); offices; and arts, 
culture and tourism development (including theatres, museums, galleries and 
concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).  
Major Development  Development involving any one or more of the following:  
(a) the winning and working of minerals or the use of land for mineral -working  
deposits;  
(b) waste development;  
(c) the provision of dwelling -houses where -  
(i) the number of dwelling -houses to be provided is 10 or more; or  
(ii) the development is to be carried ou t on a site having an area of 0.5  
hectares or more and it is not known whether the development falls within  paragraph (c)(i);  
(d) the provision of a building or buildings where the floor space to be created 
by 
the development is 1,000 square metres or more ; or 
(e) development carried out on a site having an area of 1 hectare or more.  
Material 
consideration  A matter that should be taken into account in deciding a planning application 
or on an  appeal against a planning decision.  
Metropolitan Open 
Land (MOL )  Extensive areas of land bounded by urban development around London that 
fulfils a similar function to Green Belt and is protected from inappropriate 
development by land -use planning policies.  
Mixed -use 
development  A well -integrated mix of land uses (retail, employment, leisure and other 
service uses) with decent homes of different types and tenures to support a 
range of household sizes, ages and incomes.  
Monitoring 
indicators  Generally , include three types of indicators: contextual indicators, outpu t 
indicators and local indicators including significant effects indicators. 
Contextual indicators provide the background information of the Borough such 
as population, ethnic composition, crime statistics, local history/distinctiveness 
etc. Output indicato rs are used to measure policy targets. Some local 
indicators as significant effects indicators measure the significant effects of the 
plan or programme along with sustainability appraisal objectives. Some 
indicators reflecting cross -cutting issues (for exa mple crime figures) provide 
valuable information to help identify any unintended and unforeseen 
consequences. Getting continual feedback from monitoring indicators will 
enable the Council to identify the necessary action to attain the desired 
outcomes.  
Nature conservation  Protection, management and promotion for the benefit of wild  
species and habitats, as well as the human communities that use and enjoy 
them. This also covers the creation and re -creation of wildlife habitats and the 
techniques that protect genetic diversity and can be used to include geological 
conservation.  
National Planning 
Policy 
Framework (NPPF) This sets out the Governments requirements on planning policy for  
England and how it expects them to be applied.  
National Planning 
Practice Guidance 
(NPPG)  Planning practice guidance published to help explain how the national 
planning policy framework should be applied.  
Natura 2000 
network  The European network of protected sites established under the Birds Directive 
and Habitats Directive (includes SPA, SAC, Ramsar).  
Neighbourhood Plan  A statutory plan prepared by a neighbourhood forum that  
introduces non -strategic planning policies in a designated neighbourhood 
area.  
North London 
Waste Authority  North London’s statutory waste disposal authority. The NLWA’s main function 
is to arrange the disposal of waste collected by its seven constituent boroughs. 
These boroughs are: Barnet, Camd en, Enfield, Hackney, Haringey, Islington and 
Waltham Forest.  
North London 
Waste Plan   The Waste Development Plan Document being produced for north London. 
Also referred to as the Waste Development Plan Document.  
 
Open space  
 All land in London that is predominantly undeveloped other than by buildings 
or structures that are ancillary to the open space use. The definition covers the 
broad range of types of open space within London, whether in public or private ownership and whet her public access is unrestricted, limited or 
restricted.  
 
Opportunity Areas  
 London’s principal opportunities for accommodating large scale development 
to provide substantial numbers of new employment and housing, each 
typically more than 5,000 jobs and/or 2,500 homes, with a mixed and 
intensive use of land and assisted by good public transport accessibility.  
Permitted 
Development (or  
Permitted 
Development  
Rights)  Permission to carry out certain limited forms of development without the  
need to make a n application to a local planning authority, as granted under  
the terms of the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted  
Development) Order.  
Permissive paths  Paths over which the public do not have a right of way but over which 
permission has been given to the public to use them.  
Permeability  The degree to which an area has a variety of pleasant, convenient and safe 
routes through it.  
Planning and 
Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004 National planning legislation from central government aimed at improving the 
planning process and enhancing community involvement in it. Visit 
https ://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department -for-communities -
and-local -government . 
The Regulations for 
the Planning & 
Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004 
 Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 set 
out the public participation  and consultation required when preparing and 
revising a local plan. Regulations 18, 19, 20 relate to informal and formal 
consultations for Stage 2 of local plan preparation. Regulation 24 relates to 
Stage 3 or independent examination of the document.  
Planning guidance  Non -statutory strategy and policy documents which inform or amplify policies 
in planning policy at the local level. These will include old style supplementary 
planning guidance, supplementary planning documents prepared under the 
new plannin g system and set out in the council’s local development 
scheme/local plan delivery programme, town centre strategies, parish plans, 
design guidance, concept statements, site development briefs and master 
plans. These will normally be prepared by the counci l, or endorsed by it where 
they are prepared by third parties.  
Planning condition  A requirement attached to a planning permission to limit, control or direct the 
manner in  which a development is carried out.  
Planning 
performance 
agreement (PPA)  A project management tool which sets timescales for actions between the 
local planning authority and an applicant. It should cover the pre- application 
and application stages but may also extend through to the post -application 
stage. A planning performance agreement provides greater certainty and 
transparency in the process for determining a large and/or complex planning 
application and can help to ensure that a clear and efficient process is in place 
for dealing with an application.  
Planning 
obligation/fi nancial 
contribution  Requirements made of a developer to make planning permission acceptable. 
This could include matters such as the provision of affordable housing as part 
of the scheme, or a financial contribution towards off site works such as 
highway improvements.  
 Previously 
developed land 
(PDL)  Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the 
curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the 
whole of the curtilage should be developed) and any associate d fixed surface 
infrastructure. This excludes:  
 
land that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry buildings; land that 
has been developed for minerals extraction or waste disposal by landfill 
purposes where provision for restoration has been made through 
development control procedures; land in built -up areas such as private 
residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments; and land that 
was previously -developed but where the remains of the permanent structure 
or fixed surface stru cture have blended into the landscape in the process of 
time.  
Policies Map  The Policies Map (formally called the Proposals Map) illustrates all site -specific 
policies  
in all Local Plan documents in map form.  
Public House  The licensed premises must be ope n to and welcome the public without 
requiring membership or residency, allow free entry (1), serve at least one 
draught beer or cider (2), allow drinking without requiring food to be 
consumed, have at least one indoor area not laid out for meals, and permi t 
drinks to be purchased in person at  
a bar (3), without relying on table service.’  
1) Except when entertainment is provided on limited occasions  
2) Includes cask or keg beer or cider. References to 'cider' should be read as 
'cider  
and perry'  
3) Includes a lso a hatch or specific service point  
Public realm  The space between and within buildings that is publicly accessible,  
including streets, squares, forecourts, parks and open spaces.  
Public Transport 
Accessibility Level 
(PTAL)  Public Transport Accessibility Levels are a measure of the extent and ease of 
access to the public transport network. They range from 6 (excellent) through 
to 1 (very poor).  
RAMSAR Site  Wetlands of international importance designated under the Ramsar  
Convention  
Recycling  Involves the reprocessing of waste, either into the same product or a different 
one. Many non -hazardous wastes such as paper, glass, cardboard, plastics and 
metals can be recycled. Hazardous wastes such as solvents can also be 
recycled by specia list companies, or by in -house equipment.  
Renewable energy  Energy derived from a source that is continually replenished, such as wind, 
wave, solar, hydroelectric and energy from plant material, but not fossil fuels 
or nuclear energy.  
 
Stakeholder  A person, group, company, association, etc. with an economic, professional or 
community interest in the district or specific part of it, or that is affected by 
local developments.  
Section 106 
agreements  Confer planning obligations on persons with an interes t in 
land in order to achieve the implementation of relevant planning policies as 
authorised by section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. 
Secured by design  police flagship initiative supporting the principles of designing out crime; e.g. 
windows and doors that carry secured by design approval and have been 
assesses to provide a high degree of resistance to break -ins. Sequential 
approach/sequential 
testing  Planning policies that require particular steps to be taken, or types of location 
or sites to be considered, in a particular order of preference. For example, 
retail, commercial and leisure development should be focused on sites within 
town centres, or if no in -centre sites are available, on sites on the edges of 
centres that are or can be well integrated with the existing centre and public 
transport.  
Scheduled Ancient  
Monuments  (Class 1 Archaeological Areas) – Archaeological remains which enjoy  
special protection by virtue of being scheduled under the Ancient  
Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979.  
Sites of Importance 
Nature Conservation  A non -statutory designation that seeks to protect areas of high wildlife value 
at a local level.  
Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest 
(SSSI)  Land considered to be of special interest due to its fl ora, fauna, geological or 
geographical features under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (amended 
in 1985).  
Site Allocation  A Development Plan Document identifying sites for specific types of land use 
and any requirements related to them.  
Small and M edium 
Enterprise (SME)  Business with more than 10 and less than 250 employees.  
Social infrastructure  A wide variety of services that are essential to the sustainability and wellbeing 
of a community. This includes educational facilities, health services, sports and 
leisure facilities, libraries, jobs brokerage centres, community space and faith 
facilities, cultural facilities and meeting rooms, halls and pubs.  
Social rented 
housing  Rented housing owned and managed by local authorities and registered social 
landlords, for which guideline targets rents are determined through the 
national rent regime.  
Soundness  What does a ‘soundness test’ include?  
(a) Positively prepared;  
(b) Justified;  
(c) Effective; and 
(d) Consistent with National Policy.  
 
For furth er details see: https://www.gov.uk/guidance/national -planning-
policy -framework/3 -plan -making  
Spatial development  Refers to changes in the distribution of activities and the  
linkages between them in terms of the use and development of land  
  
Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC)  A site defined in the European Union's Habitats Directive (92/43/EEC), also 
known as the Directive on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and of Wild 
Fauna and Flora to protect habitats and species.  
Special Protection 
Area  
(SPA)  Areas which have been identified by the European Commission as being of  
international importance for certain breeding, feeding, wintering or  
migration of rare and vulnerable species of bird populations found within  
the EU countries. They have sta tutory protection under the EC Directive for  
the Conservation of Wild Birds 79/409.  
Specialist housing  Housing which meets the specialised housing needs of groups such as the 
elderly and disabled people.  
Statement of 
Community 
Involvement  sets out the processes to be used by the local authority in involving the 
community in the preparation, alteration and continuing review of all local 
development documents and development control decisions.  Statement of 
compliance  The statement of compliance must be s ubmitted to the secretary of state at 
submission stage. It sets out how the statement of community involvement 
has been followed in the preparation of the document, the main issues raised 
and how these have been addressed.  
Statutory bodies  These include appropriate ‘Specific, Government and General’ consultation 
bodies in accordance with Regulation 25 of the Town and Country Planning Act 
2004 Regulations.  
Strategic 
Environmental 
Assessment and 
Sustainability 
Appraisal (SEA/SA)  A generic term used intern ationally to describe environmental assessment as 
applied to policies, plans and programmes. 
Strategic Industrial 
Location/Land (SIL)  An industrial area identified in the London Plan as being of strategic 
importance for industrial, logistics and related employment uses that support 
the functioning of London's economy.  
Sui generis uses  Uses which do not fall within any Use Class, including scrap yards, petrol filling 
stations, nightclubs, taxi businesses, and casinos, as defined under the Town 
and Country  Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and its subsequent 
amendments. 
yards, petrol filling stations, nightclubs, taxi businesses, and casinos, as defined 
under the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 and its 
subsequent amendments.  
Supplementar y 
Planning Documents  A Supplementary Planning Document is a Local Development Document that 
may provide further explanation or elaboration of policies contained in a 
‘parent’ Development Plan Document.  
Sustainable 
communities  Places where people want to l ive and work, now and in the future.  
Sustainable 
development  A widely used definition drawn up by the World Commission on Environment 
and Development: "Development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generation s to meet their own needs.  
Sustainable drainage 
systems (SuDS)  A sequence of water management practices and facilities designed to 
drain surface water in a manner that will provide a more sustainable 
approach than the conventional practice of routing run- off through a 
pipe to a watercourse.  
Sustainable 
development  Development that meets the needs of the present  
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs.  
Sustainability 
Appraisal (SA)  A systematic process, required by the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 
2004 and incorporating the requirements of the SEA Directive, aimed at 
appraising the social, environmental and economic effects of plan strategies 
and policies and ensuring that they accord with the objectives o f sustainable 
development.  
Supplementary 
planning document 
(SPD)  A local development document that has not been subject to independent 
testing and does not have the weight of development plan status. SPDs 
replace supplementary planning guidance that was p art of the old planning 
system. SPDs also help to amplify the policies contained in development plan 
documents.  
Townscape  The configuration of buildings and the space between them.  
Town centre  Areas defined in the local plan occupied by Main Town Centre uses providing a 
range of commercial, cultural, and civic activities, including shopping, leisure, 
entertainment, culture and social and community facilities.  Transport for 
London (TfL)   One of the GLA group of organisations, accountable to the Ma yor, with 
responsibility for delivering an integrated and sustainable transport strategy 
for London.  
Tree preservation 
order (TPO)  Usually made by a local planning authority to protect specific trees (or a 
particular woodland) from deliberate damage and destruction, which could 
include felling, lopping, topping, uprooting or otherwise wilful damage.  
Trees of value  Trees that have the capacity to deliver eco -system benefits in the  
form of absorbing carbon dioxide (the main greenhouse gas) and producing 
oxygen and to filter, absorb and reduce other pollutant gasses including 
sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide and ozone. To achieve 
improved air quality, trees of value will have large deciduous canopies or have 
the potential to develop such in  
the future.  
Urban greening  The process of providing appropriate types of green infrastructure,  
such as green roofs and street trees, in urban areas.  
Use Classes Order  The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order puts uses of land and 
buildings in to various categories. Planning permission is not needed for 
changes of use within the same use class.  
Viability appraisal  An assessment of the financial viability of a development to  
determine the maximum level of affordable housing and other policy 
requirements that can be provided.  
Viability review 
mechanism  A review of development viability defined within a section 106 agreement 
enabling the reassessment of development viability after  
permission has been granted, at an early, mid or late stage in the development 
process. These mechanisms address uncertainties in the application stage 
assessment of viability to enable the maximum level of affordable housing 
provision of the lifetime of a proposal.  
Windfall housing  Is generally any residential deve lopment that is given planning permission on 
land or buildings not specifically allocated for residential development in LDF.  
Work -live space  The flexible use of buildings and space to allow both functions  
within them . 
Water space  Blue/water space.  
Zero -carbon  Activity that causes no net release of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas 
emissions into the atmosphere.  
Zero -emission  Activity that causes no release of air pollutants and carbon dioxide or other 
greenhouse gases.  
 