 Official 
 
 
 
 
 
Richmond Local Plan ‘The best for our borough’                                
Draft for consultation  
Planning  
10 December 2021 
 
Pre-Publication Regulation 18 Consultation Version  
For Public Consultation until 31 January 2022 
Richmond Local Plan ‘The best f or our bor ough’  Draft f or consultation
1 1Fore word (TBC)
2 2Introduction
9 3Vision and Strategic Objectives
16 4Spatial Strategy , Place-based Strategies and Site Allocations
25 5Places
28 6Place-based Strategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
41 7Place-based Strategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
53 8Place-based Strategy f or Twickenham,  Stra wberr y Hill & St Mar garets
76 9Place-based Strategy f or Whitton & Heathfield
85 10Place-based Strategy f or Ham,  Petersham & Ric hmond P ark
93 11Place-based Strategy f or Ric hmond & Ric hmond Hill
110 12Place-based Strategy f or Kew
122 13Place-based Strategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
135 14Place-based Strategy f or Barnes
138 15Policies
139 16Responding to the c limate emer gency and taking action
166 17Delivering ne w homes and an aff ordable bor ough f or all
18918Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to c hang es in the wa y we
shop and respond to the pandemic
203 19Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to gr ow and bouncebac k following the pandemic
219 20Protecting what is special and impr oving our areas (herita ge and culture)
23521Increasing biodiver sity and the quality of our green and b lue spaces,  and greening the bor ough
266 22Impr oving design,  delivering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places
278 23Reducing the need to tra vel and impr oving the c hoices f or more sustainab le tra vel
289 24Securing ne w social and comm unity infrastructure to suppor t a gr owing population
299 25Creating saf e, health y and inc lusive comm unities
314 26Deliver y and Monitoring
316 27AppendicesContents
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policies
16 Policy 1.  Living Locally and the 20-min ute neighbourhood (Str ategic P olicy)
19 Policy 2.  Spatial Str ategy:  Managing change in the borough (Str ategic P olicy)
140 Policy 3. Tackling the climate emergency (Str ategic P olicy)
142Policy 4.  Minimising Greenhouse gas emissions and promoting energy efficiency (Str ategic P olicy)
145 Policy 5.  Energy Infr astructure (Str ategic P olicy)
147 Policy 6.  Sustainab le constr uction standards
150 Policy 7. Waste and the circular econom y (Str ategic P olicy)
153 Policy 8.  Flood r isk and sustainab le drainage (Str ategic P olicy)
163 Policy 9. Water resources and infr astructure (Str ategic P olicy)
166 Policy 10.  New Housing (Str ategic P olicy)
168 Policy 11.  Affordab le Housing (Str ategic P olicy)
173 Policy 12.  Housing Needs of Diff erent Groups
177 Policy 13.  Housing Mix and Standards
180 Policy 14.  Loss of Housing
182 Policy 15.  Infill and Bac kland De velopment
184 Policy 16.  Small Sites
189 Policy 17:  Suppor ting our centres and promoting culture (Str ategic P olicy)
193 Policy 18.  Development in centres
197 Policy 19.  Managing impacts
200 Policy 20.  Local shops and ser vices
203 Policy 21.  Protecting the Local Econom y (Str ategic P olicy)
205 Policy 22.  Promoting jobs and our local econom y
207 Policy 23.  Offices
210 Policy 24.  Industr ial land
213 Policy 25.  Affordab le, flexible and managed w orkspace
215 Policy 26. Visitor econom y
217 Policy 27. Telecomm unications and digital infr astructure (Str ategic P olicy)
219 Policy 28.  Local char acter and design quality (Str ategic P olicy)
224 Policy 29.  Designated her itage assets
228 Policy 30.  Non-designated her itage assets
229 Policy 31. Views and vistas
230 Policy 32.  Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew World Her itage Site
233 Policy 33.  Archaeology
235 Policy 34.  Green and Blue Infr astructure (Str ategic P olicy)
238 Policy 35.  Green Belt, Metropolitan Open Land and Local Green Space
241 Policy 36.  Other Open Land of Townscape Impor tance (OOL TI)
242 Policy 37.  Public open space , play, spor t and recreation
249 Policy 38.  Urban Greening
252 Policy 39.  Biodiv ersity and Geodiv ersity
257 Policy 40.  Rivers and r iver corr idors
260 Policy 41.  Moor ings and floating str uctures
261 Policy 42. Trees, Woodland and LandscapeContents
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18264 Policy 43.  Floodlighting and other e xternal ar tificial lighting
266 Policy 44.  Design Process
268 Policy 45. Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones
274 Policy 46.  Amenity and living conditions
278 Policy 47.  Sustainab le travel choices (Str ategic P olicy)
284Policy 48. Vehicular P arking standards , Cycle P arking, Ser vicing and Constr uction Logistics
Management
289 Policy 49.  Social and Comm unity Infr astructure (Str ategic P olicy)
294 Policy 50.  Education and Training (Str ategic P olicy)
299 Policy 51.  Health and Wellbeing (Str ategic P olicy)
303 Policy 52.  Allotments and f ood g rowing spaces
304 Policy 53.  Local En vironmental impacts
309 Policy 54.  Basements and subterr anean de velopments
314 Policy 55.  Deliv ery and Monitor ingContents
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 181 Fore word (TBC)
1.1 To be added later in the prepar ation of the
Plan process .
1Foreword (TBC) 1
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 182 Intr oduction
Setting the Scene
2.1 The Council’ s new Local Plan will set out
policies and guidance f or the de velopment of
the borough o ver the ne xt 15 y ears, from the
date of its adoption. The de velopment of this
Local Plan f orms an impor tant stage in the
process in de veloping a ne w Local Plan
known as the Regulation 18 stage or
pre-pub lication v ersion.  Its de velopment has
been inf ormed b y a ‘Direction of Travel’ public
consultation which w as under taken in spr ing
2020.
2.2 This dr aft Local Plan sets out the Council’ s
proposed vision, objectiv es and spatial
strategy . It includes place-based str ategies ,
site allocations and policies which will suppor t
the deliv ery of the Plan’ s vision and objectiv es
and spatial str ategy . It identifies where
development will tak e place and ho w places
within the borough will change .
2.3 The ne w Local Plan will f orm par t of the
development plan f or the borough.  Following
this consultation, the Council will mak e
changes to the Plan, where appropr iate, and
will then pub lish the Regulation 19 v ersion of
the Plan that it intends to submit to the
Secretar y of State f or Examination, and seek
representations on it.  An Examination in
Public will then be under taken by an
independent Inspector appointed b y the
Secretar y of State bef ore it can be adopted
by the Council. The London Plan, prepared
by the Ma yor of London, also f orms par t of
the de velopment plan, and the ne w Local
Plan has to be in gener al conf ormity with it.
2.4 The role of the de velopment plan is to guide
decision making on planning applications and
inform investment in social and ph ysical
infrastructure .The Planning and Compulsor y
Purchase Act 2004 requires that “... for the
purpose of making an y deter mination under
the planning Acts , the deter mination m ust be
made in accordance with the plan unless
mater ial consider ations indicate otherwise”.
2.5 This dr aft Local Plan is in accordance with
national policy b y applying a presumption in
favour of sustainab le de velopment and thepolicies contained within it sho w ho w this is
expressed locally .The Council will ensure
that planning applications that accord with
policies in the adopted Local Plan and the
London Plan will be appro ved without dela y,
unless mater ial consider ations indicate
otherwise .
2.6 The dr aft Local Plan has been prepared
within the conte xt of a hier archical fr amework
of planning legislation and policy f or England.
At the top of the hier archy are a n umber of
planning related Acts of P arliament and
Statutor y Instr uments , the National Planning
Policy F ramework 2021 (NPPF) which sets
out Go vernment’ s planning policies f or
England and ho w these should be applied,
and the Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG).
Local author ities m ust tak e the NPPF into
account when prepar ing Local Plans .This
means in pr actical ter ms that the Council
should f ollow national policy unless there is
local e vidence and circumstances that w ould
justify a diff erent approach.
2.7 Below national policy sits the London Plan,
which is prepared b y the Ma yor of London.
The Greater London A uthor ity (GLA) Act 1999
requires the Local Plan to be in ‘gener al
conformity’ with the London Plan. This means
that the Local Plan should be in line with the
London Plan 2021, unless there is local
evidence and circumstances that w ould justify
a diff erent approach. The London Plan f orms
part of the de velopment plan f or the borough
and pro vides the spatial de velopment str ategy
for Greater London.
2.8 It is ac knowledged that dur ing the lif etime of
this Plan, national policies , guidance and
other legislation will be pub lished. This ma y
be ab le to be tak en into account dur ing the
prepar ation of the Plan.  Gener ally where this
Plan ref ers to pub lications that are
subsequently superseded b y updated
policies , guidance or changes to legislation,
the updated conte xt will be regarded as
mater ial consider ations .
2.9 The ne w Local Plan is anticipated to be
adopted in 2024, at which point it will
supersede the e xisting Local Plan (2018) and
the Twickenham Area Action Plan (2013).
The West London Waste Plan (2015) and the
22  Introduction
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Ham & P etersham Neighbourhood Plan
(2019) will not be superseded b y the ne w
Local Plan.
Preparing the Local Plan
2.10 Although the Richmond Local Plan had only
been adopted in J uly 2018, commencing a
new Local Plan w as ag reed in 2019 in the
conte xt of changes in national and regional
policy and guidance , including a re vised
National Planning P olicy F ramework (NPPF)
(2019) and changes to the London Plan. The
climate emergency and g rowing population
were also identified as reasons wh y a ne w
Local Plan w as needed.
2.11 The ‘Direction of Travel’ public consultation
was under taken dur ing F ebruary to Apr il
2020. This w as an additional ear ly stage of
consultation not prescr ibed in the Local
Planning Regulations , providing the
oppor tunity f or ear ly engagement with
interested par ties and enab led Duty to
Co-oper ate bodies , key stak eholders , national
and local organisations , developers ,
lando wners and the local comm unity to
comment.  As par t of this consultation, a Call
for Sites from the comm unity w as requested.
2.12 The Council receiv ed 89 responses . All of
these responses ha ve been considered as
part of the prepar ation of the Pre-Pub lication
version of the Local Plan.  A record of all the
responses receiv ed and a summar y of the
comments made are a vailab le to vie w on the
Council’ s website at www .richmond.go v.uk/
new_local_plan_direction_of_
travel_engagement
2.13 The NPPF requires Local Plans to include
strategic policies to address pr iorities f or the
development and use of land. The str ategic
policies of this Local Plan are as f ollows:
Policy 1.  Living Locally and the 20-
minute neighbourhood
Policy 2.  Spatial Str ategy:  Managing the
scale and location of change in the
borough
Policy 3. Tackling the climate emergency
Policy 4.  Minimising Greenhouse gas
emissions and promoting energy
efficiency
Policy 5.  Energy Infr astructure
Policy 7. Waste and the circular
econom y
Policy 8.  Flood r isk and sustainab le
drainage
Policy 9. Water resources and
infrastructure
Policy 10.  New Housing
Policy 11.  Affordab le Housing
Policy 17:  Suppor ting our centres and
promoting culture
Policy 21.  Protecting the Local Econom y
Policy 27. Telecomm unications and
digital infr astructure
Policy 28.  Local char acter and design
quality
Policy 34.  Green and Blue Infr astructure
Policy 47.  Sustainab le travel choices
Policy 49.  Social and Comm unity
Infrastructure
Policy 50.  Education and Training
Policy 51.  Health and Wellbeing
2.14 Public consultation on this Pre-Pub lication
version is to be carr ied out from 10 December
2021 to 31 J anuary 2022. This is in
accordance with the requirements of
Regulation 18 of the Town and Countr y
Planning (Local Planning) Regulations 2012
and the Council’ s adopted Statement of
Comm unity In volvement.
2.15 The timetab le for the de velopment of the ne w
Local Plan is set out in the Council’ s Local
Development Scheme and is summar ised in
the tab le belo w:
3Introduction 2
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18When What
Spring 2020 (completed) Informal consultation on vision, objectiv es, spatial
strategy , and issues , alongside consultation on
Sustainability Appr aisal (SA) Scoping Repor t and
Call f or Sites consultation
10 December  2021 – 31 J anuary 2022 Pre-pub lication consultation on dr aft plan and
consultation on the dr aft Plan and SA (Regulation
18)
Autumn 2022 Publication consultation on the Council's final
version of the Plan and final SA repor t (Regulation
19)
Spring 2023 Submission of the Council's final v ersion of the Plan
to the Secretar y of State
Autumn 2023 Independent Examination in Pub lic
Autumn 2024 Adoption of the Local Plan
Table 2.1 Local Plan Timetab le
2.16 The Go vernment announced in 2020 a wide
range of proposals f or the ref orm of the
planning system, including fundamental
changes as to ho w Local Plans are prepared.
However, the Go vernment’ s Chief Planner
has also advised local author ities that the y
should not let uncer tainties stop them from
progressing on the de velopment of Local
Plans . Any reforms will be subject to pr imary
legislation and as y et the timetab le and future
approach is not theref ore cer tain.
2.17 Policy update :The En vironment Act 2021
became la w on 10 No vember 2021. The
change in legislation and resulting
requirements from the ne w Act, as applicab le,
will be reflected in the Regulation 19 v ersion
of the Local Plan.
Consultation on this Plan and associated
documents
2.18 The f ollowing documents are a vailable on the
Council’ s website 
https://www .richmond.go v.uk/draft_local_plan_pre_pub lication_v ersion:
1. Pre-Pub lication Local Plan (this
document) : this sets out the vision,
objectiv es, spatial str ategy , draft
place-based str ategies , Site Allocations
and policies to guide futuredevelopment. Where rele vant, it
indicates the proposed changes to the
Policies Map . (The e xisting P olicies Map
(reflecting the Local Plan adopted in J uly
2018 and March 2020) is as descr ibed
on the Council’ s Policies Map w ebpage
www .richmond.go v.uk/policies
_map_f or_local_plan_re view _2015_18  )
2. Sustainability Appraisal of the
Pre-Pub lication Local Plan : this sets
out ho w the economic , environmental
and social eff ects that ma y arise from
the Local Plan (f or the place-based
strategies , site allocations and policies)
have been assessed and tak en account
of.
2.19 The f ollowing suppor ting documents and
background papers , which are a vailab le on
the Council's w ebsite 
https://www .richmond.go v.uk/draft_local_plan_pre_pub lication_v ersion
, are also made a vailab le alongside the main
consultation documents:
Habitats Regulations Assessment
(HRA) : this estab lishes whether the dr aft
Local Plan, alone , or in combination with
other plans or projects , is lik ely to ha ve
a significant eff ect on an inter national /
European nature conser vation site , i.e.
42  Introduction
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Special Protection Areas (SP A), Special
Areas of Conser vation (SA C) or Ramsar
sites. If this is the case , then the impacts
on the integ rity of the site m ust be
considered b y an Appropr iate
Assessment. This document sets out
the findings of the Screening
Assessment as w ell as the Appropr iate
Assessment f or the emerging Richmond
Local Plan.
Equalities Impact Needs Assessment
(EINA) : this assesses the dr aft Local
Plan against protected equalities
character istics .The assessment has
been under taken to ensure that an y
potential negativ e equalities
consequences ar ising out of the dr aft
Local Plan ha ve been considered and,
where possib le, remo ved or minimised
so that oppor tunities f or promoting
equality and div ersity are maximised.
Health Impact Assessment (HIA) : this
sets out the findings of the assessment
of the health and w ellbeing impacts of
the dr aft policies and site allocations .
Updated local e vidence :This includes
new updated e vidence on the Urban
Design Study 2021, Open Land Re view
(Green Belt, MOL, LGS and OOL TI)
2021, Local Housing Needs Assessment
2021 (stage 1), Emplo yment Land &
Premises Needs Assessment 2021,
Retail & Leisure Needs Study 2021
(phase 1), Str ategic Flood Risk
Assessment (2020), Flood Risk
Sequential Test (2021) and Re view of
Sites of Impor tance f or Nature
Conser vation (2021).
Strategic Conte xt and Trends
2.20 The borough is f acing a n umber of k ey
challenges , oppor tunities and cr itical planning
issues . In addition, the dr aft Plan has been
prepared dur ing the challenging times of the
COVID-19 pandemic which caused dr amatic
changes in the shor t-term, and an uncer tainty
about ho w beha viour al and societal change
may alter in the medium to long ter m.Our place in London
2.21 The borough co vers an area of 5,095
hectares (14,591 acres) in southw est London.
We are bordered b y four London Boroughs
(Kingston, Hounslo w, Wands worth and
Hammersmith & Fulham) and share a
boundar y with Surre y (Elmbr idge and
Spelthor ne Boroughs). Together with
Croydon, Kingston, Mer ton and Sutton, w e
are par t of the South London P artnership ,
which f ocuses on shaping sustainab le growth
across the sub-region.
2.22 We value our special and unique natur al and
histor ic en vironment. We pla y a significant
role in pro viding oppor tunities f or recreation,
sport, culture and tour ism for not only those
who liv e and w ork in this borough, b ut also
for those from neighbour ing and other London
boroughs .
2.23 We cannot act in isolation and theref ore w ork
hand in hand with comm unities and local
partners . Our par tner organisations and
agencies include those within the pub lic
sector , business , comm unity, voluntar y and
faith sectors .We also w ork closely together
with neighbour ing boroughs as w ell as the
Mayor of London, the Greater London
Author ity (GLA) and Transpor t for London
(TfL), par ticular ly where issues cross borough
boundar ies.
The bor ough toda y, and what we kno w about a
growing and c hanging population in the future
2.24 The borough is prosperous , safe and health y.
The borough’ s residents are e xpected to g row
and change , with an ageing population.  A
strong dr iver of recent population g rowth is
natur al change , along with net inter national
migration, according to the latest
boroughwide housing research, with a notab le
level of net inter nal out mig ration to other
parts of the UK.
2.25 The borough is an attr active location f or
families . As Richmond has the highest house
prices in Outer London (which is the g roup
of London Boroughs that f orm a r ing around
Inner London boroughs), w e expect that
residents do mo ve outw ards from London,
often related to lif e stage (f amily f ormation
5Introduction 2
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18due to parenthood, marr iage, cohabitation)
and affluence (their financial resources) –
either mo ving from the pr ivate rented sector
into o wner occupation (first time b uyers) into
relativ ely less e xpensiv e areas or those
already in o wner occupation mo ving into
larger f amily siz ed proper ties.
2.26 The challenge is to suppor t a changing and
ageing population.  A key focus will be
understanding ho w we can suppor t the health
and w ellbeing of people , and the potential
impacts of an ageing population on adult
health and social care pro vision.
2.27 A large propor tion of the borough’ s workforce
population is emplo yed in highly skilled jobs .
The borough’ s econom y benefits tr aditionally
from the presence of outside w orkers through
their spend in the local econom y. Although
around half of those who w ork in the borough
also liv e in the borough, there are also strong
comm uting flo ws in and out, although the
impact of the CO VID-19 pandemic on
long-ter m trends is unclear – on diff erent
sectors and patter ns of remote w orking. The
connectivity to Heathro w and centr al London
by pub lic and pr ivate tr anspor t is an asset,
also suppor ting those comm uting out f or
work. Education attainment le vels are the
highest amongst the Outer London boroughs ,
as is g ross w eekly pa y.While o verall
deprivation le vels in the borough are lo w,
there are also poc kets of relativ e
disadv antage around Castelnau, Ham,
Hampton Nurser y Lands , Heathfield, Mor tlake
and Whitton.  However, with such a highly
skilled local w orkforce in prof essional and
manager ial jobs and a large amount of
self-emplo yed, as one of the most
entrepreneur ial boroughs in the countr y, there
is scope to adapt and f ace the post pandemic
challenges with a strong local economic
recovery.
2.28 The borough’ s unique char acter istics are an
asset, b ut also a constr aint.We are the only
London Borough spanning both sides of the
River Thames , and the area is interspersed
with open space , linked by roads and
interw oven by railways.This deter mines the
character and connectivity of the area, as w ell
as the nature of the population and w orkforce,
with distinct v ariations across the borough.2.29 More than tw o thirds of the borough is
protected b y either open space or
conser vation area status .There are open
spaces including histor ic landscapes such as
Richmond and Bush y Parks and the Old Deer
Park, the Riv er Thames and the Riv er Cr ane
corridors and other tr ibutaries.The Arcadian
Thames landscape r uns through the borough,
and is the setting of a n umber of par ks,
palaces , towpaths , open spaces and places
of cultur al and histor ic impor tance;  the area
is also one of high archaeological potential.
2.30 In addition to the par ks and open spaces ,
visitors come to major attr actors within the
borough such as Ro yal Botanic Gardens
Kew, Hampton Cour t Palace , the Wildf owl
and Wetland Centre in Bar nes, the Rugb y
Football Union at Twickenham and other
sporting v enues.The Ro yal Botanic Gardens
Kew are one of only f our World Her itage Sites
in Greater London.  Appro ximately 4.5 million
tourists visit the borough e very year,
gener ating an income of £200m.
2.31 The largest to wn centre is Richmond;  there
are also f our large to wn centres at
Twickenham, Teddington, East Sheen and
Whitton and man y smaller centres and local
parades .The borough is pr imarily residential
in char acter , interspersed with some locations
for commercial and industr ial uses , including
riverside industr ies such as y ards f or building
and repair ing small cr afts.
2.32 The constr aints mean that land v alues are
high and oppor tunities f or ne w development
are limited.  Finding space to accommodate
needs is difficult, whether it be f or jobs ,
comm unity uses , or ne w housing. The
scarcity of land pushes pr ices e ven higher ,
and aff ordability is a par ticular concer n. As
the most e xpensiv e Outer London borough
to buy and rent, and with relativ ely few social
homes , residents f ace par ticular challenges
– the difficulties of finding ne w sites f or
affordab le housing has e xacerbated
pressures o ver time , affecting the most
vulner able in our comm unities including rough
sleepers and older residents .
62  Introduction
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Responding to a c hanging en vironment
2.33 In summer 2019, w e declared a climate
emergency and adopted our Climate
Emergency Str ategy in J anuary 2020, f orming
one of the k ey drivers for change in this Local
Plan. We are committed to taking rob ust
action to tac kle the local and global threat of
climate change to the people and the
borough, both inter nally and in par tnership
with local organisations and residents .We
want to minimise our en vironmental impact
by cutting carbon and other emissions , waste
and pollution.  For Richmond’ s long-ter m
sustainability and prosper ity, we need to
ensure that the borough is prepared f or the
adverse impacts of climate change ,
particular ly those resulting from e xtreme
weather e vents such as heat w aves, droughts
and flooding.
2.34 Official data from the Depar tment f or
Business , Energy and Industr ial Str ategy
(BEIS) pro vides a reliab le longter m
measurement of some of our emissions .The
data collected co vers fuel use such as gas ,
electr icity, as w ell as petrol/diesel use in
vehicles in the borough. This pro vides us with
a picture of direct and energy indirect
emissions f or the borough, b ut does not
provide a full picture as it doesn’t include
emissions link ed to flying, or from w aste, or
from the products w e buy and consume .
2.35 The BEIS data sho ws that carbon emissions
from the borough as a whole ha ve reduced
from 1035.7 kilotons of CO2 (ktCO2) in 2005
to 617.3 ktCO2 in 2018, a reduction of 40.4%.
When looking at per capita emissions (the
amount of CO2 per person in the borough)
we have gone from 5.7 tons per person in
2005 to 3.1 tons per person in 2018, a
reduction of 45%.  In the last 5 y ears, from
2014 to 2018, total emissions ha ve reduced
by 18.6% and per capita emissions ha ve
reduced b y 20%. The major ity of these
emission reductions ha ve come from
electr icity usage (65% of total reductions
since 2005), which is link ed to the
decarbonisation of the electr icity g rid and the
shift to rene wable energy gener ation
nationally .2.36 Half of total borough emissions (50%) come
from domestic sources , which means the
electr icity and gas use in homes , with 22.6%
coming from industr y and commerce and
27.4% coming from tr anspor t. Of domestic
carbon emissions , near ly three quar ters
(73.7%) comes from gas use f or heating and
cooking, which highlights the impor tance in
impro ving the energy efficiency of homes in
the borough and mo ving from using gas to
heat our homes and to wards m uch wider use
of heat pumps as a source of heating.
2.37 The Council’ s carbon emissions (direct and
energy indirect) are only a small par t (around
2%) of the carbon emissions that w e produce
as a whole borough. The Council’ s latest
carbon emissions data sho w an o verall
decrease in emissions of 6.92% from 2018/19
to 2019/2020 and a decrease of 15.45% from
2017/18 to 2019/20.
2.38 The challenge to respond to climate change
is theref ore influenced b y land uses and the
type and location of ne w development, b ut
also per meates into man y aspects of
sustainab le place-making – f or example
through tr avel patter ns, the impor tance of
open spaces , biodiv ersity and trees , and
managing w ater and w aste resources .
2.39 Biological div ersity is the resource upon which
families , comm unities , nations and future
gener ations depend.  It is the link betw een all
organisms on ear th, binding each into an
interdependent ecosystem, in which all
species ha ve their role . It is the w eb of lif e.
Tackling biodiv ersity loss and conser ving
biodiv ersity is no wadays non-negotiab le;
investing in biodiv ersity is a str ategic
investment f or our health, our w ellbeing and
our daily liv es. Urban g reen spaces are
critical habitats to suppor t biodiv ersity .
Although w e can seek additional ne w on-site
open space pro vision as par t of larger
developments to pro vide m ulti-functional
benefits f or biodiv ersity , climate change ,
health and recreation, additional residential
development and population g rowth will lik ely
bring more access pressure to the borough’ s
parks and open spaces , man y of which
provide impor tant habitats f or protected and
other species . Disturbance to species and
damage to habitats through intense
7Introduction 2
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18recreational use including tr ampling and
erosion of habitats is a k ey challenge f or the
borough.  It is good f or everyone’s health and
well-being to be ab le to enjo y and engage
with g reen and natur al spaces near to home .
Increasing and e xtending the amount and
quality of g reen spaces in the borough and
impro ving its quality and connectedness , has
the potential to off er multiple ecosystem
services while also suppor ting better and
more equitab le human health.
2.40 The CO VID-19 pandemic highlighted that
adjustments can be made to tac kle threats
to our society , which ma y have pre viously
been considered as unrealistic or
unachie vable, such as people’ s beha viours .
For example , acceler ating mo ves to a lo w
carbon society through people choosing to
walk and cycle since the pandemic , both f or
essential jour neys and f or exercise .There
may be lasting positiv e environmental, social
and w ell-being impacts , and the e vidence
base will contin ue to be k ept under re view.
To promote and encour age this fur ther, the
20-min ute neighbourhood concept is cr itical
to enab le people to ‘live locally’, which is a
key focus of this Plan.
Links with the Council’ s plans and strategies
2.41 The Local Plan tak es account of other plans
and str ategies of the Council, and is the main
delivery mechanism f or the spatial elements
of the Council’ s Cor porate Plan.
2.42 The Council’ s Corporate Plan 2018-22 : sets
out ho w we plan to become an engaging,
open and inno vative Council - one that has
better local schools , is saf er and g reener , one
that is f air and more aff ordab le for all. There
are four o verarching objectiv es:
A greener borough
Putting the en vironment at the hear t of
local decision making
Safeguarding our beautiful borough,
protecting our g reen spaces and
impro ving air quality
A saf er borough
Being the saf est London borough
Working in par tnership with police and
local comm unities to pre vent and tac kle
crime and impro ve road saf ety
A fairer borough
Investing in good local ser vices that
protect the most vulner able
A borough that is aff ordab le for all
A borough f or everyone
Making sure residents ha ve a real sa y
over issues that aff ect them
Making our borough accessib le for
everyone and promoting oppor tunity f or
underrepresented g roups
2.43 The Plan also dr aws upon other k ey
strategies produced b y the Council. These
include the Climate Emergency Str ategy ,
Housing and Homelessness Str ategy
2021-26, Activ e Travel Str ategy 2020, and
Culture Richmond 2021 to 2031.
Heathr ow
2.44 The Council, in line with the Ma yor of London,
strongly opposes an y further e xpansion at
Heathro w and suppor ts measures to minimise
the impacts of Heathro w, particular ly on
traffic, noise and air quality .
2.45 The Council's position on Heathro w is set out
in the Cor porate Plan 2018 – 2022. This sets
out that the Council remain opposed to the
Government’ s decision to e xpand Heathro w
Airport, a third r unway and fur ther night
flights , and that w e will contin ue to w ork with
other local author ity par tners to use e very
tool at our disposal to challenge it, including
through the cour ts, to dr aw attention to the
significant impacts on residents’  lives.
2.46 The Council's Local Plan does not contain a
policy on Heathro w as the air port does not
lie within the borough boundar y. However, in
commenting on an y planning application in
relation to Heathro w Air port, the abo ve
statement sets out clear ly the Council's
position on Heathro w.
82  Introduction
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 183 Vision and Strategic Objectives
3.1 The dr aft Plan is based around ten themes
to inf orm the ne w vision f or growth in the
borough, which ha ve been de veloped since
the Direction of Travel consultation in 2020.3.2 This Local Plan sets out a str ategic vision f or
shaping the future of our borough, looking
ahead to what the borough will be lik e in
15-20 y ears’  time , and pro viding a clear
picture of the role that de velopment should
play in creating sustainab le growth.
Local Plan Strategic Vision ‘The best f or our bor ough’
Our vision f or the London Borough of Richmond upon Thames o ver the ne xt 15 y ears is to ha ve achie ved…
(from adoption of the Plan in 2024, so b y 2039)
Growth has been accommodated across the borough, making use of the borough’ s much v alued assets ,
and our centres ha ve become adaptab le and vibr ant places f or successful local comm unities .
Everything a local resident needs can no w be reached within 20 min utes b y foot or bik e.This has been
achie ved through implementing the 20-min ute neighbourhood concept, resulting in a borough with
complete , compacted, connected neighbourhoods . Since ear ly 2020 lessons ha ve been lear nt post the
Covid-19 pandemic , which changed aspects of the w ay we live, work and connect with each other .
Oppor tunities ha ve been tak en from the pandemic to redefine places and retain positiv e changes , which
have increased activ e travel and use of open spaces , suppor t for local centres and w orkspaces , and
renewed the f ocus on tac kling the climate emergency . All our residents can no w ‘live locally’;  they can
easily w alk or cycle within 20 min utes to access essential ser vices and fulfil their daily needs , in to wn
and local centres and high streets that pro vide a r ange of shops , services , emplo yment oppor tunities ,
cultur al activities and social connections .
The borough has been responding to the c limate emer gency and taking action , tackling the challenges
of climate change , cutting emissions and impro ving air quality , and f ollowing the pr inciples of a circular
econom y. New development has met high standards f or sustainab le design, increased urban g reening
and tac kled the biodiv ersity loss b y protecting species and habitats , and enab ling them to adapt to a
changing climate . So m uch has been achie ved through the co-benefits of actions through the Local Plan,
to impro ve resilience against climate change , which are pic ked up across the Local Plan’ s themes belo w.
Actions ha ve been stepped up and w e have fulfilled the Council’ s commitment as an organisation to
become carbon neutr al by 2030, and suppor t residents in reducing their climate impact. We are on our
way to be a net-z ero carbon borough b y 2050.
Residents ha ve seen the impact of delivering ne w homes and an aff ordable bor ough f or all through
an increase in housing deliv ery on small sites and optimising large sites , with ne w affordab le homes
benefitting local residents although aff ordability remains a challenge . Even in estab lished residential
9Vision and Str ategic Objectiv es 3
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18areas and in our centres , additional homes ha ve been created, through incremental intensification, with
infill and con versions that are w ell-designed to br ing positiv e benefits to comm unities and ne w
developments ha ve div ersified housing options . A range of aff ordab le housing has been deliv ered, with
a future pipeline , suppor ting lo w- and middle-income residents and w orkers into lo w cost rent and
homeo wnership options and pro viding housing options that let vulner able residents liv e independently
in their o wn homes .
The Council has pla yed a role in shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt
to chang es in the wa y we shop and respond to the pandemic. There ha ve been fundamental changes
that had already been underw ay but were acceler ated b y the pandemic , which ha ve significantly changed
how we use our m uch-v alued centres with aspects of our centres reimagined.  Implementing the 20-min ute
neighbourhood concept and enab ling people to ‘live locally’  ensured that our centres ha ve remained
attractive and pro vide a broader off er, so the y contin ue to be ab le to adapt fle xibly to fur ther changes –
with the use of m ulti-functional places changing in response to local needs and re-pur posing of e xisting
space . Most local shopping and ser vices f or da y to da y needs are easily accessed b y walking and cycling,
and man y trips are link ed to also include the leisure and cultur al off er.
All of the borough’ s main centres ha ve capitalised on ho w much the y are enjo yed by those living in the
local area, as w ell as pro viding a wider off er attr acting visitors . Richmond as a centre has capitalised on
its strengths with the cultur al quar ter sho wcasing its strong ar ts, cultur al and leisure off er enhanced b y
the to wn centres’  riverside setting and unique attr action to visitors , with the benefit of a ne w and impro ved
station. Twickenham has rejuv enated its k ey commercial and b usiness areas and benefits from a
flourishing cultur al quar ter, with a ne w focus created b y the r iverfront e xperience .Teddington has flour ished
with a distinctiv e local off er, providing a r ange of shops , emplo yment, leisure , cultur al, health and social
facilities to suppor t a range of comm unity activities . East Sheen has adapted and ref ocused its local
offer, and links with the ne w hear t for Mor tlake created b y development at the Stag Bre wery.Whitton
has sustained its local off er, complemented b y a ne w use f or Kneller Hall. The borough’ s local centres
and par ades , which contin ue to pla y a k ey role in enab ling our comm unities to ‘live locally’, ha ve also
adapted to meet g rowing local demands f or local oppor tunities f or shopping, w orking and leisure .
The Council has pla yed a par t in increasing jobs and helping b usiness to gr ow and bounce bac k
following the pandemic .The borough’ s Key Business Areas as w ell as the industr ial land and b usiness
parks ha ve been protected and in vestment in intensification has n urtured space accommodating moder n
businesses , with digital connectivity and infr astructure to suppor t smar t growth. Office space in our main
centres has adapted and local hubs pro vide space to w ork, rather than w orkers comm uting daily out of
the borough. The borough is a location where entrepreneurs and star t-ups thr ive, and there are fle xible
workspace options f or businesses and those choosing to w ork locally , suppor ted b y training oppor tunities .
Economic changes since the pandemic ha ve become embedded, with jobs created in the g reen econom y
as well as changes to ho w businesses oper ate to reduce carbon emissions and promote the circular
econom y.
The borough has been protecting what is special and impr oving our areas (herita ge and culture)  to
remain the best place to liv e in London as a result of the quality of the en vironment and lif e with high
levels of satisf action, places are highly cher ished b y residents .The high quality design of ne w development
has respected and enhanced the distinctiv e char acter of the borough, including our k ey her itage assets
which contr ibute so significantly – listed b uildings and Conser vation Areas , histor ic par ks as w ell as Ro yal
Botanic Gardens , Kew World Her itage Site .The borough has sustained and enhanced a strong ar ts and
cultur al off er.This has contr ibuted to the post pandemic reco very, providing a destination and reason to
visit, locally from across the wider region and be yond.
There has been prog ress in tackling biodiver sity loss b y retaining and impr oving e xisting as well
as creating ne w biodiver se areas, increasing the quality of our green spaces,  and greening the
borough .The outstanding natur al environment and g reen infr astructure netw ork, including the borough’ s
parks and open spaces , wildlif e corr idors , biodiv ersity and habitats as w ell as the unique en vironment
103 Vision and Str ategic Objectiv es
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18of the borough’ s rivers and corr idors ha ve been protected and enhanced.  Lear ning from the pandemic ,
the v alue of local spaces and netw orks contin ues to be recognised – from par klets and g reener streets
to larger s wathes of protected open land which ha ve a role in pro viding the g reen lung f or south w est
London.  New green spaces ha ve been deliv ered as par t of ne w major de velopments on-site , providing
multi-functional benefits to biodiv ersity , climate change as w ell as human health and w ellbeing.  Local
people f eel connected to nature and care about the local en vironment and biodiv ersity .This has been
achie ved through outreach and education b y pro viding f ormal and inf ormal education oppor tunities as
part of de velopments .
New development oppor tunities ha ve been  impr oving design,  delivering beautiful b uildings and
high-quality places  to build on the borough’ s unique char acter and strong and v aried sense of place .
The impor tance of the pub lic realm and pro viding space f or people to connect has been recognised, with
new development our places creating oppor tunities f or relaxation, pla y, exercise - including e xamples
of good pr actice at Twickenham Riv erside , Ham Close and Richmond Station.
There ha ve been changes to enab le reducing the need to tra vel and impr oving the c hoices f or more
sustainab le tra vel. Activ e travel has increased since the pandemic , as the easiest choice to access the
local netw ork of w ell-connected places across the borough. This is link ed with the Health y Streets
approach which has brought positiv e changes to the char acter and use of our paths , streets and spaces ,
with high quality , pleasant and attr active environments with clean air and enough space f or dw elling,
walking, cycling and pub lic transpor t use , to reduce the dominance of v ehicles .
Residents ha ve seen ne w development securing ne w social and comm unity infrastructure to suppor t
a growing population . Residents ha ve access to a r ange of e xceptional educational and tr aining f acilities ,
including a choice of schools and n urser ies, comm unity and healthcare f acilities . Since the pandemic ,
spaces ha ve adapted to become fle xible in ho w the y ser ve their comm unities and social v alue has been
widely recognised reflecting the impor tance of places f or inter action to suppor t a sense of comm unity.
The Council has pla yed a role in creating saf e, health y and inc lusive comm unities . Since the pandemic ,
the impor tance of health, w ellbeing and comm unity has been at the f orefront of ne w development,
delivering ne w spaces and f acilities to enab le health y lifestyles and inclusiv e access f or all.  Health y
Streets ha ve created a health y and inclusiv e environment.
Strategic objectives
Responding to the c limate emer gency and taking
action
Provide a clear pathw ay to z ero-carbon
for all types of ne w development, to
minimise and mitigate the eff ects of
climate change b y requir ing high le vels
of sustainab le design and constr uction
including reductions in carbon emissionsby minimising energy consumption,
promoting decentr alised energy and the
use of rene wable energy as w ell as
requir ing high standards of w ater
efficiency .
Promote and encour age de velopment
to be fully resilient to the future impacts
of climate change in order to minimise
vulner ability of people and proper ty; this
includes b y risk of flooding, w ater
shortages , subsidence and the eff ects
of overheating.
Optimise the use of land and resources
by ensur ing ne w development tak es
place on pre viously de veloped land and
in sustainab le locations in line with the
place based str ategies , with a f ocus on
reusing e xisting b uildings and
11Vision and Str ategic Objectiv es 3
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18encour aging remediation and reuse of
contaminated land.
Reduce or mitigate en vironmental
impacts and pollution le vels (such as air ,
noise , light, odour , fumes w ater and soil)
and secure impro vements in air quality ,
particular ly along major roads and areas
that already e xceed acceptab le air
quality standards .
Encour age the incor poration of circular
econom y principles into all aspects of
the design, constr uction and oper ation
process in order to eliminate w aste,
conser ve resources , and manage w aste
sustainab ly retaining its use at its
highest v alue f or as long as possib le.
Promote sustainab le waste management
through minimising w aste and pro viding
sufficient land f or the reuse , recycling
and treatment of w aste, and minimise
the amount of w aste going to landfill in
line with the West London Waste Plan.
Delivering ne w homes and an aff ordable bor ough
for all
Enab le oppor tunities to deliv er ne w
homes across the borough, div ersifying
the sources , locations , type and mix of
housing supply and the type of sites ,
through a positiv e approach to
incremental intensification and
recognising the contr ibution of small
sites, housing in our centres and
optimising deliv ery from large sites to
meeting local housing needs .
Maximise deliv ery of gen uinely
affordab le housing across the borough
through a r ange of measures ,
recognising the significant comm unity
benefits of aff ordab le housing as a
priority, and taking inno vative and
flexible approaches to deliv ery moreaffordab le housing to meet the needs of
Richmond residents .
Promote inclusiv e and sustainab le
comm unities , through ensur ing high
standards in ne w housing and
oppor tunities to b uild social inter action,
to create cohesiv e, health y and
dementia-fr iendly comm unities -
enab ling the older population to remain
independent and activ e for longer , as
well as pro viding suppor ted housing
options to meet the needs of vulner able
residents .
Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local
centres as the y adapt to c hang es in the wa y we
shop and respond to the pandemic
Create places where b usinesses can
thrive and comm unities and visitors can
access local shops , and a wide r ange
of ser vices as w ell as pro viding a leisure
and cultur al off er to meet the changing
needs of our comm unities , to ensure
vital viab le, attractive and
locally-rele vant to wn and local centres .
Reinf orce the role of Richmond,
Twickenham, Teddington, Whitton and
East Sheen centres , where major ne w
development should be f ocused in these
most sustainab le locations , while
suppor ting local centres and par ades
which pro vide a f ocus f or local
comm unities to meet, shop , work and
spend leisure time , as reflected in the
place based str ategies .
Encour age change in our centres which
will be k ey meeting places where social
interaction and sense of comm unity is
fostered. They will act as hubs with
clusters of uses , including pro viding
oppor tunities f or leisure and culture , to
ensure the y are destinations f or living
and w orking locally , proving an
oppor tunity f or link ed trips, to suppor t
the post pandemic reco very.
123 Vision and Str ategic Objectiv es
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Require measures in ne w developments
that contr ibute to activ e travel and
impro ve the pub lic realm which in tur n
will suppor t the centres’  attractiveness
and enab le people to ‘live locally’.
Create 20-min ute neighbourhoods that
make it easier to be ph ysically activ e,
enhance oppor tunities f or walking and
cycling saf ely, create high quality pub lic
spaces and pub lic realm, impro ve
connectivity and accessibility f or all, and
focus on suppor ting the high streets ,
centres and par ades as destinations that
people w ant to go to and use to ‘live
locally’.
Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to gr ow and
bounce bac k following the pandemic
Protect and encour age a r ange of land
and floorspace f or emplo yment use ,
enab ling intensification of uses where
appropr iate, and digital connectivity
infrastructure , to suppor t a cohesiv e,
diverse and enter prising b usiness
comm unity.
Provide a v ariety of oppor tunities f or
affordab le and adaptab le workspaces ,
encour aging oppor tunities to w ork
locally , enab ling a post pandemic
recovery.
Ensure a r ange of local emplo yment and
training oppor tunities a vailab le to
residents and to suppor t growing
businesses .
Protecting what is special and impr oving our
areas (herita ge and culture)
Protect and enhance the en vironment
including the her itage assets ,
recognising their v alue to the borough’ s
residents and visitors .
Suppor t the borough’ s diverse ar ts and
cultur al facilities , recognising their
impor tance to enr iching our local
comm unities , while also pro viding a
destination and reason to visit the
borough and post pandemic an
oppor tunity to sustainab ly grow the
visitor econom y.
Increasing biodiver sity and the quality of our
green and b lue spaces,  and greening the bor ough
Protect and enhance the borough’ s
multi-functional g reen and b lue
infrastructure netw orks, impro ving
accessibility from small spaces to
corridors and larger e xpanses , post
pandemic recognising the benefits f or
residents and visitors and the v alue to
the local econom y.
Create de velopments which enhance
the natur al en vironment and contr ibute
to the comprehensiv e blue and g reen
infrastructure netw ork to enhance
biodiv ersity .
Plan f or walkab le en vironments which
offers oppor tunities to impro ve
biodiv ersity , particular ly when
consider ing street connectivity as w ell
as wildlif e corr idors and the mo vement
of flor a and f auna across sites and
netw orks.
Protect and enhance the borough’ s
biodiv ersity , including trees and
landscapes , requir ing from ne w
development a gen uine net gain that
leaves biodiv ersity in a better state than
before.
13Vision and Str ategic Objectiv es 3
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Require ne w major de velopment to
provide on-site g reen spaces with
multi-functional benefits f or biodiv ersity ,
climate change as w ell as health and
wellbeing, including pro viding f ormal and
informal education oppor tunities to
enab le people to lear n about and
connect with nature and biodiv ersity .
Ensure ne w development where ver
possib le mak es a positiv e contr ibution
to greening of the borough’ s streets ,
buildings and pub lic spaces , recognising
its impor tant role in tac kling climate
change .
Protect and impro ve the borough's par ks
and open spaces , providing a balance
betw een areas f or wildlif e and creating
oppor tunities f or relaxation, pla y, and
exercise , recognising their post
pandemic appreciation b y local
comm unities and impor tance in
providing f or health y activ e lifestyles .
Protect and impro ve the unique
environment of the borough's r ivers,
especially the Riv er Thames and its
tributaries as wildlif e corr idors , as
oppor tunities f or recreation and r iver
transpor t, increasing access to and
alongside the r ivers where appropr iate,
and gain wider local comm unity benefits
and habitat impro vements when sites
are rede veloped.
Impr oving design,  delivering beautiful b uildings
and high-quality places
Create places that strengthen the
connection betw een people and the
physical places the y share , that can
adapt o ver time , contr ibuting positiv ely
to compact and w alkab le 20-min ute
neighbourhoods .
Provide a positiv e approach to
accommodate g rowth across the
borough, enab ling tall b uildings and
higher density de velopment inappropr iate locations , where all
development is of high design quality to
create w ell-designed, meaningful,
practical and w ell-connected places .
Ensure the design of ne w development
draws on the special v alues of the
boroughs unique and distinctiv e
character and responds to areas f or
enhancement and oppor tunities f or
growth, f ollowing the Plan’ s design
principles and place based guidance .
Reducing the need to tra vel and impr oving the
choices f or more sustainab le tra vel
Provide choice f or ho w people can mak e
their jour neys through high quality
connections betw een places ,
encour aging them to choose w alking or
cycling f or shor t day to da y jour neys –
shopping, study , comm unity and
healthcare f acilities , places of w ork,
green spaces , and more – without
having to use a car , and maintaining
increases seen post pandemic in activ e
travel.
Encour age impro vements to connectivity
and access to pub lic transpor t -
particular ly enab ling saf e, inclusiv e
access , taking oppor tunities f or car-free
development and suppor ting ne w
technologies to enab le smar ter travel,
to minimise the impacts of de velopment
in relation to congestion and air
pollution.
143 Vision and Str ategic Objectiv es
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Securing ne w social and comm unity infrastructure
to suppor t a gr owing population
Suppor t a range of social and
comm unity infr astructure uses , which
provide social v alue to residents and
cater f or a g rowing population.
Provide a comm unity off er in the
borough’ s centres and w ell-connected
places , predominantly accessed b y
active travel.
Ensure fle xible spaces are pro vided as
part of m ulti-pur pose assets , which can
adapt to changes , and are w ell
suppor ted b y the comm unities the y
serve.
Ensure sufficient pro vision of f acilities
and ser vices f or education and tr aining
for all age g roups to help reduce
inequalities and suppor t the local
econom y; this includes school places
and promoting local emplo yment
oppor tunities and tr aining prog rammes .
Encour age oppor tunities f or leisure ,
enter tainment, spor t, and cultur al
activities , which enab le activ e and
inclusiv e lifestyles .
Creating saf e, health y and inc lusive comm unities
Create en vironments that enab le activ e,
resilient and inclusiv e comm unities and
enab le residents to lead health y lives,
including recognising post pandemic the
impor tance of oppor tunities f or
place-based connections that put people
first.
Recognise the impor tance of health as
a cross cutting pr iority, from the role of
streets and pub lic spaces to pro viding
for medical, w ellness and fitness uses ,
ensur ing inclusiv e access across all
types of de velopment and places , based
on an inclusiv e neighbourhoodapproach, and suppor ting the Health y
Streets approach.
Ensure local en vironmental impacts of
development are not detr imental to the
health, saf ety and the amenity of e xisting
and ne w users or occupiers of a
development or the surrounding area.
15Vision and Str ategic Objectiv es 3
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 184 Spatial Strategy , Place-based
Strategies and Site Allocations
Policy 1. Living Locall y and the 20-min ute neighbourhood (Strategic P olicy)
A. To help people and places to thr ive we need to tr ansform the w ay we live.We need to create
environments that mak e it easier to be ph ysically activ e, enhance oppor tunities f or walking and
cycling saf ely, create high quality pub lic spaces and pub lic realm, impro ve connectivity and
accessibility f or all, and f ocus on suppor ting the high streets , centres and par ades as destinations
that people w ant to go to and use to ‘live locally’.  Creating a borough where e verything a resident
needs can be reached within 20 min utes b y foot or bik e will not only impro ve the quality of lif e but
will br ing m ultiple benefits of healthier lif estyles , cleaner air , stronger local economies and abo ve
all better resilience against climate change .
B.The ‘living locally’  concept will be achie ved by:
1. giving people the ability to meet most of their daily needs within a 20-min ute w alk from home ,
with saf e cycling and local pub lic transpor t options;
2. ensur ing access and pro ximity to daily needs , including f ood and necessities , for all;
3. facilitating access to quality pub lic transpor t that connects people to jobs and other places the y
need to go to;
4. promoting and enab ling healthier lif estyles and activ e living;
5. offering a high-quality pub lic realm and open spaces;
6. delivering ne w developments at densities that mak e local ser vices and tr anspor t viab le;
7. impro ving w alking and cycling infr astructure to achie ve the borough’ s target of 75% of tr ips
being under taken by walking, cycling and pub lic transpor t;
8. impro ving accessibility and connectivity of g reen infr astructure;
9. facilitating thr iving local economies;
10. delivering patter ns of land use that f acilitate making shor ter, regular tr ips by walking or cycling;
11. following the Ma yor’s Health y Streets Approach to ensure w alking and cycling are the natur al
choices f or local jour neys, and using the Health y Streets Toolkit to assess ne w infr astructure
schemes .
C.All de velopment (e xcept householder applications f or alter ations) should:
1. demonstr ate ho w the y will deliv er impro vements that suppor t the ‘living locally’  concept;
2. be per meab le by foot and cycle , with good connections and signage to local w alking and cycling
routes/netw orks as w ell as pub lic transpor t;
3. demonstr ate that future occupiers of the de velopment are ab le to meet their shopping, w ork,
recreational and cultur al needs within a 20-min ute w alk or cycle and ho w the ne w development
will contr ibute to sustaining the ‘living locally’  concept;
4. demonstr ate that the proposals will not lead to an y deter ioration in the pro vision of , and access
to, services to meet shopping, w ork, recreational and cultur al needs f or local comm unities;
5. demonstr ate ho w a proposal will reduce the dominance of v ehicles .
Major de velopments of 10 or more residential units or non-residential de velopment of 500sqm of
floorspace or more:
164  Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 186. must demonstr ate ho w the proposal will impro ve local w alking and cycling routes , including
accessibility to the e xisting netw ork, in areas with lo wer levels of pub lic transpor t accessibility
or higher le vels of health depr ivation and disability .
D.The Council will mak e use of planning ob ligations to create or reinf orce successful 20 min ute
neighbourhoods .This could be relating to pla y and recreational f acilities , low traffic neighbourhoods ,
walking and cycling infr astructure and activ e travel netw orks, pub lic space and pub lic realm
impro vements , green infr astructure pro vision, daily ser vice pro vision, in line with other policies in
this Plan.  Conditions ma y be applied to planning per missions to retain a specific land use to ensure
the contin ued and reinf orced pro vision of ser vices that enab le living locally .
4.1 The 20-min ute neighbourhood concept is the
idea that our places should be complete ,
compact and connected neighbourhoods
where most things y ou need f or shopping or
visiting are an easy w alk or cycle a way. For
many, the pandemic has highlighted the
benefits of living locally and ha ving f acilities
locally;  it responds to the challenges of
climate change , health, aff ordability and
liveability .The 20-min ute neighbourhood
concept enab les the borough’ s comm unities
to ‘live locally’, a concept which is at the hear t
of this Local Plan. This concept tak es a
holistic approach and f ocuses on ease of
travel, walkability and access to pub lic
services , and in light of the pandemic , it tak es
into account changing high streets ,
workplaces , cultur al activities and social
connections .
4.2 Changes in the w ay we shop w ere already
affecting our high streets bef ore the
pandemic , particular ly inter net shopping;  the
pandemic and associated loc kdowns ha ve
acceler ated this trend.  Recent changes to the
planning system, par ticular ly the introduction
of the ne w combined b usiness land Use
Class E and changes to per mitted
development r ights mean that there is e ven
more potential f or change in our high streets
than e ver bef ore. As more of us sta yed at
home , man y have realised the v alue of our
neighbourhoods – places to get our essential
goods and ser vices , to relax and meet, to
enjoy our leisure time , to appreciate our high
quality open spaces .
4.3 Recognising the Council’ s role of w orking in
partnership with stak eholders to consider the
future of our high streets and to wn centres
amid the changing times , a RichmondPartnership Conf erence w as held in 2021 to
discuss unloc king the potential of our centres .
The headline outcomes discussed included
the need f or town centres and high streets to
be destinations be yond shopping to attr act
and retain visitors , as people centred places
that are appealing to pedestr ians.This has
been f ollowed by a ser ies of vir tual
Comm unity Con versations within each area
of the borough. The results of those e vents
have informed the prepar ation of this Local
Plan.
4.4 The Ma yor of London has set out a
missions-based approach to meet the most
challenging per iod in recent histor y in ter ms
of restor ing confidence in the city , minimising
the impact on London’ s most vulner able
comm unities and reb uilding the city’ s
econom y and society f ollowing the
corona virus pandemic.  One of the nine
missions sets out a clear intent to w ork with
London’ s diverse comm unities to estab lish
new, exciting and e xperimental uses across
London’ s high streets and pub lic spaces .
4.5 The mission seeks to stitch the essential uses
of the city bac k together , following decades
of dispersal and separ ation and in vites us to
rethink the w ay we live and mo ve around the
city. It also recognises that thanks to
London’ s pre-industr ial roots 90% of all
Londoners liv e within with 10 min utes of their
local high street. The Ma yor’s High Streets
for All mission, which f ocuses on the vital role
that high streets and local neighbourhoods
play in the economic and social lif e of the city ,
complements the Council’ s ‘living locally’
concept, a k ey feature of the borough’ s
Spatial Str ategy .
17Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations 4
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 184.6 Unlik e par ts of centr al London, which rely
heavily on comm uters and visitors , Richmond
borough needs to plan f or and g rasp the
oppor tunities pro vided b y more people living
and w orking locally .There is potential to
create a more par ticipator y, inclusiv e and
comm unity-f ocused econom y, with shared
workspaces that enab le collabor ation,
knowledge e xchange and increased b usiness
productivity .To ensure w e estab lish and
maintain a 20-min ute neighbourhood f or all
parts of the borough w e need to b uild on the
momentum of remote w orking b y pro viding
flexible and f amily fr iendly local w ork spaces ,
and this ma y also mean reimagining
traditional w orkspaces as centres f or
collabor ation, inno vation and enter prise.
4.7 The ‘living locally’  concept relies on inclusiv e
and attr active high streets and pub lic spaces ,
promoting and encour aging w alking, cycling
and accessibility f or all;  this complements the
Mayor’s Health y Streets approach as set out
in TP2 of the London Plan.
4.8 One of the under lying fundamental aims of
the ‘living locally’  concept in Richmond
borough is to reduce urban carbon emissions
and biodiv ersity loss . Environmental
impro vements in the pub lic realm, changing
the w ay we access our high streets to
sustainab le modes of tr anspor t and using
local ser vices and shops will help us tac kle
the climate and ecological emergencies whilstimpro ving air quality , creating g reen jobs and
enab ling us to tr ansition to a lo w carbon
society .
4.9 To facilitate the 20-min ute neighbourhood
concept, the Council will ensure – through
planning and other inter ventions – that local
assets , businesses and par tnerships are
provided that local people w ant to use and
value.This could f or example include
meanwhile uses and/or tempor ary leases f or
premises a waiting longer-ter m
redevelopment, which could pro vide a r ange
of creativ e and fle xible comm unity uses .
Other inno vative approaches will be
suppor ted b y the Council, such as
cycle-based local distr ibution hubs . High
streets and neighbourhood centres will
theref ore not just pro vide ser vices to meet
daily essential needs , but the y will also pla y
a greater comm unity, cultur al and creativ e
role.
4.10 The map belo w depicts the borough’ s
centres , with diff erent shaded b uffers applied
for 200, 400 and 800 metres .These b uffers
are applied ‘as the cro w flies’  rather than
actual w alking distances . As a guide , 400
metres is an around 5-10 min ute w alk.
Applying an 800 metres b uffer, it is e vident
that most of the borough benefits from a
centre or par ade, and theref ore it is impor tant
to ensure that these centres are sustained
and enhanced to contin ue meeting the ‘living
locally’  concept f or the major ity of the
borough.
184  Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Map 4.1 200,  400,  and 800 metre b uffers around centre boundaries in the bor ough.
4.11 The Council’ s Local Implementation Plan f or
Transpor t sets out activ e travel targets . It
shows that residents in Whitton, Hampton
and East Sheen are less lik ely to achie ve the
active travel target than those living in
Twickenham, St Margaret’ s and Richmond.
There is a correlation betw een areas with lo w
active travel levels and areas with both lo wer
levels of pub lic transpor t accessibility and
higher le vels of health depr ivation and
disability .There are poc kets of relativ e
deprivation around Castelnau, Ham, Hampton
Nurser y Lands , Heathfield, Mor tlake and
Whitton. The London Plan directs incremental
intensification to e xisting residential areaswithin high PT ALS or close to stations or to wn
centres , which will be sho wn on the P olicies
Map as identified in Figure 1 and P olicy 16
Small Sites .
4.12 The Council will also use initiativ es outside
of planning to target these areas f or both
infrastructure impro vements and comm unity
schemes , designed in par tnership with
Transpor t and Pub lic Health.  Inter ventions
will include impro ving local w alking and
cycling routes to schools , town centres , bus
stops and local r ail stations , as w ell as softer
measures such as school tr avel planning and
promotion of cycling tr aining to local
residents .
Policy 2. Spatial Strategy:  Mana ging c hang e in the bor ough (Strategic P olicy)
The o verarching aim is to ensure that g rowth is deliv ered in a sustainab le way, with suppor ting
infrastructure , while tac kling the climate emergency and biodiv ersity cr isis.
A. The Local Plan seeks to deliv er the Council’ s vision and meet the identified needs b y directing ne w
higher density de velopment including homes , jobs , comm unity uses and infr astructure to sites in
the to wn centres or places that are that are w ell connected to jobs , services , infrastructure and
19Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations 4
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18amenities b y pub lic transpor t, walking and cycling.  New smaller scale de velopment will be appropr iate
in the local centres to suppor t Living Locally . Beyond these areas , incremental intensification will
contr ibute to achie ving g rowth, ha ving regard to the e xisting to wnscape char acter .
B.Development in the borough will pr ioritise the use of pre viously de veloped land, including the reuse
and con version of e xisting b uildings to minimise embodied carbon with a presumption in f avour of
refurbishment.
C.Development in the borough will promote the pro vision of g reen infr astructure that creates resilience
and helps mitigate the impacts of climate change , and protect and, where possib le, enhance the
environment, local char acter and her itage assets .
D.Proposals should ha ve regard to the rele vant place-based str ategy and set out ho w a char acter-
and design-led approach to change has been tak en.
4.13 The Spatial Str ategy , as set out abo ve,
contin ues the approach tak en in the adopted
Local Plan.  It builds on inf ormation from our
evidence base , including f eedbac k from
public consultation as w ell as the
Sustainability Appr aisal, which sets out a
detailed and up-to-date analysis of the k ey
sustainability issues , challenges , and
oppor tunities f or the borough. The Spatial
Strategy also sets out ho w the main elements
of the str ategic vision and str ategic objectiv es
for the borough are to be deliv ered o ver the
plan per iod.
4.14 The Local Plan aims to meet the needs of
local comm unities and b usinesses through
the pro vision of housing, emplo yment,
schools , comm unity ser vices , social
infrastructure , leisure and other local ser vices ,
in a sustainab le way – following the ‘Living
Locally’  concept as set out abo ve in P olicy 1.
The policies in the Local Plan f ollow the
approach of the NPPF’ s presumption in
favour of sustainab le de velopment.
Paragraph 9 in the NPPF recognises planning
policies should pla y an activ e role in guiding
towards sustainab le solutions , but in doing
so should tak e local circumstances into
account, to reflect the char acter , needs and
oppor tunities of the borough. The Council
places emphasis on protecting and, where
possib le, enhancing the special en vironment,
local char acter and uniqueness of this
borough b y recognising the en vironmental
constr aints and limits that pro vide the conte xt
for growth in the borough and which need to
be respected. This includes the locallydistinctiv e histor ic and cultur al en vironment,
protected par ks and open spaces , the Riv er
Thames and its floodplain.
4.15 To understand future needs f or housing,
emplo yment, retail and leisure , a Local
Housing Needs Assessment 2021 (stage 1),
Emplo yment Land & Premises Needs
Assessment 2021, and Retail & Leisure
Needs Study 2021 (phase 1) ha ve been
under taken.
Housing : the London Plan sets the 10
year target of 4,110 net housing
completions (2019/20 to 2028/29). The
Local Housing Needs Assessment 2021
(stage 1) identifies f or aff ordab le rent a
need f or 1,123 aff ordab le homes per
annum across the Borough, and a need
for 552 aff ordab le homes per ann um for
affordab le home o wnership products ,
representing an acute aff ordab le housing
need.
Retail needs :The borough Retail &
Leisure Needs Study 2021 (phase 1)
forecasts that b y 2039 there is an
under-supply of 5,031 sqm g ross of retail
and f ood/be verage floorspace
requirements . In addition there could be
a requirement f or about 7,000 sqm g ross
of leisure/cultur al floorspace b y 2039.
There is currently no requirement to
allocate sites f or major retail de velopment.
In the shor t to medium ter m there is
emphasis on repur posing e xisting
floorspace , with the study finding the
existing stoc k of premises can pla y a role
204  Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18in accommodating project g rowth, through
vacant proper ties and g rowth in sales
densities .
Emplo yment needs :The borough
Emplo yment Land & Premises Needs
Assessment 2021 advises the Local Plan
should seek to accommodate g rowth of
100 industr ial jobs per ann um / 60,000
sqm /15 ha industr ial land, b ut recognises
there are f ew options to address this
deficit.  For office floorspace there is a
shortfall of o ver 100,000 sqm and f or
future need it advises the Local Plan
should seek to accommodate an
additional minim um of 130 jobs per
annum and a minim um quantum of 40,000
sqm o ver the plan per iod, and there
should be the oppor tunity to boost supply
where ver the oppor tunity presents ,
including re-using high street space .
4.16 A boroughwide Urban Design Study 2021
and Open Land Re view (Green Belt,
Metropolitan Open Land (MOL), Local Green
Space (LGS) and Other Open Land of
Townscape Impor tance (OOL TI)) 2021, ha ve
been under taken which together f orm the
basis f or a holistic understanding of the
borough’ s constr aints and capacity f or growth.
The Urban Design Study  2021 pro vides
a boroughwide to wnscape char acter
assessment, with a deep understanding
of the v alues , char acter and sensitivity of
the diff erent par ts of the borough,
combined with the reality of future
development pressures to assess
capacity . It recognises a large propor tion
of the borough has high sensitivity to
change , including the large open spaces
and r iver corr idors .There are f ew areas
of lower sensitivity to change .
The Open Land Re view (Green Belt,
MOL, LGS and OOL TI) 2021 e xamined
the perf ormance of designated open
space against rele vant national, regional
and local pur poses and cr iteria. Much of
the borough is co vered b y these open
space designations , which collectiv ely
play impor tant roles including pre venting
the spr awl of Greater London and the
coalescence of neighbourhoods ,contr ibuting to the char acter of
neighbourhoods and pro viding g reen
spaces f or recreation, nature and
associated health and w ellbeing impacts .
The open spaces also ha ve an impor tant
role to pla y as par t of the borough’ s green
infrastructure netw ork, which is
considered more widely as par t of other
evidence base studies . Land designated
as Green Belt w as assessed to meet the
purposes strongly and all land w as
recommended f or retention. The major ity
of the MOL has been assessed as
performing strongly , with some areas
scoring w eakly against the MOL cr iteria.
The study has also assessed e xisting
OOLTI, the major ity of which meet the
criteria for designation. The Study also
assessed a n umber of potential sites f or
LGS designation, some of which the
Council is taking f orward as ne w sites .
Overall, there are recommendations f or
changes to only a small n umber of
existing or ne w sites to be considered as
reflected in this Local Plan.
4.17 So while w e need to plan f or more homes
and jobs , and the suppor ting infr astructure ,
there are limited sites in the borough. We
must focus on making the most of our limited
land supply .The London Plan’ s Good Gro wth
policies seek to mak e the best use of land,
to create successful mix ed-use places .The
borough’ s histor ic en vironment and its
protected open spaces significantly limit the
oppor tunities f or de velopment within the
borough, just one site has been f ound where
exceptional circumstances considered
justified to release from MOL f or aff ordab le
housing.
4.18 With such limited sites in the borough, the
overarching spatial str ategy contin ues to
direct major de velopment into the fiv e town
centres (i.e . Richmond, Twickenham,
Teddington, Whitton and East Sheen), and
to suppor t ‘Living Locally’  through the netw ork
of local centres , neighbourhood centres and
parades spread across the borough, with
incremental intensification of e xisting
comm unities as en visaged b y the London
Plan. The London Plan directs incremental
intensification to e xisting residential areas
within high PT ALs or close to stations or to wn
21Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations 4
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18centres . Most ne w developments are f ocused
on small bro wnfield sites , with a small n umber
of larger sites identified within the Local Plan
and its Site Allocations .
4.19 The Urban Design Study identifies the
capacity f or growth in the borough using the
findings of the char acter isation study .The
London Plan requires a borough-wide g rowth
assessment (London Plan P olicy D1) and
sets the e xpectation f or a design-led
approach to deter mine the optim umdevelopment capacity of sites .The Urban
Design Study sets out an o verall de velopment
strategy , with the broad areas that f orm par t
of the str ategy f or tall and mid-r ise buildings .
There are only a f ew contained areas within
the borough which ha ve capacity f or tall
buildings , within to wn centres , and/or within
previously de veloped sites , along with some
capacity f or mid-r ise b uildings . Only one
character area in the borough, in East K ew,
is identified with a long-ter m oppor tunity to
transform the char acter of the area.
Map 4.2 Urban Design Stud y overall de velopment strategy
224  Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Alternative P olicy Options to the Spatial Strategy
4.20 For the ne xt draft of the Local Plan this will
be remo ved, ho wever we have included at
this stage to inf orm consultees of the issues
being considered.
4.21 The NPPF requires , as one of the tests of
soundness , the Plan to be based on an
appropr iate str ategy , taking into account the
reasonab le alter nativ e, and based on
propor tionate e vidence . As highlighted abo ve,
the constr aints of the borough se verely limit
alternativ e approaches to deliv ering g rowth.
With o ver tw o thirds of the borough being
constr ained b y designations and the
remaining areas being relativ ely dense
low-medium r ise places , the Plan is unab le
to meet the objectiv ely assessed housing and
emplo yment needs .
4.22 The Open Land Re view (Green Belt, MOL,
LGS and OOL TI) 2021 identifies a v ery small
propor tion of the borough is designated as
Green Belt (2.29%) to the south w ester n and
wester n tips of the borough, adjoining
neighbour ing Green Belt in Hounslo w,
Spelthor ne and Elmbr idge. It states that while
Green Belt land in the borough is limited, a
significant propor tion of the borough is
designated Metropolitan Open Land (MOL)
(51.9%), which includes the borough’ s large
green spaces including Richmond P ark,
Bush y Park and K ew Gardens .There is also
a substantial propor tion of MOL co vering the
River Thames and w atercourses , as w ell as
the surrounding linear g reen spaces .The
MOL has a significant influence on the
character and de velopment potential within
the borough. There is currently only one Local
Green Space designation in the borough,
made since this designation w as introduced
in national policy in 2012. The Open Space
Review sets out that areas designated as
Other Open Land of Townscape Impor tance
(OOL TI) co ver 2.26% of the borough,
recognising poc kets of g reener y are of
townscape impor tance , contr ibuting to the
local char acter and v alued b y local residents
as open spaces within the b uilt-up area.
Overall the e vidence highlights the
impor tance of protecting the borough’ s openspaces . An alter nativ e option f or the Plan to
envisage g rowth on open land w ould be
contr ary to the London Plan and the NPPF .
4.23 The Urban Design Study 2021 pro vides a
boroughwide to wnscape char acter
assessment, with a deep understanding of
the v alues , char acter and sensitivity of the
different par ts of the borough, combined with
the reality of future de velopment pressures
to assess capacity . It recognises a large
propor tion of the borough has high sensitivity
to change , including the large open spaces
and r iver corr idors as w ell as her itage assets .
There are f ew areas of lo wer sensitivity to
change . An alter nativ e option f or the Plan to
expect higher densities without regard to
existing local char acter and the histor ic
environment w ould be contr ary to the London
Plan and the NPPF .
4.24 If new higher density de velopment is
dispersed across the borough, it could create
unsustainab le patter ns of de velopment,
leading to increased tr avel, and negativ e
impacts f or tac kling poor air quality and the
climate emergency .This w ould be contr ary
to the London Plan and the NPPF .
4.25 The London Plan 2021 w as subject to an
integ rated impact assessment, which
considered a r ange of spatial options ,
including Green Belt release and ho w housing
growth should be accommodated, in suppor t
of the pref erred approach to sustainab le
intensification.  London is dealt with as a
whole b y the London Plan, f or example a
single housing mar ket, and theref ore some
boroughs will ha ve diff erent constr aints and
this is reflected in the broad spatial
distribution of housing and emplo yment,
which tak es into account the borough’ s
location in outer London. The Plan’ s spatial
strategy is required to be in gener al
conformity with the London Plan.
4.26 This Plan positiv ely seeks oppor tunities to
meet the de velopment needs in the borough
unless the adv erse impacts of doing so w ould
significantly and demonstr ably outw eigh the
benefits when assessed against the NPPF .
This approach is consistent with par agraph
11 b of the NPPF .
244  Spatial Str ategy , Place-based Str ategies and Site Allocations
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 185 Places
5.1 While the vision and str ategic objectiv es of
the Local Plan, broad spatial str ategy and
overall distr ibution of g rowth has been set out
above, there is a f ocus on setting out a
place-making str ategy f or each area and ho w
this will be deliv ered.
5.2 The borough has been divided into nine
high-le vel ‘places’, based on categor isation
to reflect a ‘sense of place’  as w ell asidentifying areas recognised as ‘places’  by
local people as par t of the Urban Design
Study 2021. These places are:
Hampton & Hampton Hill (A)
Teddington & Hampton Wick (B)
Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St
Margarets (C)
Whitton & Heathfield (D)
Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark (E)
Richmond & Richmond Hill (F)
Kew (G)
Mortlake & East Sheen (H)
Barnes (I)
Borough Places
25Places 5
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 185.3 The f ollowing section pro vides an area-based
strategy f or each ‘place’  and pro vide fur ther
details where specific areas f or change are
identified. While e very place in the borough
is expected to see some change o ver the plan
period, there are some specific sub-areas
identified as the places where g rowth ma y be
accommodated, as identified in the Local
evidence base and through specific Site
Allocations .The contents ha ve been inf ormed
by the Ham & P etersham Neighbourhood
Plan, Twickenham Area Action Plan and the
Village Plan SPDs which each included a
vision and objectiv es for each area, and tak es
into account updates since then including
discussions r aised in the ser ies of local
Comm unity Con versations dur ing 2021 that
followed the Richmond P artnership
Conference .
5.4 This section of the Plan does not repeat
gener al policies and guidance that ma y be
set out else where in the Plan, f or example in
the thematic policies , for example regarding
responding to the climate change emergency
or seeking to increase aff ordab le housing
which will apply across the borough;  rather
this section sets to distinguish at a local le vel
the k ey differences and areas of change that
have a spatial, land-use basis f or including.
5.5 The Council has identified k ey sites that are
considered to assist with the deliv ery of the
spatial str ategy of the Plan. This is of
particular impor tance f or ensur ing there is
sufficient land f or future needs . Some of the
sites represent longer-ter m oppor tunities f or
key sites due to their siting and siz e, where
the Plan seeks to influence de velopment
should the y come f orward through planning.
Needs will also be met through other sites
coming f orward.The rele vant site allocations
are included at the end of each place-based
strategy .
265  Places
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 186 Place-based Strategy f or Hampton
& Hampton Hill
Place-based Strategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Area Pr ofile
The Hampton & Hampton Hill area encompasses Hampton Histor ic Centre , Hampton Waterw orks,
Hampton Cour t and Bush y Park, and the residential areas of Hampton and Hampton Hill. These are
character areas A1, A2, A3, A4 and A5 in the Urban Design Study 2021.
The setting of the area is largely defined b y its r iver frontages with the Thames and the Longf ord, the
open spaces of Bush y and Home P arks, which ha ve protected status as an impor tant habit f or wildlif e
and a Site of Special Scientific Interest, and the nationally significant Hampton Cour t Palace and
gardens .The area is a tour ist destination f or recreation and e vents such as the ann ual Hampton Cour t
Flower Sho w and P alace F estival.
The area kno wn as Hampton is made up of a n umber of div erse areas;  the chief of these being the
last major estate to be b uilt, called the Nurser ylands , and histor ic Old Hampton, par t of which is ref erred
to as Hampton Village .
The relationship with the Riv er Thames is a v alued f eature , through preser vation of vie ws and alle yways,
and contr ibuting to a semi-r ural char acter , although not alw ays pub licly accessib le.There are three
inhabited islands along this par t of the r iver, with Platts Ey ot the largest.  Hampton Waterw orks pro vide
appro ximately 30% of London's mains w ater.
286  Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The residential areas ha ve a sub urban char acter .The b usy local centre of Hampton Hill maintains its
village char acter and has a concentr ation of small shops and ser vices and a largely commercial function.
Hampton Village is a larger local centre although it is dispersed. The local par ade at Hampton Nurser y
Lands ser ves an area lac king in local retail f acilities , and ser ves an area that has been amongst the
most relativ ely disadv antaged in the borough.
Parts of this area are considered poor ly connected relativ e to other par ts of the borough, and suff ers
from the impact of through tr affic on Hampton Hill High Street and Hampton Cour t Road.
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 f eedbac k was in vited on what people v alued
in their area.  Hampton Histor ic Centre (A1) w as valued f or its attr activeness , heritage , tranquil and
calm places , and g reen and open spaces . For Hampton Residential (A2) respondents scored its tr anquil
and calm places , green and open spaces , attractiveness , and shops and restaur ants highly .
Respondents f or the Hampton Waterw orks (A3) v alued its g reen spaces , shops and restaur ants, culture
and enter tainment, and attr activeness .
Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises Hampton Histor ic Centre has a high sensitivity to
change , and e xtensiv e change is not appropr iate.The histor ic built fabric, human-scale propor tions ,
and pro ximity to the r iver and Bush y/Hampton Cour t Parks giv e a strong sense of place , and the
strategy is theref ore to conser ve the histor ic char acter of the area.  Hampton Residential (A2) has
overall a medium sensitivity to change , as the Study recognises the sub urban char acter should be
enhanced, with the potential f or positiv e change which is sympathetic to the area’ s valued f eatures .
Hampton Waterw orks (A3) has a distinct sense of place and high sensitivity to change , and e xtensiv e
change is not appropr iate, and the str ategy is to conser ve and enhance f eatures where appropr iate.
Hampton Hill Residential (A4) has a high sensitivity to change , owing to the high to wnscape v alue
across m uch of the area, the consistent b uilding heights , sub urban char acter and sense of g reen, and
the str ategy is to conser ve and enhance .  Hampton Cour t and Bush y Park (A5) has a high sensitivity
to change , the e xisting char acter of the area is v ery strong and the str ategy is theref ore to conser ve
it, enhancing the resilience of par ticular f eatures to future pressures .The Urban Design Study contains
design guidance f or each char acter area and f or Richmond’ s Riv erside .
Other initiatives
The Council w orks with Hampton Village Traders Association who promote a positiv e approach to the
high street engaging residents and b usinesses , organising e vents and pro viding a b usiness director y.
The Council w orks with Hampton Hill Traders Association, who promote “Love Hampton Hill”.
Vision
29Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill 6
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The vision is to br ing together the diff erent areas of Hampton as a comm unity with f acilities to meet
local needs .The char acter istic local urban scale , and r ural feel with its par ks, green spaces and
riverside , will be retained and there will be a more div erse r ange of shopping, an impro ved cultur al
offer and high quality local schools to reinf orce Hampton as a vibr ant comm unity within the borough.
The vision f or Hampton Hill is a thr iving High Street and comm unity f acilities to meet local needs .
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Enhance e xisting local centres and parades,  encoura ging more independent shops and
businesses,  to g enerate a sense of activity and vibranc y, and reanimate as local hubs.
There is an oppor tunity to impr ove the pedestrian e xperience , to pr ovide space f or
“spill-out”  from restaurants,  cafés and pubs in the commer cial stretc hes of streets and on
Hampton Hill High Street,  including temporar y pedestrianisation of r oads.
Contrib ute to impr oving the pub lic realm and implement more high-quality street furniture ,
including in Hampton Village and Hampton Hill.
Incorporate f ocal points and a mo vement strategy acr oss the area,  while ad dressing the
poor urban design elements of the e xisting estates in Hampton Residential. There is an
oppor tunity to estab lish distinctive landmarks,  without recour se to tall b uildings,  to impr ove
legibility , focused along main r oads and at ke y junctions.
Contrib ute to oppor tunities to estab lish more green infrastructure , particularl y street trees,
increasing and impr oving open spaces.
Contrib ute to impr oving connectivity within the area,  through wa yfinding,  signa ge and
legibility , and the links to the river side, preser ving and enhancing pub lic access to the
Thames.  Embrace the wider landscape setting along Thames to enhance identity of area
and g enerate a more sub urban/semi-rural f eel, including to better estab lish/open vie ws
along the River at Hampton Waterw orks.
Consider oppor tunities to reduce the dominance of car s inc luding the se vering eff ect of
Staines Road East/Upper Sunb ury Road.
There are some de velopment sites that if the y are br ought f orwar d, or permissions implemented,
may provide f or rede velopment or ne w de velopment.  At Carpark f or Sainsb urys, Uxbridg e Road,
Hampton (Site Allocation 5) there is potential f or aff ordable housing and restoration and
enhancement of the river corridor .
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
Hampton Square , Hampton
Platts Ey ot, Hampton
Hampton Traffic Unit, 60-68 Station Road, Hampton
Hampton Deliv ery Office , Rosehill, Hampton
Carpark for Sainsb urys, Uxbr idge Road, Hampton
306  Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
1:Hampton
Square , Hampton
Site Area (ha):  2.85
Site Pr oposal
Partial re-de velopment and impr ovement f or comm unity , retail and local ser vices,  emplo yment
and residential uses,  including aff ordable units and car parking.
Conte xt
The Council rejuv enated Hampton Square through an £800,000 in vestment project bac k in 2013.
The Square pro vides a moder n and w elcoming f ocal point f or Hampton Nor th, including an impressiv e
illuminated w ater f eature , seating, landscaping and space f or a whole r ange of comm unity activities .
Any proposals that come f orward should look to fur ther enhance this area.
There is still a need f or par tial rede velopment and impro vement of the related b uildings to pro vide
for comm unity, retail, ser vice, local b usiness uses and residential uses , including aff ordab le housing,
which will complement the ne w Hampton Square .
Any scheme should include impro vements to pedestr ian routes where possib le and adequate car
parking needs to be retained to meet the needs of the comm unity centre and ne w uses .
The rede velopment should ensure that it creates an attr active setting f or the rejuv enated Square
and that it contr ibutes to creating an activ e and liv ely local centre .
The g reen open space to the south of the site is designated Pub lic Open Space and ‘Other Open
Land of Townscape Impor tance (OOL TI). Any proposal f or re-de velopment of this site should ensure
31Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill 6
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18that it estab lishes a positiv e relationship with the adjoining g reen space , and where possib le enhance
its setting.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or A2 Hampton Residential and the Village Planning
Guidance Supplementar y Planning Document (SPD) f or Hampton.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Mixed
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
326  Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
2:Platts Ey ot,
Hampton
Site Area (ha):  3.77
Site Pr oposal
Regeneration of the island b y maintaining,  and where possib le enhancing,  existing river -dependent
and river related uses.  New business and industrial uses that respect and contrib ute to the island's
special and unique c haracter are encoura ged. Residential de velopment to allo w for the restoration
of the listed b uildings,  especiall y those on the Herita ge at Risk Register , may be appr opriate .
Conte xt:
There is a need to retain and protect the island's unique emplo yment and b usiness uses , particular ly
the river-related uses , including the doc ks, whar ves and slipw ays.
Of the fiv e listed b uildings on Platts Ey ot, four are on the Her itage at Risk Register , as w ell as the
Conser vation Area co vering the island. There is a need to ensure that these designated her itage
assets , and the wider char acter of the island, are impro ved and enhanced.
In Ma y 2021 there w as a large fire which destro yed se veral buildings on the island and caused
further deter ioration of the Conser vation Area. The Council is seeking reinstatement of the listed
buildings as the y were bef ore the fire .
It is ac knowledged that some residential de velopment ma y be needed to suppor t the restor ation of
the listed b uildings;  this should be limited to the minim um necessar y to achie ve viability .
Residential uses should complement the e xisting char acter of the island as w ell as maintain and
where possib le impro ve the appear ance .They should not prejudice the contin ued oper ation of
existing r iver-dependent and r iver-related uses .
33Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill 6
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There is restr icted access to the island and an y proposed scheme will need to address the issue
of pro viding saf e access and eg ress in the e vent of flooding;  this is also lik ely to limit the amount of
residential de velopment on the island. Very limited v ehicular access ma y be appropr iate, provided
that this w ould not adv ersely impact on the char acter and appear ance of the island.
The Council will w ork closely with the En vironment Agency to understand the issues relating to the
provision of saf e access / eg ress to and from the island.
The Council is committed to w orking in par tnership with the site o wners and Histor ic England to
develop a Master plan or de velopment br ief for the island.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or A3 Hampton Waterw orks and the Village Planning
Guidance SPD f or Hampton.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
346  Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
3:Hampton
Traffic Unit,
60-68 Station
Road,  Hampton
Site Area (ha):  0.28
Site Pr oposal
Appr opriate land uses inc lude b usiness,  emplo yment g enerating and other commer cial or social
and comm unity infrastructure uses. The Building of Townscape Merit should be retained and a
pedestrian link should be pr ovided thr ough the site .
Conte xt:
The site is within the designated Hampton Village local centre .
The site is within the Hampton Village Conser vation Area and the whole b uilding is a Building of
Townscape Mer it and should be retained.
The site w as declared sur plus to requirements b y the Metropolitan P olice in 2015 and is no w in
private o wnership . It is recognised that a planning application f or 28 residential units w as granted
permission in 2017. There is a planning application to re-de velop the site to pro vide a residential
care scheme that has been g ranted per mission subject to completion of a Section 106 ag reement.
The e vidence suggests there is a need f or emplo yment gener ating and other commercial or social
infrastructure uses in this area.
Only if other emplo yment gener ating, commercial and social infr astructure uses ha ve been e xplored
and options discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould a residential-led scheme with
policy compliant le vels of aff ordab le housing and on-site car par king be considered as a potential
redevelopment option.
Any proposed scheme should create a pedestr ian link through the site betw een Station A venue
and Be veree Spor ts Ground.  Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes
35Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill 6
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18that should a scheme come f orward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le
housing, in accordance with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability ,
then it w ould not need to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting
submitted.  In those circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or A1 Hampton Histor ic Centre and the Village Planning
Guidance SPD f or Hampton.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
366  Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
4:Hampton
Deliver y Office ,
Rosehill,
Hampton
Site Area (ha):  0.12
Site Pr oposal
If the site is dec lared surplus to requirements,  appr opriate land uses inc lude emplo yment
generating or social and comm unity infrastructure uses.
Conte xt:
The site w as declared sur plus to requirements b y Royal Mail as the sor ting and deliv ery oper ations
were amalgamated with another centre in Ashf ord, Surre y.
Residential uses ma y also be appropr iate as par t of a mix ed use scheme
Only if other emplo yment gener ating, commercial and social infr astructure uses ha ve been e xplored
and options discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould a residential-led scheme with
affordab le housing and on-site car par king be considered as a potential rede velopment option.
The site is located within the Hampton Village Conser vation Area, and an y proposed scheme has
to be compatib le with, and complement, the surrounding residential area.
It is recognised that a planning application f or a mix ed–use de velopment compr ising office units
and 6 houses has been g ranted planning per mission in 2021.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or A1 Hampton Histor ic Centre and the Village Planning
Guidance SPD f or Hampton.
37Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill 6
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
386  Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
5:Carpark f or
Sainsb urys,
Uxbridg e Road,
Hampton
Site Area (ha):  1.99
Site Pr oposal
If this site comes f orwar d for de velopment,  an appr opriate future land use w ould be 100% on-site
affordable housing. There is a str ong planning polic y expectation that a future de velopment
scheme coming f orwar d should deliver 100% on-site aff ordable housing. The restoration and
enhancement of the Longf ord River wildlif e corridor along the southern edg e would be required.
Conte xt:
The adjacent e xisting f oodstore is w ell estab lished and a k ey facility f or the local comm unity.
Parking is e xpected to be repro vided f or the adjacent f oodstore .The e xisting petrol filling station is
expected to be retained or repro vided.
The site of the car par k hard-standings and petrol station is proposed f or release from MOL f ollowing
the Open Land Re view 2021 which f ound this par t (of P arcel 1:  Longf ord E & Schools) perf orms
weakly against all MOL designation cr iteria.
The e xceptional circumstances justifying the MOL release are set out under P olicy 11 to meet the
identified aff ordab le housing needs of local residents and theref ore an y future de velopment scheme
coming f orward for this site should deliv er 100% on-site aff ordab le housing.
The souther n edge of the car par k immediately borders the Longf ord Riv er which f alls within a
designated ‘Other Sites of Nature Impor tance (OSNI)’. This Riv er corr idor f orms par t of an impor tant
‘landscape-scale' wildlif e corr idor connecting through the borough into adjacent g reen space netw orks.
Any new development w ould need to pro vide a minim um of 20% measur able Biodiv ersity Net Gain
(BNG) to wards restor ing and enhancing the ecological habitat quality of the Longf ord Riv er wildlif e
39Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill 6
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18corridor r unning along the souther n edge of the site , in order to help impro ve its function and
connectivity , in accordance with the Richmond Biodiv ersity Action Plan.
Any proposal will be required to pro vide ne w natur al green space habitat creation e xpanding along
the edge/ on the bank top of the Riv er watercourse (within the souther n edge of the site) to help
widen the width of the wildlif e corr idor to deliv er the enhancements descr ibed abo ve.There is a
need f or a comprehensiv e strategy to consider on-site natur al green space .
There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment pro vides ne w on-site Pub lic Open Space in addition
to an y external amenity space requirements , deliv ering m ulti-functional benefits including f or nature
conser vation and biodiv ersity v alue as w ell as f or health and w ellbeing of future occupants and
users , including surrounding comm unities .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or A2 Hampton Residential and the Village Planning
Guidance SPD f or Hampton.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
406  Place-based Str ategy f or Hampton & Hampton Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 187 Place-based Strategy f or
Teddington & Hampton Wick
Place-based Strategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
Area Pr ofile
The Teddington & Hampton Wick area encompasses Teddington Town Centre and the residential
areas of Teddington and Hampton Wick.These are char acter areas B1, B2 and B3 in the Urban Design
Study 2021.
The place as a whole is defined b y its setting of Bush y Park and Hampton Cour t to the south and the
River Thames to the nor th and east, pro viding a special landscape setting, along with a good g reen
infrastructure netw ork of open spaces , although not all are pub licly accessib le. Udne y Park Pla ying
Fields has already been designated as a Local Green Space of par ticular impor tance to the local
comm unity.
Teddington Loc k, constr ucted in 1811, is a distinctiv e landmar k that incor porates a w eir and suspension
bridge, mar king the end of the tidal reach of the Thames and pro viding pedestr ian and cycle connectivity
to Ham and P etersham.  However, man y par ts of the r iverfront are largely inaccessib le.
41Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick 7
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Teddington is identified as a distr ict centre in the borough’ s centre hier archy and the London Plan (see
section 6 of the Plan), sho wing demand f or existing office functions , gener ally within smaller units , and
with the area’ s night-time econom y classed as of more than local significance (NT3).  It pro vides a
balance of m ultiple and independent shops and ser vices and the v acancy r ate in the past has been
consistently lo w.
The area is home to significant assets in the science and lif e sciences sectors , including the National
Physical Labor atory and LGC Ltd (pre viously kno wn as the Labor atory of the Go vernment Chemist)
as well as a moder n business par k.The London Plan recognises its e xisting office functions , gener ally
within smaller units , should be protected, albeit with lo w commercial g rowth potential.
The pro ximity of Teddington to wn centre and r ailway station pro vides good tr anspor t links into centr al
London.
Outside of the to wn centre , Teddington is char acter ised pr imarily by Victor ian and Edw ardian terr aced
and semi-detached proper ties.The preser vation of per iod architectur al details giv es unif ormity to the
histor ic ele vations and a sense of quality to the to wnscape .To the nor th west is a neighbourhood
centre at Stanle y Road pro viding local shops and ser vices .
Hampton Wick Residential is located betw een Bush y Park, the Riv er Thames , and Kingston in the
neighbour ing borough.  Predominantly a residential area of quiet winding streets , man y of which are
conser vation areas , there is also a distinctiv e histor ic core and neighbourhood centre .This pro vides
a mix of shops and ser vices in the south of the area b y Kingston Br idge, bringing activity and vibr ancy
along the High Street.  Hampton Wick railway station is on the same loop r unning through Teddington.
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 f eedbac k was in vited on what people v alued
in their area.  For char acter area B1 Teddington Town Centre all f eatures w ere scored consistently ,
although par ticular ly highly f or shops and restaur ants, vibr ant health y places , comm unity spir it and
attractiveness . For char acter area B2 Teddington Residential most f eatures w ere scored highly , with
attractiveness , tranquil and calm spaces , and shops and restaur ants scor ing highly . For char acter area
B3 Hampton Wick Residential respondents scored highly f or attr activeness , tranquil and calm places ,
green and open spaces , and shops and restaur ants.
Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises Teddington Town centre (B1) has a good sense of
place and cohesiv eness , and a high sensitivity to change o wing to the high to wnscape v alue and
consistency in scale and height of e xisting b uildings .The str ategy is to conser ve and enhance the
town centre’ s char acter and function. The Study recognises in Teddington Residential (B2) the unif orm
street patter ns, consistent b uilding quality , and pre valent g reen infr astructure contr ibution to the area’ s
distinctiv e sub urban char acter , with o verall a high sensitivity to change;  the str ategy is to conser ve the
existing char acter .The e xisting char acter of Hampton Wick Residential (B3) is good, with areas of
427  Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18high-quality architecture and her itage v alue, and an o verall high sensitivity to change .The str ategy is
to conser ve and enhance the coherence and strength of char acter across the area, impro ving connection
to the Thames and its wider setting.
Other initiatives
The Council w orks through the Teddington Society with the b usiness comm unity and Teddington
Together (TT) to organise e vents such as the Chr istmas “Lights Up”  event, to mak e Teddington a g reat
place to w ork and liv e.The Council will suppor t investigation of oppor tunities f or a mar ket in Teddington
and to increase independent g rocer y stores .There is a director y of b usinesses oper ated b y the Hampton
Wick Association to sho wcase the wide r ange of shops and ser vices , pubs and restaur ants, trades
and cr afts people in Hampton Wick.
Vision
The vision f or Teddington is that it will contin ue to be a comm unity f or residents , visitors and b usiness
which enjo ys links to open spaces , the histor ic Ro yal Parks and the Riv er Thames .The b usy and saf e
district centre will pro vide a wide r ange of independent and other shops , emplo yment, leisure , cultur al,
health and social f acilities to suppor t a range of comm unity activities .
The vision f or Hampton Wick is to retain its sense of identity and off er an attr active mix of retail and
other f acilities , making the most of its location close to the Riv er Thames and e xpansiv e open spaces
at Bush y and Home P arks, which ha ve protected status as an impor tant habit f or wildlif e and a Site
of Special Scientific Interest.
There are limited oppor tunities f or de velopment, with some identified sites in the Teddington to wn
centre that can pla y a role in pro viding f or commercial and comm unity uses along with ne w residential
development.
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Contrib ute to a sense of activity and vibranc y in the to wn and neighbourhood centres,
retaining the mix of uses inc luding restaurants,  cafés, and pubs.
Secure the pr ovision of office floor space and ne w fle xible workspaces within the to wn
centre and intensification of e xisting emplo yment sites to pr ovide f or jobs and suppor t
local b usinesses.
Enhance the pub lic realm,  to impr ove the sense of arriv al at Teddington Station and create
public areas f or dwelling in Teddington to wn centre and implement more , high quality
street furniture . Upgrade the pub lic realm in Hampton Wick to reanimate it as a local hub.
Suppor t greening thr ough enhancing street trees,  planting and ver ges, in the to wn and
neighbourhood centres and the residential areas,  such as the oppor tunity to impr ove
biodiver sity in the gar dens in fr ont of Elmfield House .
Impr ove and increase open spaces,  the connections between them and vie ws to green
spaces and the Thames Corridor .
In areas deficient in access to Pub lic Open Space , consider oppor tunities to impr ove
access to e xisting spaces,  either thr ough design and pub lic realm impr ovements,  or where
oppor tunities arise , provide ne w pub licly accessib le open space . Open spaces that are
currentl y not pub licly accessib le, such as Udne y Park Pla ying Fields,  will be encoura ged
to make them a vailab le for pub lic access and use .
43Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick 7
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Ensure de velopment along the river side reflects the semi-rural c haracter of the Thames
Corridor and embraces the wider landscape setting to enhance the identity of the area.
Contrib ute to v alued leisure functions,  including water uses,  walking and c ycling and
enhancing contin uity, connectivity and legibility of the Thames P ath r oute , with pub lic
realm and active fr onta ges along the river side.
Consider oppor tunities to reduce the dominance of car s and pr omote active tra vel,
impr oving the permeability and creating space f or pedestrians.
Within the to wn centre boundar y, there is potential f or ne w de velopment at ke y corner plots
and ar ound the station if sites come f orwar d, including at Teddington Telephone Exc hang e
(Site Allocation 6), Teddington Deliver y Office (Site 7),  and Teddington P olice Station (Site
Allocation 9). There are oppor tunities to pr ovide f or social and comm unity infrastructure , and
enhance the local retail and emplo yment off ers whic h contrib ute to enab ling the to wn centre
grow and diver sify, as well as pr ovide ne w housing. There is an identified oppor tunity f or
mid-rise b uildings in the area along the rail way line nor th of Teddington Station,  across the
junction of Station Road/High Street in accor dance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building
Zones.  Outside of the to wn centre , at the Strathmore Centre (Site Allocation 8) rede velopment
for a replacement n ursery and aff ordable housing is e xpected to be implemented.
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
Telephone Exchange , Teddington
Teddington Deliv ery Office , Teddington
Strathmore Centre , Strathmore Road, Teddington
Teddington P olice Station, P ark Road, Teddington
447  Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
6:Telephone
Exchang e,
Teddington
Site Area (ha):  0.17
Site Pr oposal
If the site is dec lared surplus to requirements,  appr opriate land uses inc lude commer cial / retail
on the gr ound floor , especiall y in the designated ke y shopping fr onta ge facing the High Street.
Any proposal should pr ovide f or emplo yment floor space , including offices.  A mix ed-use sc heme
with housing (inc luding aff ordable housing) in upper floor s and to the rear of the site could be
considered.
Conte xt
The site is located within Teddington’ s town centre boundar y and par tly within the k ey
shopping area.
The site is subject to being declared sur plus to requirements b y the telecoms lando wner
The Retail & Leisure Needs Study 2021 (phase 1) f orecasts a small increase in con venience
goods floorspace and additional f ood/be verage floorspace requirements in total of ca.
810sqm (g ross) uses f or Teddington to 2039.
Any rede velopment proposal should pro vide f or commercial / retail floorspace on the g round
floor and create an attr active frontage , including retaining the open area fronting the High
Street.
Any commercial / retail floorspace should enab le the centre to g row and div ersify in a w ay
that responds to changes in the retail and leisure industr ies, providing commercial, b usiness
and ser vice uses to ser ve the local comm unity.
45Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick 7
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18As this is a site in one of the borough's to wn centres , there is an e xpectation that an y
proposal pro vides emplo yment floorspace , particular ly offices which could be in the f orm
of fle xible shared w orkspaces .
The site is within the High Street Teddington Conser vation Area, and an y rede velopment
proposal will need to respect its char acter and the settings of the listed b uildings on the
opposite side of the High Street.
Only if other commercial or emplo yment gener ating uses ha ve been e xplored and options
discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould the pro vision of housing, including
policy compliant aff ordab le housing, in upper floors and to the rear of the site as par t of a
mixed use scheme , be considered as a potential rede velopment option.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which
any rede velopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is also set out in the Urban Design
Study 2021 in the char acter area profile and design guidance f or B1 Teddington Town
Centre and the Village Planning Guidance SPD f or Hampton Wick and Teddington.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
467  Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation 7:
Teddington
Deliver y Office ,
Teddington
Site Area (ha):  0.06
Site Pr oposal
If the site is dec lared surplus to requirements,  appr opriate land uses inc lude commer cial / retail
on the gr ound floor , especiall y in the designated ke y shopping fr onta ge facing the High Street.
Any proposal should pr ovide f or emplo yment floor space , including offices.  A mix ed-use sc heme
with housing (inc luding aff ordable housing) in upper floor s and to the rear of the site could be
considered.
Conte xt
The site is located within Teddington’ s town centre boundar y and par tly within the k ey
shopping area.
The site is within the High Street Teddington Conser vation Area and the b uilding is par tly
designated as Building of Townscape Mer it. Any rede velopment proposal should be modest,
and conser ve and, where appropr iate, enhance the Conser vation Area, and retain the
Building of Townscape Mer it.
As of 2021, Ro yal Mail has no plans to relocate oper ations from this deliv ery office . However,
if the site is declared sur plus to requirements b y the Ro yal Mail in the longer ter m.
The Retail & Leisure Needs Study 2021 (phase 1) f orecasts a small increase in con venience
goods floorspace and additional f ood/be verage floorspace requirements in total of ca.
810sqm (g ross) uses f or Teddington to 2039.
47Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick 7
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Any rede velopment proposal should pro vide f or commercial / retail on the g round floor ,
particular ly facing the High Street (taking account of the Building of Townscape Mer it
designation and subject to f easibility and viability of alter ing the ele vations).
As this is a site in one of the borough's to wn centres , there is an e xpectation that an y
proposal pro vides emplo yment floorspace , particular ly offices which could be in the f orm
of fle xible shared w orkspaces .
Any commercial / retail floorspace should enab le the centre to g row and div ersify in a w ay
that responds to changes in the retail and leisure industr ies, providing commercial, b usiness
and ser vice uses to ser ve the local comm unity.
Only if other commercial or emplo yment gener ating uses ha ve been e xplored and options
discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould the pro vision of housing, including
policy compliant aff ordab le housing, in upper floors and to the rear of the site as par t of a
mixed use scheme , be considered as a potential rede velopment option.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which
any rede velopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is also set out in the Urban Design
Study 2021 in the char acter area profile and design guidance f or B1 Teddington Town
Centre and the Village Planning Guidance SPD f or Hampton Wick and Teddington.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
487  Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
8: Strathmore
Centre ,
Strathmore
Road,
Teddington
Site Area (ha):  0.63
Site Pr oposal
Social and comm unity infrastructure uses and/or an aff ordable housing sc heme with on-site car
parking are the most appr opriate land uses f or this site .
Conte xt
This site has an e xisting social infr astructure use , which pro vides a complete r ange of child-care
services f or children up to and including Year 6, as w ell as acting as a n urser y to pre-school aged
children.
It is ac knowledged that the site has currently poor access pro vision;  it is also located in a lo w Pub lic
Transpor t Accessibility Le vel (PT AL) area.
There is an increasing need f or the pro vision f or childcare f acilities and n urser ies in the borough.
This site , due to its location in a pr imarily residential area and its pro ximity to Stanle y School and
St James's school, mak es it ideal f or the pro vision of n urser ies and other child-care ser vices .
Proposed rede velopment will only be acceptab le if the current child-care pro vision is adequately
re-pro vided in a diff erent w ay, including the pro vision of appropr iate outside space and par king
related to the childcare ser vices , or else where in a con venient alter nativ e location accessib le to the
current comm unity it suppor ts.
Only if other alter nativ e social or comm unity infr astructure uses ha ve been e xplored and options
discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould an aff ordab le housing scheme with on-site
car par king be considered as a potential rede velopment option.
49Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick 7
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes that should a scheme come
forward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing, in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , then it w ould not need
to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting submitted.  In those
circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted. However, on this site the
Council is seeking repro vision of the n urser y along with aff ordab le housing, due to the need to
repro vide the e xisting use .
An application f or the rede velopment of the site f or the repro vision of a n ursey and the constr uction
of 30 dw ellings (100% aff ordab le) has a resolution to g rant per mission from Richmond’ s Planning
Committee . Negotiations are ongoing regarding the legal ag reement to secure the planning
obligations .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or B2 Teddington Residential and the Village Planning
Guidance SPD f or Hampton Wick and Teddington.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
507  Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
9:Teddington
Police Station,
Park Road,
Teddington
Site Area (ha):  0.16
Site Pr oposal
Comm unity/social infrastructure led mix ed use de velopment with an element of residential. The
residential element should pr ovide a polic y compliant le vel of aff ordable housing.
Conte xt
The site w as identified to be disposed of within The Ma yor’s Office f or Policing and Cr ime (MOP AC)
and Metropolitan P olice Ser vice ‘Public Access Str ategy’  (2017).  Further, the site has subsequently
been appro ved for disposal, and it is understood will be shor tly be mar keted f or sale .
The site is within the P ark Road Conser vation Area and within the setting of fur ther designated
heritage assets .The w all fronting P ark Road is a Building of Townscape Mer it, and there are other
surrounding BTMs .The open space to the nor th of the site has been designated as OOL TI (Other
Open Land of Townscape Impor tance).
Proposed rede velopment of the site will only be acceptab le if a comm unity/social infr astructure use
is repro vided on site at g round floor le vel, such as f or a medical/health use . Residential use will be
acceptab le on the upper floors , subject to the de velopment pro viding policy compliant le vels of
affordab le housing (in line with pub lic sector land disposal).  Grant funding oppor tunities should be
looked at to maximise the le vel of aff ordab le housing o ver and abo ve the policy requirement.
A comprehensiv e rede velopment of the site should be pursued, and an attr active frontage created
along P ark Road ha ving regard to and retaining the BTM designated w all.To the rear there are
large br ick walls and a metal f ence which pro vides secur ity to the P olice Station b ut creates an
inactiv e frontage . Once the use as a P olice Station ceases , then there is an oppor tunity to impro ve
51Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick 7
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18the design of this area. The rear boundar y treatment should be softened and designed to impro ve
the streetscene along P ark Lane .
The OOL TI should be retained, and an y proposals should protect and enhance this area, which
would benefit from being opened f or pub lic use with seating and planting.
The site is within Teddington Town Centre b ut does not f orm par t of the k ey shopping area.  Retail
is not considered appropr iate in this location as it w ould detr act from the main shopping area.
Proposals should reflect the site’ s town centre location and look to complement the vitality and
viability of the centre .
Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes that should a scheme come
forward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing, in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , then it w ould not need
to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting submitted.  In those
circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted. However, on this site the
Council is seeking a social infr astructure use and aff ordab le housing, due to its prominent to wn
centre location and local needs .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or B2 Teddington Residential and the Village Planning
Guidance SPD f or Hampton Wick and Teddington.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
527  Place-based Str ategy f or Teddington & Hampton Wick
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 188 Place-based Strategy f or
Twickenham,  Stra wberr y Hill & St
Margarets
Place-based Strategy f or Twickenham,  Stra wberr y Hill & St Mar garets
Area Pr ofile
The Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets Area encompasses Twickenham Town Centre and
Green, Twickenham Residential, and Twickenham Riv erside , along with the residential areas of St
Margarets and East Twickenham, and Str awberr y Hill and Fulw ell and West Twickenham Residential.
A green, leafy char acter a way from the commercial to wn centre , particular ly along the Riv er Thames ,
is complemented b y the Riv er Cr ane, Crane P ark and Fulw ell Golf Course .There are man y areas of
high scenic quality of open space including the Thames P ath, with the cur ving r iver giving e xpansiv e
views and a sense of openness .
Twickenham is recognised as a distr ict centre in the London Plan, with the area’ s night time econom y
classified as of more than local significance (NT3), medium commercial g rowth potential and B office
guidelines (potential to accommodate ne w office de velopment gener ally as par t of mix ed-use
development).  It off ers a r ange of retail, leisure , education and comm unity f acilities .There are local
centres at East Twickenham, and St Margarets , as w ell as local shopping pro vision across the area
including at Cro wn Road, St Margarets Road, Twickenham Green, Str awberr y Hill, Fulw ell and Hospital
Bridge Road.
The area is an impor tant emplo yment location with the Council and other offices in the centre , along
with retail and ser vice b usinesses , and other significant emplo yers across the area, including a n umber
of industr ial estates .Twickenham Film Studios pro vides studios , post production and production
solutions . Eel Pie Island, which is par tly residential, also pro vides f or river related industr ies such as
boat b uilding and repair , contr ibuting to a w orking w aterfront.
53Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18St Mar y’s Univ ersity is a major educational institution, with a main campus in Str awberr y Hill as w ell
as facilities at Teddington Loc k, and the y also oper ate the Exchange comm unity b uilding in Twickenham
Town Centre .
The area includes Twickenham’ s nationally impor tant r ugby venues at Twickenham Stadium, a w orld
famous landmar k and the home of Rugb y Union, and The Stoop (Har lequins Rugb y Football Club).
The area is home to some impor tant histor ic riverside estates and their gardens , such as Marb le Hill
House , Orleans House , York House , Pope’s Garden and Radnor Gardens .There is a r ange of other
cultur al and comm unity f acilities including the Twickenham Museum, The Mar y Wallace Theatre , the
World Rugb y Museum, Turner’s House , Orleans House Galler y and Str awberr y Hill House .
The area is ser ved by rail stations at Twickenham, Fulw ell, Str awberr y Hill and St Margarets .
Rede velopment at Twickenham Station is being completed, which has deliv ered full accessibility and
a new plaza with a link to the Riv er Cr ane.There are r iver crossings to wards Richmond to wn centre
but over the Riv er Thames in the Twickenham area there is only a seasonal pedestr ian and cycle f erry
that oper ates from the r iver bank at Marb le Hill to Ham on the opposite bank.
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 f eedbac k was in vited on what people v alued
in their area.  For char acter area C1 Twickenham Town Centre , respondents scored highly f or shops
and restaur ants and vibr ancy. For char acter area C3 Twickenham Riv erside respondents gener ally
scored f airly highly , although par ticular ly highly f or attr activeness , tranquillity , and g reen spaces . C4
Strawberr y Hill Residential receiv ed high scores f or attr activeness , valuing her itage , tranquillity , and
green spaces . Respondents scored C5 East Twickenham Residential highly f or attr activeness , as the y
did for C6 St Margarets Residential.
Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises o verall large par ts of this area ha ve high sensitivity
to change , including f or Twickenham Residential (C2), Twickenham Riv erside (C3), Str awberr y Hill
Residential (C4), East Twickenham Residential (C5), and St Margarets Residential (C6). There ma y
be small areas of small areas of lo wer sensitivity within the area where the to wnscape is less intact
and does not reflect the char acter descr ibed in the k ey char acter istics , and o verall the areas of
Twickenham Town Centre and Green (C1) and Fulw ell and West Twickenham Residential (C7) ha ve
medium sensitivity to change with some potential f or positiv e change .
548  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18For Twickenham Town Centre and Green (C1) the str ategy identifies a strong sense of place , with the
oppor tunity to enhance a coherent distinctiv eness and strengthen e xisting char acter b y upg rading
inconsistent de velopments . For Twickenham Residential (C2) the str ategy is to conser ve, enhance
and impro ve the char acter of this area b y enhancing its legibility and the consistency of its b uilt
environment.  For Twickenham Riv erside (C3) it is identified as ha ving a distinctiv e sense of place and
high quality to wnscape , theref ore the str ategy is to conser ve the char acter , elements and f eatures
whilst enhancing e xisting f eatures where appropr iate. For East Twickenham Residential (C5) the
strategy is to conser ve the e xisting char acter , and enhance pub lic realm and frontages along local
parades . For St Margarets Residential (C6) it is identified as ha ving a distinctiv e sense of place and
character istic elements in good condition, theref ore the str ategy is to conser ve existing char acter and
enhance elements and f eatures , where appropr iate. For Fulw ell and West Twickenham Residential
(C7) it recognises the char acter area has a less coherent char acter than other areas in the borough,
theref ore the str ategy is to impro ve the char acter of the area, with future ne w development and creation
of landmar ks taking oppor tunities to add ne w char acter and sense of place .
Other initiatives
The Council suppor ts businesses and retailers w orking with the current Twickenham Business
Impro vement Distr ict, Disco ver Twickenham. They work with b usinesses to engage visitors and promote
local shops to the comm unity, in addition to off ering suppor t and netw orking to the b usiness comm unity.
There is also the Church Street Association, a collection of tr aders who promote Church Street as a
sought-after designation f or businesses , residents and visitors , suppor ting initiativ es such as alfresco
dining.
Vision
The vision f or Twickenham is that it is a connected comm unity with good access to leisure f acilities ,
green spaces and its r ivers, comm unity netw orks and ser vices .
The vision f or Twickenham to wn centre is to ser ve local residents , workers and visitors – a destination
of choice with a unique sense of place .The to wn will meet moder n requirements and ha ve a strong
local econom y whilst making the most of its distinctiv e her itage , open spaces and r iverside .
The aim is to rejuv enate its b usiness and cultur al off er, with a ne w focus created b y the r iverfront
experience , through de velopment of k ey sites .
Twickenham’ s impor tant spor ting and cultur al attr actions will be maximised and disr uption to local
residents and b usinesses minimised.
The vision f or Str awberr y Hill is that it will contin ue to be a saf e, and attr active family f ocused residential
area. The local centre and r ailway station will be enhanced to create a real ‘hear t’ to the area, whilst
the contr ibution that its v alued open spaces mak e to the area’ s char acter will be protected.  St Mar y’s
University will contin ue to contr ibute to the local comm unity.
The vision f or St Margarets and East Twickenham is to maintain the attr active residential char acter
and to ensure that the shopping centres contin ue to thr ive.
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
55Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Contrib ute to a sense of activity and vibranc y in the to wn and local centres,  to encoura ge
arts, culture and leisure de velopments to enhance the mix ed-use potential of the area and
make it more of a destination to spend time .
Encoura ge the pr ovision of office floor space and ne w fle xible workspaces within the to wn
centre and intensification of e xisting emplo yment sites to pr ovide f or jobs and suppor t
local b usinesses.
Ensure that an y expansion and mana gement of enter tainment and leisure facilities is
sensitive to the amenity of people who live in the centre and the wider functioning of the
area,  promoting the night-time econom y thr ough diver sifying the rang e of cultural ven ues
and off ers, encoura ging on-street al fresco dining and making a welcoming en vironment
for all night-time econom y user s and w orker s.
Enhance the pub lic realm thr ough creating high quality spaces and implement more
high-quality street furniture , including implementing the East Twickenham streetscene
impr ovements,  providing a ne w pub lic square or civic space at Twickenham River side,
and reanimating local commer cial areas suc h as Wellesle y Road.
Promote r outes f or active tra vel and e xercise, encoura ging health y activity and e xploration
of the area b y local w orker s, visitor s and residents.  Suppor t greening thr ough tree-planting.
Contrib ute to pr otecting,  enhancing and making the most of the c haracter of the b uilt and
open en vironment,  including the River Thames and Crane river sides and associated river
related activities and Twickenham w orking waterfr ont, including preser ving and enhancing
public access to the Thames.
Suppor t the cultural and comm unity off er for both residents and visitor s around the
Twickenham Cultural Quar ter, including the area f ocused ar ound the Civic Centre ,York
House and Gar dens,  the Mar y Wallace Theatre ,Twickenham Museum and Librar y, with
potential to e xtend as a cultural hub into the to wn centre and along the River side, to pr ovide
a destination f or visitor s, and encoura ging outdoor temporar y and permanent ar t and
theatre inter ventions.
Maintain and pr ovide ne w pub lic toilets within the pub lic realm,  supplementing the
Richmond Comm unity Toilet Sc heme , including pr ovision at Twickenham Station and to
serve Twickenham River side.
Within the to wn centre boundar y, development is e xpected at Station Yard (Site Allocation 15)
to pr ovide ad ditional residential use , and there is potential f or ne w de velopment to contrib ute
to a mix of uses if sites come f orwar d, including at Twickenham Telephone Exc hang e (Site
Allocation 16) and Twickenham P olice Station (Site Allocation 17). There is a tall b uilding zone
around the station and nor th of the rail way line , where rede velopment has recentl y occurred,
with a surr ounding mid-rise b uffer, for an y future pr oposals to be considered a gainst P olicy
45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones.  At Twickenham River side and Water Lane/King Street
(Site Allocation 18) there is the oppor tunity f or the site to reg enerate the to wn centre and
increase f ootfall,  making the River side a destination and impr oving its connectivity .
Outside of the to wn centre , there is an oppor tunity to enhance the spor ting r ole of Twickenham
Stadium (Site Allocation 13) and The Stoop (Site Allocation 12),  and enhance the education
offer at St Mar y’s Univer sity (Site Allocation 10) and Ric hmond upon Thames Colleg e (Site
Allocation 11).  At Mere way (Site Allocation 14) there is potential rede velopment f or a social or
comm unity infrastructure use .
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
St Mar y's Univ ersity , Strawberr y Hill
Richmond upon Thames College , Twickenham
The Stoop (Har lequins Rugb y Football Club), Twickenham
568  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Twickenham Stadium, Twickenham
Mere way Day Centre , Mere way Road, Twickenham
Station Yard, Twickenham
Twickenham Telephone Exchange
Twickenham P olice Station
Twickenham Riv erside and Water Lane/King Street
57Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
10:St Mar y's
Univer sity,
Strawberr y Hill
Site Area (ha):  12.08
Site Pr oposal
Retention and upgrading of St Mar y’s Univer sity and its associated teac hing,  spor t and student
residential accommodation.  Upgrade w orks to inc lude refurbishment,  adaptation,  intensification,
extensions and ne w build elements on site where justified full y with regar d to national polic y and
the policies of the de velopment plan.  A Masterplan and/or site de velopment brief , whic h
encompasses the main campus in Stra wberr y Hill as well as Teddington Loc k, together with ne w
estates and student accommodation strategies,  will be prepared in conjunction with the Council.
This will guide future de velopment f or St Mar y’s Univer sity, both on and off site .
Conte xt
There is a need to tak e account of the future demand f or univ ersity places as e videnced in the Local
Housing Needs Assessment 2021
There is a need to impro ve and upg rade the e xisting f acilities at St Mar y’s Univ ersity as w ell as a
need to pro vide additional educational floorspace , student residential accommodation and other
associated f acilities .
The Council will suppor t and w ork with St Mar y's Univ ersity to ensure it remains a highly regarded,
competitiv e and viab le higher education f acility in the future and to assist in meeting the future
educational needs of students .
It is ac knowledged that this is a constr ained site , with the major ity of land not b uilt on designated
as Metropolitan Open Land.
588  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There are also listed b uildings , Buildings of Townscape Mer it as w ell as spor ts pla ying fields . Any
development proposal has to tak e account of the highly significant her itage assets and respect the
special and unique location and setting of St Mar y's Univ ersity , including the Gr ade I listed Chapel,
the adjoining Gr ade I listed b uilding (Str awberr y Hill House) and the associated Histor ic Park and
Garden (II*) as w ell as the high quality Edw ardian villas within the Waldeg rave Park Conser vation
Area.
The e xisting pla ying fields and spor ts facilities should be retained and/or re-pro vided, and if necessar y,
replacement f acilities will ha ve to be pro vided on or off site . Any repro vision of f acilities should be
at equal or better standard than e xisting.
The Council will w ork with the Univ ersity on a Master plan and/or site de velopment br ief (SPD) f or
the longer ter m upg rading of their sites (main campus at Str awberr y Hill and Teddington Loc k) to
meet the demand f or additional teaching, spor t and student residential accommodation, taking
account of e xisting site constr aints and with the aim to impro ve and enhance the Metropolitan Open
Land, including vie ws and vistas .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C4 Str awberr y Hill residential and the Str awberr y
Hill Village Planning Guidance SPD , and where rele vant within the Master plan / site de velopment
brief.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
59Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
11:Richmond
upon Thames
Colleg e,
Twickenham
Site Area (ha):  8.65
Site Pr oposal
Rede velopment to pr ovide a ne w replacement colleg e, science / tec hnology / engineering / maths
centre , technical hub (B1),  a ne w secondar y school and special education needs sc hool,  spor ts
centre as well as residential inc luding aff ordable housing.  Protection and upgrading of the pla ying
field to the south of the colleg e, including the installation of a ne w artificial grass (3G) pla ying
pitch.
Conte xt
There w as a clear identified need f or a ne w campus f or education and enter prise at the site , including
in par ticular a ne w secondar y school.  In 2016 outline per mission w as granted f or the rede velopment
of the site to pro vide a ne w college campus , secondar y school, SEN school, a technical hub ,
replacement spor ts centre , upg rading of the pla ying fields and f or residential de velopment.
The ne w college campus b uilding, secondar y school and SEN school ha ve been pro vided and are
now in use .
The Council still suppor ts the comprehensiv e rede velopment of the site , providing f or a v ariety of
educational needs in the borough, together with associated suppor ting residential de velopment
including a policy compliant le vel of aff ordab le housing.  In line with the London Plan as this is pub licly
owned land the Council e xpects that g rant funding oppor tunities are e xplored to increase aff ordab le
housing pro vision abo ve what is e xpected in policy .
Multi-use is sought f or the educational and spor ts facilities , in line with other policies in this Plan.
608  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The Council will w ork closely with par tners , including Transpor t for London and Har lequins Rugb y
Football Club , to ensure the de velopment does not lead to har mful impacts on the local road netw ork.
Any development proposal is required to protect and, where possib le, enhance , the Riv er Cr ane
corridor.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C4 Str awberr y Hill residential and the Twickenham
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
61Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
12:The Stoop
(Harlequins
Rugb y Football
Club),
Twickenham
Site Area (ha):  4.61
Site Pr oposal
The Council suppor ts the contin ued use of the gr ounds f or spor ts uses.  Appr opriate ad ditional
facilities inc luding a ne w nor th stand,  indoor leisure , hotel or b usiness uses as well as residential
including aff ordable housing ma y be suppor ted pr ovided that the y are complementar y to the
main use of the site as a spor ts gr ound.
Conte xt
There is a need to retain, and where possib le enhance , the contin ued use of this site as a spor ts
ground.
The Council will w ork in par tnership with Har lequins RFC to understand the potential need f or
associated ne w facilities , such as a ne w and impro ved stadium or an upg rade to the e xisting, indoor
leisure (gym/tr aining f acilities), b usiness uses or potentially a hotel.
Any additional uses need to be complementar y to the main use of the site as a spor ts ground;  new
uses should theref ore be associated with, and not detr act from, the main spor ts use of this site . A
mixed use scheme , which ma y include residential including aff ordab le housing, ma y also be
considered appropr iate pro vided that other spor ting and associated uses ha ve been fully in vestigated
and that the mix ed / residential use is compatib le with the main use of the site .
To the east of the stadium is designated Other Open land of Townscape impor tance (OOL TI).The
Open Land Re view 2021 f ound this parcel (site n umber 74:  Land at Har lequins) perf ormed strongly
against OOL TI designation cr iteria.
Multi-use is sought f or the spor ts and associated f acilities , in line with other policies in this Plan.
628  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The Council will w ork closely with par tners , including Transpor t for London and Har lequins RFC , to
ensure the de velopment does not lead to har mful impacts on the local road netw ork.
Any development proposal is required to protect and, where possib le, enhance , the Riv er Cr ane
corridor as w ell as the Duk e of Nor thumber land Riv er, as w ell as the setting of the Rosecroft
Conser vation Area.
The Council is committed to w orking in par tnership with Har lequins RFC to de velop a Master plan,
which should set out the long-ter m str ategy f or de velopment of this site .
There is potential oppor tunity in the mid-r ise building z one (5-6 store ys) identified f or the site in the
Urban Design Study 2021, f or a proposal to be assessed against P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building
Zones , the proposals should be carefully located, respond positiv ely and protect the setting of
existing b uildings in the surrounding area, including her itage assets such as conser vation areas ,
listed b uildings and locally listed b uildings and pro vide high quality open space .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C2 Twickenham Residential and the Twickenham
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
63Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
13:Twickenham
Stadium,
Twickenham
Site Area (ha):  12.62
Site Pr oposal
The Council suppor ts the contin ued use and impr ovement of the gr ounds f or spor ts uses.
Appr opriate ad ditional facilities inc luding ne w stands,  indoor leisure , hotel or b usiness uses,  as
well as hospitality and conf erence facilities,  may be suppor ted pr ovided that the y are
complementar y to the main use of the site as a spor ts gr ound.
Conte xt
There is a need to retain, and where possib le enhance , this nationally impor tant spor ting v enue
with its associated f acilities to ensure it remains a w orld class standard of f acilities and visitor
experience .
The Council will w ork in par tnership with the Rugb y Football Union (RFU) to understand the potential
need f or associated ne w and complementar y facilities such as a hotel, leisure centre , training
facilities as w ell as hospitality and conf erence f acilities .The applicant will ha ve to demonstr ate that
additional f acilities do not lead to har mful impacts on the vitality and viability of Twickenham to wn
centre .
Multi-use is sought f or the spor ts and associated f acilities , in line with other policies in this Plan.
There is a gener al need f or ne w office floorspace in the borough and in the e vent of an area of the
site being declared sur plus to requirements , the oppor tunity to pro vide f or emplo yment floorspace ,
such as offices or a b usiness par k, should be firstly e xplored.  A mix ed use scheme , which ma y
include residential including aff ordab le housing, ma y also be considered appropr iate pro vided that
other spor ting and associated uses , including emplo yment, ha ve been fully in vestigated and that
648  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18the mix ed / residential use is compatib le with the main use of the site , i.e. a national stadium, also
taking into account the presence of the e xisting se werage treatment w orks to the nor th of the site
and residential amenity .
There is a need to retain sufficient par king, par ticular ly for coaches , servicing f acilities and space
for spectators and related ser vices . Any further de velopment should not lead to har mful impacts on
parking, congestion and the wider local road netw ork.
Part of the site , adjacent to the Duk e of Nor thumber land Riv er, is designated Metropolitan Open
Land (MOL). The Open Land Re view 2021 f ound that the MOL str ip of land to the east of the r iver
should be impro ved as it f orms par t of the v alued g reen corr idor at the Duk e of Nor thumber land’s
River to enhance pro vision f or wildlif e and access .Theref ore, any development proposal is required
to protect and, where possib le, enhance , the Duk e of Nor thumber land Riv er, including access to it,
and the associated MOL.
The Council is committed to w orking in par tnership with the RFU to de velop a Master plan, which
should set out the long-ter m str ategy f or de velopment of this site .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C2 Twickenham Residential and the Twickenham
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
65Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
14:Mere way Day
Centre , Mere way
Road,
Twickenham
Site Area (ha):  0.23
Site Pr oposal
Social and comm unity infrastructure uses are the most appr opriate land uses f or this site .
Conte xt
There w as a disused da y centre on this site which has recently been demolished.
This is an e xisting social infr astructure site and due to its location in a pr imarily residential area, it
could be suitab le for a social infr astructure use to meet local needs .
It is ac knowledged that the site has currently poor access pro vision;  it is also located in a lo w Pub lic
Transpor t Accessibility Le vel (PT AL) area.
Only if other alter nativ e social or comm unity infr astructure uses ha ve been e xplored and options
discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould a residential-led scheme with policy compliant
levels of aff ordab le housing and on-site car par king be considered as a potential rede velopment
option.
Any development proposal is required to protect and, where possib le, enhance the Riv er Cr ane
corridor.
Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes that should a scheme come
forward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing, in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , then it w ould not need
668  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting submitted.  In those
circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C2 Twickenham Residential and in the rele vant
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
67Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
15:Station Yard,
Twickenham
Site Area (ha):  0.17
Site Pr oposal
The appr opriate land use f or this site inc ludes residential uses.  Any rede velopment pr oposal will
be required to impr ove the pub lic realm/landscaping. The b us stands should be retained,
rede veloped or re-sited in a suitab le location.
Conte xt
Part of the site is currently used as a car par k, which is anticipated to be sur plus to requirements
once the o verall rede velopment of Twickenham Station has been completed;  the remainder of the
site to the w est is o wned b y Transpor t for London and currently used as a b us waiting stand.
Permission has been g ranted in March 2021 f or the rede velopment of the e xisting car par k to pro vide
a new building of 5 to 6 store ys, compr ising of 46 residential units and associated landscaping,
enhancements to pub lic realm as w ell as disab led par king and cycle par king.
Any development should be designed to pro vide an attr active frontage to wards Alban y Pub lic House .
The oppor tunity to impro ve the pub lic realm through high quality tree planting and other landscaping
to impro ve the quality of the en vironment, and to complement the Council’ s own pub lic realm
impro vements around the Alban y Pub lic House .
The site is in a constr ained location with the r ail line to the nor th. Any development should mak e
sure that the amenity of future residents is protected.
The b us stands on the site are currently in use b y TFL on an inter mittent basis .The stands are
impor tant when Twickenham stadium is holding an e vent.The b us stands should be retained,
redeveloped or re-sited in a suitab le location.
688  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The site is on a cycle route and there is a pedestr ian route to the station via steps on the other side
of the London Road br idge.There are oppor tunities to retain and impro ve cycling and pedestr ian
links, particular ly in ter ms of the saf ety and per meability of these routes .
The design of an y proposal should tak e into account the setting and char acter of the adjacent
Queens Road Conser vation Area and Alban y Pub lic House , which is a Building of Townscape Mer it.
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies par t of Station Yard as a mid-r ise building z one (5-6 store ys),
with the oppor tunity f or an y new development to respond appropr iately to the surrounding landscape
and scale , in accordance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones .The mid-r ise zone in this
location pro vides an area of tr ansition to the tall b uilding z one to the nor th (i.e .Twickenham Station),
Bridge House to the east and the more modest b uildings to the south as w ell as the 3-store y Alban y
Public House . Building heights should step do wn from Br idge House and act as an inter mediar y
with the smaller scale surrounding residential proper ties and Alban y Pub lic House .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C1 Twickenham Town Centre and Green.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public/pr ivate
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
69Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
16:Twickenham
Telephone
Exchang e
Site Area (ha):  0.18
Site Pr oposal
If the Telephone Exc hang e is dec lared surplus to requirements,  the Council suppor ts the mix ed
use rede velopment of the site to bring f orwar d residential and emplo yment,  commer cial or retail
uses whic h enhance the comm unity / cultural off ering within Twickenham to wn centre .
Conte xt
The site is within Twickenham to wn centre .
The Telephone Exchange is subject to being declared sur plus to requirements b y the telecoms
lando wner .
If the Telephone Exchange sur plus to requirements the oppor tunity should be tak en for a
comprehensiv e rede velopment of the whole site .
Currently the b uilding has inactiv e frontages along Garfield Road and Arr agon Road, which detr act
from the streetscene .The Council e xpects that both of these frontages are activ ated and designed
to enhance the vibr ancy of the area.
The design along Garfield road should look to create cohesion with the libr ary (Gr ade II listed
building) opposite and the g reen link through Garfield Road P ark.
The Council considers there to be a r ange of commercial and retail uses could be located on the
site, such as space f or creativ e industr ies, an indoor retail/f ood mar ket, niche retail or a small cinema.
The optim um location of these uses w ould be on the g round floor fronting Garfield Road, to e xtend
the to wn centre off er and enhance the Twickenham Cultur al Quar ter.
708  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Residential uses w ould be suited to the upper floors and the area fronting Arr agon Road. The
frontage along Arr agon although residential should still be activ e and pro vide visual stim ulation (no
large b lank f acades with small windo ws) while still pro viding secur ity to the residents .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C1 Twickenham Town Centre and Green and the
Twickenham Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
71Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
17:Twickenham
Police Station
Site Area (ha):  0.23
Site Pr oposal
In the e vent of a satisfactor y re-location of P olice station uses,  acceptab le uses of the site w ould
be for a mix of to wn centre uses to inc lude retail or other active fr onta ges on London Road,  with
residential to rear , facing Gr osvenor Road.
Conte xt
The site is within Twickenham to wn centre boundar y.
The police station w as extensiv ely refurbished in 2020.  As of 2021, the Council is not a ware of an y
relocation plans . If the site is declared sur plus to requirements b y the Ma yor's Office f or Policing
and Cr ime (MOP AC) and Metropolitan P olice Ser vice, this will be subject to a satisf actor y re-location
of Police station uses .The current station pro vides a 24 hour front counter ser vice.
Any future de velopment coming f orward w ould need to remain sensitiv e to preser ving the histor ic
character and histor ic landscape setting of the adjacent Conser vation Area.
There is a need to create activ e frontages on London Road including ne w retail / commercial
floorspace .
The Retail & Leisure Needs Study 2021 (phase 1) f orecasts a small increase in con venience goods
floorspace and additional f ood/be verage floorspace requirements in total of ca.  616sqm (g ross)
uses f or Twickenham to 2039.
Any commercial / retail floorspace should enab le the centre to g row and div ersify in a w ay that
responds to changes in the retail and leisure industr ies, providing commercial, b usiness and ser vice
uses to ser ve the local comm unity.
728  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18As this is a site in one of the borough's to wn centres , there is an e xpectation that an y proposal
provides emplo yment floorspace , particular ly offices which could be in the f orm of fle xible shared
workspaces .
The par t of the b uilding which is designated as a b uilding of Townscape Mer it needs to contin ue to
be protected within an y future de velopment proposal.
New uses should seek to impro ve the retail and b usiness en vironment and to enhance the link
betw een the station and the core of the to wn centre , including a pedestr ian link betw een London
Road and Grosv enor Road, along with pub lic realm impro vements .
Residential uses ma y be appropr iate to the rear of the site along Grosv enor Road. The residential
use m ust not impact on the deliv ery of to wn centre uses at the front of the site .
Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes that should a scheme come
forward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing, in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , then it w ould not need
to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting submitted.  In those
circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted. However, on this site the
Council is seeking aff ordab le housing along with commercial use , due to its prominent to wn centre
location.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C1 Twickenham Town Centre and Green and the
Twickenham Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
73Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
18:Twickenham
River side and
Water Lane/King
Street
Site Area (ha):  1.06
Site Pr oposal
Comprehensive mix ed-use re-de velopment of the site to pr ovide residential,  a rang e of commer cial
uses,  high quality pub lic realm and impr ovements to the river side and open space .
Conte xt
The site is within Twickenham's to wn centre boundar y.
Comprehensiv e mix ed-use rede velopment of the site should tak e place , bringing bac k into use large
parts of the area which are currently derelict, either through ne w build or con verting e xisting b uildings .
There is an oppor tunity to impro ve connections betw een the core of the to wn and the Riv erside to
create a destination.  Due to its to wn centre location the site could accommodate a r ange of
commercial uses , including retail, office , cafes, restaur ant/pub lic house or hotel.  Retail should be
maintained at g round floor retail frontage on King Street.
Residential uses should be located on the upper floors to retain/pro vide activ e commercial frontages
on the g round floor . Affordab le housing should be pro vided at policy compliant le vels.
The Council e xpects that high-quality pub lic realm is created within the site , with a ne w pub lic square
or civic space , that can be used f or events and pla yspace .There is an aspir ation to pro vide pub lic
toilets . Any proposal should include open space that is as a minim um equiv alent in ter ms of quantum
and quality as the e xisting pro vision, and will be open and accessib le to the pub lic.This can be
achie ved through impro vements/enhancements to the Diamond J ubilee Gardens or through
re-pro vision and re-distr ibution within the site .
748  Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Hard or soft landscape design should increase the urban g reening of the site and pro vide space f or
outdoor activities/uses . It should pro vide coherent routes through the site to promote activ e travel
such as w alking and cycling.
The site is in an area with good accessibility to pub lic transpor t with a PT AL rating of 5 and 6a.
There should be a comprehensiv e approach to ser vicing and deliv ery, along with e xplor ing the
oppor tunity to impro ve the en vironment of the Embankment through a reduction in car par king.
The site is in the Twickenham Riv erside Conser vation Area and opposite Queens Road Conser vation
Area.  It is within the setting of listed b uildings (10-12 Kings Street and Barcla ys Bank) and Buildings
of Townscape Mer it. Any design that comes f orward m ust protect and enhance these her itage
assets and their settings .
Any proposal should seek to maintain the Embankment as a w orking qua y and pro vide moor ing
and landing f acilities , and consider the impact on the char acter and function of Eel Pie Island.
Due to its location on the banks of the Riv er Thames , flood def ences where viab le should be
upgraded and impro ved.Works should be inf ormed b y discussions with the En vironment Agency .
There is a planning application currently under consider ation.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or C3 Twickenham Riv erside and the Twickenham
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Mixed including pub lic
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
75Place-based Str ategy f or Twickenham, Str awberr y Hill & St Margarets 8
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 189 Place-based Strategy f or Whitton
& Heathfield
Place-based Strategy f or Whitton & Heathfield
Area Pr ofile
The Whitton & Heathfield area encompasses Whitton and Heathfield Residential and Whitton High
Street. These are char acter areas D1 and D2 in the Urban Design Study 2021.
Whitton and Heathfield is slightly isolated from the rest of the borough as a result of hea vy traffic on
Cher tsey Road (A316) and b y the Riv er Cr ane.The residential areas are pr imarily large estates of
inter-w ar terr aced or semi-detached houses set bac k from the street with hedgero ws.
Whitton has a unique 1930s High Street, whilst the Heathfield area has less of a f ocus with f ew focal
points .
Whitton to wn centre f orms a f ocus of retail activity , it is identified as a distr ict centre in the borough’ s
centre hier archy and the London Plan (see section 6 of the Plan).  However the London Plan recognises
it has lo w commercial g rowth potential. There are also three smaller shopping par ades , around Hanw orth
Road, Nelson Road and P owder Mill Lane , serving da y to da y needs .Whitton centre also pla ys a
particular role f or visitors to Twickenham Stadium.
The Riv er Cr ane and Cr ane P ark pro vide a natur al-feeling en vironment, enclosed from the surrounding
housing estates b y mature v egetation. This is contin ued through se veral open spaces including
Heathfield Recreation Ground, Murr ay Park and Twickenham Cemeter y. Hounslo w Heath separ ates
the area from fur ther de velopment to the w est.
769  Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18A striking contr ast to its surrounds is the Gr ade II listed Kneller Hall and gardens , which w as built in
the ear ly 18th centur y as a large house near to the f ormer village centre and then home to the Ro yal
Militar y School of Music f or over 150 y ears (until Summer 2021).
Whitton is less accessib le by pub lic transpor t in compar ison to Richmond and Twickenham.
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 f eedbac k was in vited on what people v alued
in their area.  For char acter area D1 Whitton and Heathfield Residential scored poor ly across all aspects ,
with g reen and open spaces scored the highest.  For char acter area D2 Whitton High Street w as scored
highest f or shops and restaur ants, while v aluing her itage , tranquillity , green spaces , and vibr ancy,
receiv ed slightly lo wer scores .
Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises Whitton and Heathfield Residential (D1) has a
medium sensitivity to change , with some areas of high sensitivity , including listed b uildings and open
spaces .The str ategy is to impro ve the char acter of this area, with future ne w development using
histor ic ref erences , as w ell as taking oppor tunities to de velop ne w char acter and sense of place .
Overall, Whitton High Street (D2) has a medium sensitivity to change , owing to the consistency in b uilt
vernacular and scale of b uildings along the high street, and the str ategy is to conser ve its unif ormity
and functionality and enhance its strength of char acter and identity .The Urban Design Study contains
design guidance f or each char acter area.
Other initiatives
The Council w orks with ‘Love Whitton’, b y Whitton Business Association and the Town Centre Manager .
They are activ e promoting Whitton b usinesses and in the comm unity, organising and funding local
events that attr act people into the High Street including an ann ual St Georges Da y Parade.
Vision
The vision f or Whitton & Heathfield is to retain and reinf orce the estab lished char acter of the area, and
ensure the pro vision of comm unity f acilities and tr anspor t links .This includes protecting the 1930s
architecture , within both Whitton High Street and in the surrounding residential areas , and encour aging
village e vents such as mar kets or regular cultur al events in the High Street or in other suitab le areas
such as par ks and open spaces .
There are some de velopment sites that pro vide the oppor tunity to de velop ne w char acter , including
to ensure Kneller Hall will lie at the hear t of the Whitton comm unity, through a viab le long-ter m use
protecting its her itage significance and opening up the site to include comm unity uses along with a
new pub lic par k.
Policy
77Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield 9
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Conser ve the consistenc y and sub urban quality of the area,  retaining and restoring fr ont
gardens and boundar y walls as an impor tant c haracteristic that pr ovides consistenc y to
the streetscene .
Consider oppor tunities to reduce the dominance of car s and pr omote active tra vel,
impr oving the permeability and creating space f or pedestrians.
Embrace the Crane river v alley character in adjoining urban spaces b y implementing
appr opriate planting palettes and wa yfinding.
Contrib ute to enhancing the sense of arriv al and quality of the pub lic realm at Whitton
Station,  identifying oppor tunities f or ar t, wayfinding,  and pub lic realm.
Contrib ute to oppor tunities to pr ovide space f or dwelling,  to encoura ge villa ge events suc h
as markets or regular cultural e vents in the High Street or in other suitab le areas suc h as
parks and open spaces,  including temporar y pedestrianisation of r oads to space f or
“spill-out”  from restaurants,  cafés and pubs,  and restoring and maintaining street trees
and planter s.
In areas deficient in access to Pub lic Open Space , consider oppor tunities to impr ove
access to e xisting spaces,  either thr ough design and pub lic realm impr ovements,  or where
oppor tunities arise , provide ne w pub licly accessib le open space . Open spaces that are
currentl y not pub licly accessib le, such as Kneller Hall,  will be encoura ged to make them
availab le for pub lic access and use .
Within the to wn centre boundar y, the Telephone Exc hang e (Site Allocation 19) pr ovides a
rede velopment oppor tunity to pr ovide f or emplo yment and social infrastructure use , increasing
permeability to the High Street,  with some oppor tunity in the identified mid-rise zone in Whitton
Town Centre in accor dance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones. There is an
oppor tunity to create a sense of identity thr ough future landmark de velopments,  enhanced
public realm,  and gate way features at either end of Whitton High Street.  Shopfr onts,  including
signa ge and canopies,  should be in keeping with the 1930s c haracter , and original shopfr onts
should be retained,  reinstated and enhanced (in accor dance with the shopfr ont guidance in
the Whitton and Heathfield Village Planning Guidance SPD).
At Kneller Hall (Site Allocation 20) there is an oppor tunity to create a mix ed use “quar ter”
bringing ne w homes,  emplo yment and comm unity uses,  including in the identified mid-rise
zone in accor dance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones. This will be set within the
protected landscape and herita ge significance of the Grade II listed Hall and MOL,  with the
oppor tunity to open up f or comm unity access inc luding a ne w pub lic park off ering recreation
and leisure as well as inf ormal pla y and wildlif e habitats.
At Whitton Comm unity Centre (Site Allocation 21) there is an oppor tunity to repr ovide comm unity
facilities (the e xisting da y centre and pharmac y) with aff ordable housing abo ve, to pr ovide
modern facilities f or the elderl y and the local comm unity .
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
Telephone Exchange , Ashdale Close , Whitton
Kneller Hall, Whitton
Whitton Comm unity Centre , Percy Road, Whitton
789  Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
19:Telephone
Exchang e,
Ashdale Close ,
Whitton
Site Area (ha):  0.42
Site Pr oposal
If the site is dec lared surplus to requirements,  appr opriate land uses inc lude emplo yment and
social infrastructure or other appr opriate main centre uses.  Any proposal should pr ovide f or
emplo yment floor space , including offices.  A mix ed use sc heme with housing,  including aff ordable
housing,  could be considered.
Conte xt
The site is located within Whitton’ s town centre boundar y.
The site is subject to being declared sur plus to requirements b y the telecoms lando wner .
As this is a site in one of the borough's to wn centres , there is an e xpectation that an y proposal
provides emplo yment floorspace , particular ly offices which could be in the f orm of fle xible shared
workspaces .
Any rede velopment proposal should pro vide f or emplo yment and social infr astructure or other
appropr iate main centre uses .
Only if other main centre uses as w ell as social infr astructure or comm unity uses ha ve been e xplored
and options discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould a mix ed use scheme with
housing, including policy compliant aff ordab le housing, be considered as a potential rede velopment
option.
The oppor tunity should be tak en for a comprehensiv e rede velopment of the area and ensure that
the site estab lishes a positiv e relationship with the surrounding area, including the car par k, libr ary
79Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield 9
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18and high street. This should include increased per meability f or pedestr ians and cyclists from this
site through the car par k to the High Street.
The applicant/o wner will be e xpected to w ork together with the Council and adjoining lando wners
to bring forward a scheme that contr ibutes to the vitality and viability of Whitton to wn centre .
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies a mid-r ise b uilding z one (5-6 store ys) in Whitton Town
Centre set bac k from the high street, which m uch of this site f alls within, with potential f or de velopment
to impro ve the char acter of the to wn centre , in accordance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building
Zones .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or D2 Whitton High Street and the Whitton and Heathfield
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
809  Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
20:Kneller Hall,
Whitton
Site Area (ha):  9.72
Site Pr oposal
Appr opriate land uses inc lude residential (inc luding aff ordable housing),  educational use ,
emplo yment and emplo yment g enerating uses as well as social infrastructure uses,  such as
health and comm unity facilities.  Any proposal should pr ovide f or some emplo yment floor space ,
including offices. The Council will e xpect the pla ying fields to be retained,  and the pr ovision of
high quality pub lic open spaces and pub lic realm,  including links thr ough the site to integrate
the de velopment into the surr ounding area as well as a ne w pub licly accessib le green and open
space , availab le to both e xisting and ne w comm unities.
Conte xt
Kneller Hall, w as the ‘home of militar y music’, occupied b y the Ro yal Militar y School of Music , for
over 150 y ears.
Defence Minister Mar k Lancaster announced the release of Kneller Hall on 18 J anuary 2016. The
site w as eventually sold to Duk es Education who r un Radnor House , an Independent School based
in Twickenham.
Adopted in 2020, the Supplementar y Planning Document f or Kneller Hall sets out the master plan
for the site .
There is potential f or a ne w residential “quar ter” to be created to wards the w est of the site as set
out in the SPD . Any residential de velopment will need to respect the e xisting listed Kneller Hall, the
site’s setting within the histor ic core of Whitton and ensure that an y proposal integ rates w ell within
the e xisting surrounding area and e xisting Whitton comm unity.
81Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield 9
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The design of the residential area should seek to create activ e frontages along Whitton Dene and
Kneller Road. The la yout of the residential element should be designed to encour age w alking and
cycling and create a visual and ph ysical link into the e xisting comm unity.There is oppor tunity , as
set out in the SPD and the Urban Design Study 2021, f or the centre of the residential area to ha ve
building heights of 4-5 store ys tapered do wn to 2-3 store ys on the boundar ies, with an y proposal
in the par t identified as a mid-r ise building z one to be assessed against P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise
Building Zones .The Council will seek a policy compliant le vel of aff ordab le housing, in line with
public sector land disposal.
It is e xpected that the ne w site o wners will pro vide educational uses b ut the Council w ould also
suppor t emplo yment gener ating uses including lo wer cost units f or small b usinesses , the v oluntar y
sector , creativ e industr ies and scientific and technical b usinesses including g reen technology .
Social infr astructure and comm unity uses , such as leisure , spor t and health uses , should be
incor porated and the need f or such f acilities should be fully e xplored.
It is e xpected that the e xisting pla ying fields will be retained and where possib le upg raded, such as
with ancillar y facilities , including changing pro vided to suppor t the use of the pla ying fields , provided
that an y existing ecological benefits and the openness and char acter of the Metropolitan Open Land
is retained and, where possib le enhanced.
Any rede velopment proposal f or the whole site will require the restor ation and enhancement of the
existing Gr ade II listed b uilding (Kneller Hall). The reuse of this histor ic building off ers an e xcellent
oppor tunity to ensure the site incor porates and promotes a cultur al and histor ic legacy of the ‘home
of militar y music’.  Any development should be sensitiv e to the significance of the histor ic building
and respond positiv ely to the setting of the listed b uilding.
Parts of the site are designated as Metropolitan Open Land and de velopment in this area w ould not
be acceptab le.There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment proposal impro ves the char acter
and openness of the Metropolitan Open Land.
Any scheme will need to ensure that the site estab lishes a positiv e relationship with the surrounding
area. This should also include increased per meability f or pedestr ians and cyclists through the site .
Any rede velopment of the scheme should pro vide habitat enhancement through the creation of an
east-w est habitat corr idor.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Kneller Hall SPD and accompan ying
Heritage Assets Assessment, Whitton and Heathfield Village Planning Guidance SPD and the Urban
Design Study 2021 in the char acter area profile and design guidance f or D1 Whitton and Heathfield
Residential.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private (pre viously in pub lic sector o wnership)
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
829  Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
21:Whitton
Comm unity
Centre , Percy
Road, Whitton
Site Area (ha):  0.14
Site Pr oposal
Comm unity/social infrastructure led mix ed use de velopment with the repr ovision of the pharmac y
and aff ordable housing.
Conte xt
The site has an e xisting social/comm unity infr astructure use , a comm unity centre and local phar macy .
It is ac knowledged that the site is in an area of lo w Pub lic Transpor t Accessibility Le vel (PT AL).
The site is located in a predominantly residential area although it’ s pro ximity to Twickenham school
and Whitton Cor ner Health and Social Care centre means that it is in a suitab le location to pro vide
a moder n comm unity use , with the repro vision of the phar macy , that caters f or both the y oung and
old from the area.
Proposed rede velopment will only be acceptab le if the current comm unity use is adequately
re-pro vided.  Only if repro vision has been pro vided then an aff ordab le housing scheme can be
explored on the upper le vels of an y rede velopment.
To the nor th is Twickenham Cemeter y which is designated as an Other Site of Nature Impor tance .
To the south is the St A ugustin’ s Church which is a Building of Townscape Mer it, together with
Lincoln Fields Spor ts Pitches fur ther south being Metropolitan Open Land (MOL). The design of
any proposal coming f orward should be sympathetic to these areas .
The site is located within a cluster of ‘larger’  buildings and the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises
there is potential as a mid-r ise b uilding z one f or a proposal to be assessed against P olicy 45 Tall
83Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield 9
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18and Mid-Rise Building Zones , provided it has regard to the sensitiv e location adjacent to BTMs ,
OOLTI and MOL.
Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes that should a scheme come
forward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing, in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , then it w ould not need
to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting submitted.  In those
circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted. However, on this site the
Council is seeking aff ordab le housing with comm unity/social infr astructure , due to the need to
repro vide the e xisting use .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Whitton and Heathfield Village
Planning Guidance SPD and the Urban Design Study 2021 char acter area profile and design
guidance f or D1 Whitton and Heathfield Residential.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
849  Place-based Str ategy f or Whitton & Heathfield
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1810 Place-based Strategy f or Ham,
Petersham & Ric hmond P ark
Place-based Strategy f or Ham,  Petersham & Ric hmond P ark
Area Pr ofile
The Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark area encompasses Ham and P etersham Residential, Ham
Common and Riv erside , and Richmond P ark.These are char acter areas E1, E2 and E3 in the Urban
Design Study 2021.
The area is defined b y its setting on a bend in the Riv er Thames , providing an impor tant element within
the Arcadian Thames landscape , and broad belt of open land, including P etersham and Ham Commons .
The National Trust-o wned Ham House and Richmond P ark are national landmar ks and visitor attr actions .
This area includes the designated str ategic vie w from King Henr y VIII's Mound to St P aul's Cathedr al.
In addition, the area contains the only vie w in England to be protected b y an Act of P arliament; The
Richmond, P etersham and Ham Open Spaces Act (1902) pre vents de velopment of the land on and
below Richmond Hill in order to protect the unique and distinctiv e foreground vie ws that it pro vides to
the w est and south.  (see fur ther details in P olicy 27 Views and vistas).  A key feature of this place is
Richmond P ark, which has protected status as an impor tant habitat f or wildlif e; it is a European Special
Area of Conser vation and a National Nature Reser ve as w ell as London's largest Site of Special
Scientific Interest.
85Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark 10
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Some par ts of this place are not w ell-ser ved in ter ms of local shopping f acilities and par ts ha ve been
amongst the most relativ ely disadv antaged in the borough.  Ham P arade is identified as a local centre
in the borough’ s centre hier archy (see section 6 of the Plan), as a w ell-used par ade of shops and local
services , along with other local clusters of shops , schools and local ser vices across the area. The
major ity of residents w ork outside of the area.
A large par t of this place is co vered b y the Ham & P etersham Neighbourhood Plan, which f ollowing a
successful ref erendum result w as adopted in J anuary 2019. The Neighbourhood Plan sets out the
histor y of the area and its de velopment, and ho w the area ph ysically relates to its neighbours and
descr ibes the current char acter . It recognises the r ange of social g roups living in the area is a distinctiv e
and v alued char acter istic in ter ms of diff erent ages and social g roups .The descr iption of the
neighbourhood area as ‘semi- r ural’ has been used to descr ibe the setting of the settlements of Ham
and P etersham within substantial areas of open and unde veloped land, as a distinctiv e and v alued
feature of the area, pro viding relativ e isolation from more urban areas of London.  It recognises the
area is quite isolated, with f ew vehicular access points and limited b us routes , with more options to
access on f oot or b y cycle .
Relationship of the Neighbourhood Plan with the Local Plan:
Both the Local Plan and Neighbourhood Plan should be read together and used to guide and shape
development in the locality .The Neighbourhood Plan w as prepared in the conte xt of the then emerging
2018 Local Plan, and all its policies w ere considered to be compliant with the Local Plan.  In essence ,
the Neighbourhood Plan reflects and responds to the unique char acter istics and planning conte xt of
the Ham and P etersham Neighbourhood Area, thereb y adding an additional le vel of detail to the Local
Plan. There are a n umber of policy areas within the Neighbourhood Plan that e xceed the requirements
of the 2018 Local Plan, where this w as justified through local e vidence , such as the higher le vels of
cycle stor age due to the poor accessibility of this par t of Richmond borough. The P olicy on Open
Spaces also goes be yond Local Plan requirements as it requires that an y development adjacent to
the open space should not detr imentally impact on the v alue of the g reen space;  this is in response
to the distinctiv eness of the area and the large amounts of high-quality open spaces .
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 f eedbac k was in vited on what people v alued
in their area.  For char acter area E1 Ham and P etersham Residential w as rated highly f or attr activeness ,
valuing her itage , tranquillity , green spaces and comm unity spir it. For char acter area E2 Ham Common
and Riv erside scores v aried across the diff erent f eatures , with g reen spaces receiving the highest
score and other highly scored f eatures included tr anquillity , attractiveness , and comm unity spir it. For
character area E3 Richmond P ark receiv ed the highest possib le score f or its attr activeness , and it w as
also scored v ery highly f or valuing her itage , tranquillity , and g reen and open spaces .
Overall strategy
8610  Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises Ham & P etersham Residential (E1) has to wnscape
of medium quality , with the pre vailing sense of spaciousness and “village”  char acter increasing the
sensitivity of the area, and P etersham ha ving a high sensitivity to change . It recognises Ham Common
and Riv erside (E2) has a high sensitivity to change , due to openness and visual aesthetic of the area.
Richmond P ark (E3) is recognised as ha ving high sensitivity to change , with the high v alue and
susceptibility of the areas meaning that significant change is unlik ely to be appropr iate.
For Ham and P etersham Residential (E1) the str ategy is to impro ve the char acter of the area b y taking
oppor tunities to create a sense of place , enhancing the e xisting par ades and de veloping a w ell-defined
neighbourhood centre .The functionality and biodiv ersity v alue of the area’ s open spaces , and the
quality of its pub lic realm, will also be impro ved. For Ham Common and Riv erside (E2) and Richmond
Park (E3) the str ategy is to conser ve.The Urban Design Study contains design guidance f or each
character area and f or Richmond’ s Riv erside .
Other initiatives
The Neighbourhood F orum compr ises a large g roup of activ e residents , business representativ es and
representativ es of local comm unity ser vices and v oluntar y groups , whose pur pose is to fur ther the
social, economic and en vironmental w ell-being of the area, including through prepar ing and monitor ing
the Neighbourhood Plan.
Initial f easibility has been carr ied out f or a ne w pedestr ian and cycle br idge in the borough, with the
best location f ound to be connecting Ham to Twickenham, with another viab le location identified as
Ham to Radnor Gardens in Str awberr y Hill.  As set out in the Council’ s Third Local Implementation
Plan, additional studies are required to deter mine the economic f easibility of the br idge, and funding
for the br idge m ust still be f ound.
Vision
As set out in the adopted Neighbourhood Plan, the vision f or Ham & P etersham is to b uild on the
identity of Ham and P etersham as a distinct and sustainab le mix ed comm unity giving g reat oppor tunities
to live and w ork within a semi–r ural histor ic landscape .
The vision f or a sustainab le comm unity is that, whene ver viab le, residents will ha ve access to education,
shopping, w orking, cultur al and other oppor tunities within Ham and P etersham so as to f oster a g reater
sense of belonging and identity .The aim is to encour age an increasing propor tion of local jour neys to
be by foot or bicycle b y creating a netw ork of cycle/w alking routes accessib le to a r ange of ages and
good pub lic transpor t.
The Neighbourhood Plan identifies the k ey oppor tunity f or rede velopment at Ham Close , to pro vide
moder n housing and comm unity f acilities in k eeping with the char acter of the area.
Richmond P ark, an area of national and inter national impor tance f or wildlif e conser vation and r ich
heritage , will be protected.
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Enhance e xisting local centres and shopping parades,  to impr ove the appearance and
attractiveness thr ough appr opriate shopfr onts and signa ge, along with directional signa ge,
87Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark 10
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18lighting,  seating,  pub lic ar t, space f or comm unity e vents and soft landscaping inc luding
at Ham P arade (accor ding with Neighbourhood Plan P olicy O1) and St Ric hard’s Square
(accor ding with Neighbourhood Plan P olicy O2).
Conser ve and enhance the netw ork of green spaces and the pub lic realm,  and impr ove
legibility to better connect open spaces to the to wnscape , including ar ound Ham
Common/Ham House Estate .
Contrib ute to impr oving transpor t infrastructure , including impr ovements to suppor t bus
use and the accessibility of e xisting f erry ser vices (accor ding with Neighbourhood Plan
Comm unity Pr oposal 1).
Contrib ute to reducing the dominance of vehic le traffic along main r oads and parades,
and pr ovide more space f or and impr oving visibility , accessibility and connectivity f or
pedestrians and c yclists.
Contrib ute to enhancement of Ham Village Green thr ough the pr ovision of soft landscaping,
planting,  seating and appr opriate pla y and e xercise equipment (accor ding with
Neighbourhood Plan Comm unity Pr oposal 5).
At Ham Close (Site Allocation 22,  Neighbourhood Plan P olicy O3),  the reg eneration pr oposed
is an oppor tunity f or rede velopment to create a landmark sc heme , creating a sense of
identity , providing modern homes and comm unity facilities in the identified mid-rise zone
in accor dance with P olicy45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones. There is also an oppor tunity
if Cassel Hospital is dec lared surplus to requirements (Site Allocation 23,  Neighbourhood
Plan P olicy O5) f or con version to comm unity facilities. The Neighbourhood Plan seeks to
make the most of small sites that are currentl y under -used or redundant and ha ve been
previousl y developed,  while pr otecting bac k land gar den sites fr om de velopment as lar ge
gardens and lo w density housing are c haracteristic of the neighbourhood area.
Other polic y initiatives:
The Council will contin ue to e xplore funding oppor tunities to take f orwar d bridg e feasibility f or
a new foot and c ycle bridg e linking Ham and Twickenham (accor ding with Neighbourhood Plan
Comm unity Pr oposal 1).
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
Ham Close , Ham
Cassel Hospital, Ham Common, Ham
8810  Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
22:Ham Close ,
Ham
Site Area (ha):  4.31
Site Pr oposal
The Council suppor ts the reg eneration of Ham Close and will w ork in cooperation with Ric hmond
Housing P artnership in or der to rejuvenate Ham Close and its surr ounding area.  A comprehensive
redevelopment of this site , including demolition of the e xisting b uildings and ne w build repr ovision
of all the residential and non-residential b uildings,  plus the pr ovision of ad ditional ne w residential
accommodation with aff ordable housing at polic y compliant le vels,  will be suppor ted.
Conte xt
Richmond Housing P artnership is the freeholder of the 192 flats at Ham Close . A de velopment
partner f or the re-de velopment has no w been chosen.
The flats are gener ally of poor constr uction, with poor insulation b y moder n standards , and man y
have condensation and damp issues .The b locks of flats do not ha ve lifts , thus lea ving a n umber
of flats inaccessib le to people with disabilities .
The e xisting aff ordab le housing should be repro vided, and an y additional housing o ver and abo ve
this le vel should pro vide aff ordab le housing in line with policy . As the land w as or iginally o wned b y
the Council, there is the policy e xpectation on pub lic sector land disposals that higher le vels of
affordab le housing will be achie ved.
Any rede velopment proposal has to respond positiv ely to the unique and distinctiv e char acter of
Ham Close and Ham, including the setting of the adjacent Ham House Conser vation Area and the
many listed b uildings and Victor ian proper ties that line the frontage .
89Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark 10
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There is a need to retain, and where possib le enhance , the landscape and e xisting g reen spaces ,
including the Green, which is designated Pub lic Open Space and Other Open Land of Townscape
Impor tance , as w ell as trees where ver possib le.
Optimising the use of the land b y pro viding high quality living spaces f or both e xisting as w ell as
new residents of Ham Close .
Servicing, car and cycle par king should be pro vided as par t of the regener ation of the area and an y
development should enhance the quality of the local to wnscape , thereb y creating a more cohesiv e
sense of place .
The Council is w orking in cooper ation with Richmond Housing P artnership including through funding
suppor t.
Further inf ormation can be f ound on the dedicated Ham Close w ebsite .
There is also a need to tak e account of the adopted Ham and P etersham Neighbourhood Plan,
which sets out fur ther guidance and policies that an y development proposal will be assessed against
including P olicy O3 f or this site .
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies Ham Close as a mid-r ise b uilding z one (5-6 store ys), with
the oppor tunity f or an y new development to respond appropr iately to the surrounding landscape
and scale , in accordance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones . Design objectiv es and
gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the rede velopment of this site
should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the char acter area profile and
design guidance f or E1 Ham and P etersham Residential.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private (f ormerly in pub lic sector o wnership)
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
9010  Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
23:Cassel
Hospital,  Ham
Common,  Ham
Site Area (ha):  3.97
Site Pr oposal
If the site and the Grade II listed Cassel Hospital are dec lared surplus to requirements,  social and
comm unity infrastructure uses are the most appr opriate land uses f or this site . Con version or
potential rede velopment f or residential uses could be considered if it allo ws for the pr otection
and restoration of the listed b uildings.
Conte xt
The site is o wned b y the West London Mental Health Trust and pro vides national specialist
assessment and treatment ser vices f or young people and adults with comple x personality disorders .
It is ac knowledged that an y proposal w ould be subject to the hospital being declared sur plus to
requirements b y the NHS Trust and will be dependent on their decision on ho w much of the site
they need to retain f or their o wn future needs .
If the site is declared sur plus to requirements , in whole or par t, appropr iate land uses include social
and comm unity infr astructure uses .
Only if other alter nativ e social or comm unity infr astructure uses ha ve been e xplored and options
discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould a residential-led scheme with policy compliant
affordab le housing (in line with a pub lic sector land disposal) and on-site car par king be considered
as a potential rede velopment option.
It is ac knowledged that con version or potential rede velopment f or residential uses ma y be needed
to suppor t the protection and restor ation of the listed b uildings;  residential uses should ho wever be
limited to the minim um necessar y to achie ve viability .
91Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark 10
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The g rounds to the rear and to the side are designated as both Other Site of Nature Impor tance
and Other Open Land of Townscape Impor tance and de velopment in this area w ould not be
acceptab le.
The restor ation and con version has to respect the significance of the her itage asset, protect and
enhance the listed b uildings , ensur ing their sensitiv e repair and re-use , and the Ham Common
Conser vation Area and their settings .The settings of neighbour ing listed b uildings including the
Grade II* listed proper ties, will also need to be considered as par t of an y development on this site .
Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes that should a scheme come
forward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing, in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , then it w ould not need
to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting submitted.  In those
circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted.
There is also a need to tak e account of the adopted Ham and P etersham Neighbourhood Plan,
which sets out fur ther guidance and policies that an y development proposal will be assessed against,
including P olicy O5 f or this site . In addition, design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the
local char acter of the area, which a proposal f or this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the
Urban Design Study 2021 in the char acter area profile and design guidance f or E2 Ham Common
and Riv erside .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
9210  Place-based Str ategy f or Ham, P etersham & Richmond P ark
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1811 Place-based Strategy f or
Richmond & Ric hmond Hill
Place-based Strategy f or Ric hmond & Ric hmond Hill
Area Pr ofile
The Richmond & Richmond Hill area encompasses Richmond to wn centre and r iverside , and the
residential and mix ed use areas into Richmond Hill and Nor th Sheen. These are char acter areas F1,
F2 and F3 in the Urban Design Study 2021.
Richmond’ s char acter der ives from its location on the Riv er Thames , its histor ic built en vironment and
landscape , providing a strong setting to the to wn centre and surrounds .The wider place includes the
histor ic Green, the open spaces along the r iverside , accessed from the centre along char acterful,
intimate pedestr ian lanes , and connectivity to the Thames P ath, Old Deer P ark and Richmond P ark.
The residential areas encompass Richmond Hill in the south-east and the g radual tr ansition to wards
Kew to the nor th-east, reflecting m uch of its histor ical char acter and scenic vie ws as a result of the
steep topog raphy.There are neighbourhood centres at Sheen Road and F riars Stile Road, and par ades
of local impor tance at Lo wer Mor tlake Road and K ew Road.
Richmond to wn centre is the most accessib le centre b y pub lic transpor t. As major road infr astructure
runs through the area, there is a prominence of roads in the centre .The to wn centre is defined as a
‘major’  centre in the London Plan’ s netw ork of to wn centres . It is the major shopping centre in the
borough compr ising a r ange of good m ultiple and smaller specialised shops within a high quality
environment.  Richmond has attr acted an impressiv e cluster of technology and IT companies . It also
has a wide r ange of leisure and enter tainment f acilities such as the theatres , a Curz on cinema, P ools
on the P ark, the Museum of Richmond and n umerous pub lic houses , cafes and restaur ants.
93Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 f eedbac k was in vited on what people v alued
in their area.  For char acter area F1 Richmond Town Centre and Riv erside scored highly f or green and
open spaces , F2 Richmond and Richmond Hill Residential w as regarded highly f or attr activeness ,
valuing her itage , green spaces , vibrancy, shops and restaur ants and culture . F3 Nor th Sheen Residential
scored relativ ely poor ly for most f eatures .
Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises Richmond Town Centre (F1) and Richmond and
Richmond Hill (F2) ha ve a high sensitivity to change , with both areas ha ving strong char acter . Richmond
Town Centre has a strong sense of place and her itage – the str ategy is to conser ve the r ichness of
townscape and histor ic elements and enhance the identity of specific areas (notab ly around the station)
and the functioning of the area as a to wn centre . North Sheen Residential (F3) has a medium sensitivity
to change o verall, with some par ts of the urban g rain fr agmented and with detr acting f eatures where
positiv e change has the potential to enhance char acter to create a sense of place , and the str ategy is
to impro ve the area. The Urban Design Study contains design guidance f or each char acter area and
for Richmond’ s Riv erside .
Richmond is the borough’ s major centre as recognised in the London Plan, dr awing in visitors from
the borough and be yond, and is considered a to wn centre with strong commercial g rowth potential.
The area’ s night time econom y is classified as NT2, with regional or sub-regional significance , hosting
an arr ay of caf es, restaur ants, bars , pubs and cultur al activities , including the Richmond Theatre and
the Or ange Tree Theatre , and the Curz on Cinema. With demand f or leisure uses increasing, there is
oppor tunity to b uild on this e vening and night time culture across the to wn centre , green spaces and
along the Riv erside , with impro ved w ayfinding from Richmond Station.
The 2020 Centre Land Use Sur vey repor ted an increase in v acancies in Richmond to wn centre due
to the impact of the pandemic , with visib le vacancies in k ey shopping frontages .The Retail Study 2021
(phase 1) repor ts that Richmond is considered to ha ve an upscale mar ket position, and although
forecasts a decrease in compar ison retail floorspace b y 2039 this is counterbalanced b y a small
increase in con venience goods floorspace and additional f ood/be verage floorspace requirements ,
resulting in total of ca.  1,457sq.m (g ross) uses f or Richmond. There is theref ore no need to allocate
for additional floorspace , but there is e xpected to be a shift from compar ison goods retail space to
food/be verage and leisure/cultur al uses , with v acant shop premises also con verting to these uses .
This ma y utilise the fle xibility introduced b y Government allo wing f or changes of use within Use Class
E (commercial, b usiness and ser vice uses) which in pr inciple do not require planning per mission.
Other initiatives
The Council suppor ts businesses and retailers w orking with the current Richmond Business Impro vement
District (RBID), Be Richmond, which has been in place since 2017 and is contin uing eff orts to ensure
Richmond fulfils its potential as a g reat place to liv e, work and e xplore . Be Richmond aims to highlight
the to wn’s strengths and f ocuses on fiv e priorities:
9411  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Suppor ting Business Gro wth
Enhancing the look and f eel of the BID area
Raising the profile of Richmond to all rele vant par ties
Implementing k ey cor porate and social responsibility str ategies
Working to address par king and tr affic congestion issues
Be Richmond commissioned the prepar ation of a Place Plan in 2019 and f ollowing the production of
a baseline repor t has produced the Future Vision F or Richmond (2021). The vision statement is to:
Suppor t Richmond become fit f or the future:  helping it be a resilient, prosperous , vital and health y
place f or people , through impro vements which help them who liv e, work, and e xplore .
Strengthen its role as a div erse and e xciting cultur al destination, dr awing energy and f ocus from
its strong her itage and landscape identity .
There are six themes:
Strength of c haracter: Celebr ate Richmond’ s unique histor ic char acter , its longstanding role as
a leisure destination, a hub f or culture , and as par t of the Arcadian Thames .
Open f or business: Suppor t flexibility , diversity and g rowth of b usinesses , recognising the
changing nature of the to wn centre off er, and also the impor tant role of places outside of the
core retail area.
Places to pause: Enhance and supplement Richmond’ s netw ork of pub lic spaces ,
suppor ting div erse pub lic life, and pro viding a ne w focal point.
Comm unity wellbeing: Suppor t a health y and happ y comm unity, with spaces f or people of all
ages , abilities , and all w alks of lif e.
Walk this wa y:Strengthen pedestr ian connections betw een diff erent par ts of the to wn, making
the rich urban str ucture more legib le, giving people the confidence to choose a less w ell-trodden
path and e xplore the wider area.
Green and pleasant land: Make the most of Richmond’ s open spaces and r iverine landscape ,
and pro vide additional g reen, f or amenity , biodiv ersity , and in response to the climate emergency .
A pilot Clean Air Zone within Richmond Town Centre is being prog ressed.  As the most polluted location
in our borough and a hot spot f or through tr affic, the ambition is to reduce polluting v ehicles and
dissuade v ehicles from unnecessar ily using the to wn centre as a through route .This will help to
estab lish the pr iorities of the local and wider Richmond Town Centre comm unity with consider ation
given to air quality , pub lic realm impro vements , a balance of both or other measures .The results of
this e xercise will help to shape the w orking methodology going f orward, and to help deter mine ho w
further study w ork should be deliv ered in prepar ation f or a more detailed to wn centre consultation in
summer 2022.
Vision
The vision f or Richmond & Richmond Hill is to retain and enhance its unique char acter , and create a
comm unity and cultur al off er in and around the Old Town Hall and Riv erside to enhance its unique
visitor attr action.
95Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The aim is that Richmond Town Centre will contin ue to be a thr iving major centre with a div erse mix
of retail, emplo yment, ser vice, leisure and ar ts uses .
Though encour aged, the g rowth of the e vening econom y will be carefully managed to ensure the
amenity of residents is maintained.
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Contrib ute to a sense of activity and vibranc y in the to wn and neighbourhood centres,  to
impr ove and restore high street fr onta ges and the lanes to encoura ge a diver se rang e of
uses,  including independent shops and b usinesses,  emphasising local maker s and ar tisans.
Encoura ge the pr ovision of office floor space and ne w fle xible workspaces within the to wn
centre and intensification of e xisting emplo yment sites to pr ovide f or jobs and suppor t
local b usinesses.
Facilitate the temporar y reuse of v acant units to help diver sify the to wn centre off er and
activ ate underutilised fr onta ge.
Enhance the pub lic realm thr ough creating high quality spaces in the to wn centre ,
reinf orcing a retail cir cuit b y upgrading Eton Street and Red Lion Street,  creating a ne w
destination hub at Whittaker A venue Square , enhancing the triangle of land between Hill
Rise , Petersham Road and Compass Hill as pub licly accessib le green space , enhancing
Richmond Hill gate way, impr oving wa yfinding and the sense of arriv al at Ric hmond Station,
and enhancements at Ric hmond River side and Ric hmond Pr omenade .
Promote r outes f or active tra vel and e xercise, encoura ging health y activity and e xploration
of the Ric hmond area b y local w orker s, visitor s and residents.  Suppor t greening thr ough
tree-planting on the High Street (inc luding the station) and Whittaker A venue Square ,
introducing ‘green trails’  across the to wn centre thr ough to the river and Old Deer P ark,
and creating green walls on the lanes where appr opriate .
Contrib ute to measures related to air quality , pub lic realm and transpor t, to implement
priorities inf ormed b y the pilot Clean Air Zone within Ric hmond Town Centre .
Ensure that an y expansion and mana gement of enter tainment and leisure facilities is
sensitive to the amenity of people who live in the centre and the wider functioning of the
area,  promoting the night-time econom y thr ough diver sifying the rang e of cultural ven ues
and off ers, encoura ging on-street al fresco dining and making a welcoming en vironment
for all night-time econom y user s and w orker s.
Suppor t the cultural and comm unity off er for both residents and visitor s around the
Richmond Cultural Quar ter, including bringing the ref erence and lending libraries tog ether
and enhancing The Museum of Ric hmond to create a cultural hub to pr ovide a destination
for visitor s, and encoura ging outdoor temporar y and permanent ar t and theatre
inter ventions.
Maintain and pr ovide ne w pub lic toilets within the pub lic realm,  supplementing the
Richmond Comm unity Toilet Sc heme , and inc luding pr ovision at Ric hmond Station and
to ser ve Ric hmond River side and Ric hmond Green.
Impr ove Nor th Sheen Residential area b y impr oving the sense of arriv al at Nor th Sheen
station,  along with upgrades to the pub lic realm and greening oppor tunities.
Within the to wn centre boundar y, Richmond Station (Site Allocation 24) pr ovides a major
rede velopment oppor tunity , whic h could pr ovide substantial inter chang e impr ovements
as well as a rang e of appr opriate to wn centre uses,  with some oppor tunity to accommodate
a landmark tall b uilding within the herita ge and other constraints identified,  in accor dance
with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones. There is an oppor tunity to replace , upgrade ,
9611  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18or better integrate , the m ulti-store y car park on P aradise Road so that it better ad dresses
the streetscape and is less pr ominent in vie ws.The f ormer House of Fraser site (Site
Allocation 25) on Geor ge Street is e xpected to be repurposed to deliver a mix of uses,
including retail,  offices/w orkspace , and leisure/comm unity use , with impr oved active
ground floor street fr onta ges inc luding along P aved Cour t and at Golden Cour t.
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
Richmond Station, Richmond
Former House of F raser, 16 P aved Cour t 20 King Street 4 To 8 And 10 P aved Cour t And 75 - 81
George Street Richmond
Richmond Telephone Exchange , Spr ing Terrace, Richmond
Amer ican Univ ersity , Queens Road, Richmond
Homebase , Manor Road, East Sheen
Sainsb urys, Lower Richmond Road, Richmond
97Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
24:Richmond
Station,  Richmond
Site Area (ha):  1.96
Site Pr oposal
Comprehensive rede velopment to pr ovide an impr oved transpor t inter chang e, pub lic realm and
an appr opriate mix of to wn centre uses. This inc ludes a mix of commer cial and comm unity uses,
including retail,  offices/w orkspace , and leisure/comm unity use , along with residential on upper
floor s.
Conte xt
This is a k ey development site and gate way into Richmond to wn centre , set within the Richmond
Centr al Conser vation Area.
There is a need f or a comprehensiv e approach, including tr anspor t interchange impro vements (both
National Rail and London Underg round).
The station is a designated Building of Townscape Mer it, although the visual char acter lies pr incipally
in the f açade and booking hall, with the side and rear of the b uildings being unattr active and not
contr ibuting to the setting.
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies as a negativ e quality the underwhelming sense of arr ival
at Richmond Station, with the potential to impro ve the gener al en vironment.
Any rede velopment proposal m ust be of the highest quality in char acter and respond positiv ely to
the Conser vation Area.
The Retail & Leisure Needs Study 2021 (phase 1) f orecasts a small increase in con venience goods
floorspace and additional f ood/be verage floorspace requirements in total of ca.  1,457sqm (g ross)
for Richmond to 2039.
9811  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Any commercial floorspace should enab le the centre to g row and div ersify in a w ay that br ings
vitality and viability and responds to changes in the retail and leisure/enter tainment industr ies,
providing commercial, b usiness and ser vice uses to ser ve the local comm unity, provide a destination
for visitors br inging additional benefits to Richmond to wn centre , and pro vide jobs . New development
at the station is an oppor tunity to pro vide a broad off er, to attr act visitors to mak e sustainab le link ed
trips.
This site is located in the borough's largest centre and theref ore there is an e xpectation that an y
proposal mak es a substantial pro vision of emplo yment floorspace , particular ly offices which could
be in the f orm of fle xible shared w orkspaces (including a propor tion of aff ordab le workspace).
Other uses f or comm unity, leisure and enter tainment, such as f or health and fitness or restaur ants
and caf es, would also be appropr iate in this highly accessib le town centre location. There could be
oppor tunity f or pub licly accessib le vie wing at upper le vels as par t of a commercial use . New
development can include measures to manage potential amenity impacts and theref ore contr ibute
to the night-time econom y through pro viding vibr ant, activ e uses that are inclusiv e and increase
surveillance .
The pro vision of housing (including policy compliant aff ordab le housing) in upper floors as par t of
a mix ed use scheme w ould be appropr iate. Due to its location near a Tube, Overground and National
Rail Station the site w ould lend itself to a Build to Rent scheme (with policy compliant le vels of
affordab le rented units).
There is potential to impro ve facilities f or pedestr ians and cyclists (including secure cycle stor age),
as well as pub lic transpor t users , to promote activ e travel through the oppor tunity to interchange .
This should include future proofing to consider f or example e-micromobility , charging and stor age,
to benefit residents , visitors and b usinesses (e .g. e-cargo bik es).
Any rede velopment proposal is e xpected to contr ibute to enhancements to the pub lic realm, impro ving
wayfinding and suppor ting g reening, as set out in the Place-Based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond
Hill.This should include a high quality , pedestr ian-only amenity space outside the station, to pro vide
a sense of arr ival and that could be used f or civic use .
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies a small area ne xt to the station as a tall b uilding z one (7-8
store ys), with a mid-r ise zone b uffer (5-6 store ys), with the oppor tunity f or a landmar k building that
is well designed and sensitiv e to identified constr aints, in accordance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise
Building Zones . It recognises that de velopment is hea vily constr ained b y the scale of the surrounding
buildings , the modest scale of The Quadr ant, the pro ximity of the residential area to the south, and
a number of high v alue her itage assets .
The Council has produced and adopted a de velopment br ief for this site , and intends to update this
SPD.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or F1 Richmond Town Centre and Riv erside and the
Village Planning Guidance SPD f or Richmond and Richmond Hill.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
99Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
25:Former
House of Fraser ,
16 Paved Cour t
20 King Street 4
To 8 And 10
Paved Cour t And
75 - 81 Geor ge
Street,  Richmond
Site Area (ha):  0.19
Site Pr oposal
The Council suppor ts a mix of commer cial and comm unity uses,  including retail,  offices/w orkspace ,
and leisure/comm unity use , with active gr ound floor street fr onta ges inc luding along P aved Cour t
and at Golden Cour t.
Conte xt
The site is located within Richmond’ s town centre boundar y and within the k ey shopping area. With
its pr imary frontage to George Street, and secondar y frontages to King Street, P aved Cour t and
Golden Cour t, the f ormer House of F raser store has been seen as an anchor in the to wn centre ,
but closed in September 2020.
The site is located in a v ery sensitiv e location. While the main b uilding has no her itage designations ,
units within P aved Cour t are either BTM or Gr ade II Listed. The site is par tly within the Richmond
Green and Centr al Richmond Conser vation Areas and there are n umerous listed b uildings and
BTMs in the vicinity .
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies as a negativ e quality the lac k of activ e frontage in places
along the High Street, par tly due to recently closed shops such as this site .
There is an e xtant planning per mission f or refurbishment, pro viding o ver 8,000sqm, with an additional
store y at f ourth floor .
The site is e xpected to be repur posed to deliv er a mix of uses , including retail, offices , and
leisure/comm unity use , with impro ved activ e ground floor street frontages along P aved Cour t and
at Golden Cour t.
10011  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The Retail & Leisure Needs Study 2021 (phase 1) f orecasts a small increase in con venience goods
floorspace and additional f ood/be verage floorspace requirements in total of ca.  1,457sqm (g ross)
for Richmond to 2039.
Any commercial floorspace should enab le the centre to g row and div ersify in a w ay that br ings
vitality and viability and responds to changes in the retail and leisure/enter tainment industr ies,
providing commercial, b usiness and ser vice uses to ser ve the local comm unity, provide a destination
for visitors br inging additional benefits to Richmond to wn centre , and pro vide jobs . In Richmond
there is a shor tage of units with larger floor-plates , although fle xible floorspaces that could be adapted
to meet the needs f or local b usinesses and small fir ms will also be suppor ted.
The site is located in the borough’ s largest centre and theref ore there is an e xpectation that an y
proposal mak es a substantial pro vision of emplo yment floorspace , particular ly offices which could
be in the f orm of fle xible shared w orkspaces (including a propor tion of aff ordab le workspace).
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y proposal
for re-use should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the char acter area
profile and design guidance f or F1 Richmond Town Centre and Riv erside and the Village Planning
Guidance SPD f or Richmond and Richmond Hill.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
101Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
26:Richmond
Telephone
Exchang e,
Spring Terrace ,
Richmond
Site Area (ha):  0.27
Site Pr oposal
If the site is deemed surplus to requirement,  the Council w ould suppor t the pr ovision of housing,
including aff ordable housing.
Conte xt
The site is subject to being declared sur plus to requirements b y the telecoms lando wner .
The site lies just outside of Richmond Town Centre Boundar y, although benefits from good tr anspor t
links and a locality to shops and ser vices .
If the site is declared sur plus to requirements , in whole or par t, the Council w ould e xpect a
residential-led scheme with aff ordab le housing to come f orward.
The Council e xpects that an y proposal that comes f orward meets the le vel of aff ordab le housing
set out in P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing as a minim um, together with e vidence that there has been
engagement with the GLA and the Council’ s housing teams to e xplore g rant funding to maximise
affordab le housing pro vision.
Any development proposal is required to protect and enhance the St Matthias and Sheen Road
Conser vation Areas in which the site is located.
The Council e xpects that an y proposal demonstr ates whether the e xisting b uildings can be con verted.
If this is not f easib le then a comprehensiv e re-de velopment w ould be acceptab le. If the site is to be
10211  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18re-de veloped an y height of the ne w built form should tak e in to account the residential proper ties
which adjoin the site on three sides .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or F1 Richmond Town Centre and Riv erside and the
Village Planning Guidance SPD f or Richmond and Richmond Hill.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
103Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
27:American
Univer sity,
Queens Road,
Richmond
Site Area (ha):  2.01
Site Pr oposal
If the site is deemed surplus to requirement,  then educational uses are the most appr opriate land
use f or the site . If educational use is not viab le on site , then the pr ovision of comm unity/social
infrastructure uses w ould also be appr opriate or could be incorporated as par t of a mix ed use
scheme .
Conte xt
The Amer ican Univ ersity Richmond campus has been located on the site since 1972. The univ ersity
was founded b y British educationist Sir Cyr il Taylor GBE.
The Univ ersity no w has plans to relocate the campus to a site in a neighbour ing borough.
The campus currently pro vides residential accommodation f or its students within three of the b uildings
on site with o ver 200 bedspaces .
The site’ s main b uilding is Gr ade II listed, and the Red House in the Nor th East cor ner is a Building
of Townscape Mer it.The site f alls within the Richmond Hill Conser vation Area.  Any proposal that
comes f orward m ust preser ve and enhance these her itage assets .
Adjoining the site to the nor th is the Vineyard School, a 3 f orm entr y primary school.  According to
the School Place Planning Str ategy 2019, the school has no space f or fur ther e xpansion.
10411  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18If the site is deemed to be sur plus to requirement, the Council e xpects that an educational use is
contin ued on site . A mix ed-use proposal incor porating education and social/comm unity infr astructure
uses w ould also be acceptab le.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or F1 Richmond Town Centre and Riv erside and the
Village Planning Guidance SPD f or Richmond and Richmond Hill.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
105Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
28:Homebase ,
Manor Road,
East Sheen
Site Area (ha):  1.84
Site Pr oposal
Comprehensive residential-led rede velopment of the site with a fle xible rang e of other uses,
including retail,  office and comm unity/social. This will inc lude the pr ovision of high quality pub lic
realm,  impr ovements to permeability and the Manor Road street fr onta ge, to integrate the
development into the surr ounding area.
Conte xt
The site is currently occupied b y Homebase and P ets at Home with a large surf ace le vel car par k
with circa 170 spaces .
The site is bounded b y railway / underg round / o verground lines to the south and to the w est.
There is an e xisting b us ter minus on the site which will need to be retained.
There is a need f or housing in the borough and this site is considered to be suitab le for a substantial
provision of ne w housing units (including a policy compliant le vel of aff ordab le housing).
As the site is located outside of the to wn centre and defined retail frontage , the e xisting retail use
is not protected. The Council does e xpect that an y rede velopment w ould pro vide a r ange of uses
on the site , including retail, office and comm unity to meet local needs .
Due to the constr aints of the r ailway lines and b uilt form along Manor Road, including designated
BTMs and close pro ximity to the Sheen Road Conser vation Area and Sheendale Road Conser vation
Area, the height of the b uilt form should increase to wards the middle of the site . Any proposal should
assess potential impacts on vie ws and amenity .The Council e xpects that the street frontage along
Manor Road is enhanced.
10611  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies par t of the site as a tall b uilding z one (7-8 store ys), with a
mid-r ise zone b uffer (5-6 store ys), in accordance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones .
Proposals should look to pro vide a high-quality pub lic realm. The Council e xpects the creation of
permeability through the site with sensitiv e landscape design that can also promote activ e transpor t,
such as w alking and cycling.
There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment pro vides ne w on-site Pub lic Open Space in addition
to an y external amenity space requirements , deliv ering m ulti-functional benefits including f or nature
conser vation and biodiv ersity v alue as w ell as f or health and w ellbeing of future occupants and
users , including surrounding comm unities .
A planning application w as submitted in 2019 to the Council f or the rede velopment of the site .This
was refused b ut was subsequently called in b y the Ma yor (Ref:  GLA/4795/03). The Ma yor resolv ed
to grant per mission, b ut per mission has not been g ranted as the legal ag reement secur ing the
planning ob ligations has y et to be signed. The proposal includes b uildings up to 11 store ys, however
the Urban Design Study 2021 recommends the appropr iate heights f or the z one are up to 8 store ys
to respect the small scale of the surrounding area.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y proposal
for re-use should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the char acter area
profile and design guidance f or F3 Nor th Sheen Residential and the Planning Guidance SPD f or
Richmond and Richmond Hill.
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
107Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
29:Sainsb ury's,
Lower Ric hmond
Road,  Richmond
Site Area (ha):  2.63
Site Pr oposal
The Council will suppor t comprehensive rede velopment of this site to pr ovide f or retail and
residential uses. The contin ued use of the site as a f oodstore and the repr ovision of the e xisting
retail floor space is required.
Conte xt
The e xisting f oodstore is w ell estab lished and a k ey facility f or the local comm unity.
The site is located adjacent to the Gas Valve Compound and an y rede velopment proposal needs
to tak e account of its pro ximity to the gas pipeline .
Rede velopment of this f oodstore pro vides an oppor tunity to optimise the use of the site and it is
acknowledged that an y rede velopment proposal ma y necessitate a per iod of closure and / or a loss
of trade dur ing constr uction.
Any rede velopment proposal will be required to retain and/or repro vide the e xisting retail floorspace .
There is a need f or housing in the borough and this site is considered to be suitab le for a substantial
provision of ne w housing units with a policy compliant le vel of aff ordab le housing.
There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment proposal should pro vide pub lic realm benefits ,
including impro vements to the visual appear ance of the area.
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies par t of the site as a tall b uilding z one (7-8 store ys), set
back from Lo wer Richmond Road, with a mid-r ise zone b uffer (5-6 store ys), in accordance with
Policy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones .
10811  Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment pro vides ne w on-site Pub lic Open Space in addition
to an y external amenity space requirements , deliv ering m ulti-functional benefits including f or nature
conser vation and biodiv ersity v alue as w ell as f or health and w ellbeing of future occupants and
users , including surrounding comm unities .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or F3 Nor th Sheen Residential and the Richmond Village
Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
109Place-based Str ategy f or Richmond & Richmond Hill 11
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1812 Place-based Strategy f or Kew
Place-based Strategy f or Kew
Area Pr ofile
The K ew area encompasses K ew Gardens and Riv erside , Kew Gardens , and East K ew Mix ed Use .
These are char acter areas G1, G2 and G3 in the Urban Design Study 2021.
Kew is enclosed on tw o sides b y a bend in the Riv er Thames .The area’ s setting is strongly influenced
by its scenic meander ing river frontage and the significant open spaces of Old Deer P ark and the Ro yal
Botanic Gardens , Kew.The open space at K ew Green f orms an impor tant gate way to the borough.
The r iver and related to wpaths and open spaces are the defining f eatures of the area. Tree lined streets
are a common f eature through m uch of K ew.While K ew Green is fronted b y grand Georgian and
Victor ian homes , to the nor th east of the Green are terr aced cottages which create a more intimate
urban char acter . Houses are more densely arr anged in K ew than man y other par ts of the borough
with shor ter set-bac ks and f ewer spaces betw een proper ties.
The Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew which w as declared a UNESCO World Her itage Site in 2003, is a
world-famous and w orld-leading scientific organisation and botanic garden.  It is amongst the most
impor tant cultur al her itage sites in the w orld and a k ey feature of London’ s identity as a w orld city .The
Government has committed to protecting, conser ving, presenting and tr ansmitting to future gener ations
the Outstanding Univ ersal Value of World Her itage Sites and to protecting and conser ving their settings .
This area includes Old Deer P ark which is a histor ically impor tant and w ell used recreational and
comm unity area of the borough. The e xtensiv e open space suppor ts a r ange of recreational functions ,
including the P ools on the P ark (Richmond Baths), Richmond Athletic Association and the Ro yal
Mid-Surre y Golf Club .
11012  Place-based Str ategy f or Kew
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There is a liv ely and attr active local shopping centre at K ew Gardens Station, presenting a distinctiv e
gateway for those arr iving b y rail or underg round, and there are also local par ades at K ew Green and
Sandycombe Road which pro vide f or top-up shopping.
There has been major residential de velopment at East K ew, providing contempor ary apar tments and
houses in a landscaped setting, along with commercial and m unicipal uses which are in the f orm of
larger scale and less regular de velopment. The Townmead Road Re-use and Recycling Centre pro vides
for residential and tr ade w aste.There is a w ell-used out of centre retail par k.Visitors also come to the
National Archiv es, which is the official archiv e and pub lisher f or the UK Go vernment, pro viding document
reading rooms to access the collection as w ell as e vents.
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 f eedbac k was in vited on what people v alued
in their area.  For Kew Gardens and Riv erside (G1) there w ere v ery inconsistent scores , but it w as
scored par ticular ly highly f or attr activeness , tranquillity , and g reen spaces . For Kew Residential (G2)
it was scored consistently high f or all f eatures , with shops and restaur ants, attractiveness and her itage
marginally higher . For East K ew Mix ed Use (G3) f eatures w ere not scored consistently , sho wing star k
positiv e vie ws on some aspects mirrored b y negativ e vie ws on other aspects , but in par ticular
attractiveness , tranquillity , and g reen spaces w ere considered to be positiv e features of the area.
Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises that both K ew Gardens and Riv erside (G1) and K ew
Residential (G2) ha ve a high sensitivity to change , where the e xisting char acter is v ery strong.  It
recognises f or Kew Gardens and Riv erside (G1) that the char acter area contains a ser ies of unique
open spaces and to wnscape that are in e xcellent condition, and the str ategy f or this area is to conser ve
its char acter .The Study recognises f or Kew Residential (G2) that the char acter istic elements and
features are largely in good condition, and the str ategy f or this area is to conser ve the char acter , whilst
enhancing e xisting f eatures where appropr iate. For East K ew Mix ed Use (G3) it recognises a medium
sensitivity to change , as the e xisting char acter of the area is disjointed and lac ks coherence or identity ,
with the potential f or de velopment to impro ve the char acter and address negativ e qualities , particular ly
in areas such as around the retail par k. It sets out long-ter m oppor tunity to tr ansform the char acter of
the area into a coherent and attr active area of mix ed use de velopment and ser vices , looking to impro ve
the sense of place , pub lic access , and to wnscape legibility .The Urban Design Study contains design
guidance f or each char acter area and f or Richmond’ s Riv erside .
There is also an adopted SPD f or the Old Deer P ark area, has been produced to suppor t the then
emerging 2018 Local Plan and the site allocations within this area. This SPD pro vides an integ rated
framework which suppor ts the conser vation, enhancement and management of the Old Deer P ark as
a histor ically impor tant and w ell-used recreational and comm unity area of the borough.  It considers
the histor ic attr ibutes of the site , the rele vant planning policy fr amework, the recreational and comm unity
activities , environmental consider ations and identifies oppor tunities to suppor t its maintenance and
enhancement.
111Place-based Str ategy f or Kew 12
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Other initiatives
The Council w orks with K ew Traders Netw ork, suppor ting the r ange of independent shops , restaur ants
and caf es in the hear t of the village .There are man y locally organised e vents including K ew Village
Market.
At the time of wr iting, there are activ e travel oppor tunities , including the implementation in 2021 of a
cycle scheme on K ew Road, the potential f or a ne w cycle hub at K ew Gardens and upg rades to the
Kew Gardens Station f ootbr idge.
Vision
The vision f or Kew is to maintain its char acter as a residential area.  Kew Gardens Station will contin ue
to pro vide a liv ely shopping centre f or residents and visitors , with local shops and ser vices at K ew
Green and Sandycombe Road.
The setting of the Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew World Her itage Site will be protected and enhanced,
to conser ve its outstanding univ ersal v alue.There are oppor tunities to sustain the significance of the
histor ic landscape of the P ark and the f eatures it contains , as w ell as suppor ting its wildlif e, nature
conser vation and climate change role , whilst also impro ving the P ark for spor ts, recreation and
comm unity use , with enhanced access .
There is an oppor tunity through ne w development at K ew Retail P ark to impro ve the char acter at East
Kew and impro ve green links to the Riv er Thames .
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Conser ve the high-quality , traditional,  fronta ges along the parade area b y Kew Gar dens
Station,  with oppor tunities f or retaining and enhancing the “spill-out”  of ven ues, including
restaurants,  cafés, and pubs,  to maintain a sense of activity and vibranc y.
Impr ove wa yfinding at the Station and acr oss the to wn centre to places of interest suc h
as Sand ycombe Road,  National Ar chives and the Ro yal Botanical Gar dens.
Preser ve the openness of the parklands and the river side, by resisting de velopment whic h
would aff ect this per ception,  and restoring historic elements where appr opriate .
In areas deficient in access to Pub lic Open Space , consider oppor tunities to impr ove
access to e xisting spaces,  either thr ough design and pub lic realm impr ovements,  or where
oppor tunities arise , provide ne w pub licly accessib le open space . Open spaces that are
currentl y not pub licly accessib le, will be encoura ged to make them a vailab le for pub lic
access and use .
Suppor t greening thr ough conser ving and enhancing street trees and planted fr ont gar dens
with shrubs,  small trees and hedg es with a f ocus on biodiver sity impr ovements.
Contrib ute to conser ving and enhancing the Ro yal Botanic Gar dens,  Kew World Herita ge
Site and surr ounds in accor dance with P olicy 32 Ro yal Botanic Gar dens,  Kew World
Herita ge Site .
 Contrib ute to conser ving and enhancing the significance of the Old Deer P ark historic
landscape and its f eatures,  as set out in the Old Deer P ark SPD , including strengthening
the southern boundar y to reduce the impact and potential encr oachment of spor ts
developments,  adjacent to wnscape , and Twickenham Road,  on the registered park and
garden and conser vation area.   Suppor t the contin ued spor ting and complementar y uses
11212  Place-based Str ategy f or Kew
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18at Pools on the P ark and surr oundings and Ric hmond Athletic Association Gr ound,  Old
Deer P ark.
Impr ove and transf orm par ts of East K ew by impr oving the sense of place , pub lic access
and legibility , along with estab lishing more green infrastructure , particularl y street trees.
Enhance the connectedness of the Thames P ath r oute within the wider K ew townscape
and to the adjacent open spaces.
Contrib ute to pr omoting active tra vel and reducing the dominance of vehic le traffic,
including along Mor tlake Road (A205) and K ew Road (A307) to reduce their se vering impact.
There are oppor tunities in par ts of East K ew for de velopment to positivel y contrib ute to
impr oving the c haracter and ad dressing negative qualities,  creating a sense of activity with an
inviting pub lic realm as par t of a coherent strategy , to impr ove permeability and active tra vel
links.  At K ew Retail P ark (Site Allocation 30) there is the oppor tunity f or comprehensive
residential-led rede velopment to inc lude a rang e of commer cial uses,  impr ove the pub lic realm,
active tra vel and links to the River Thames. There is a tall b uilding zone oppor tunity (7 store ys),
surrounded b y a mid-rise b uffer to pr ovide f or a transition to the more modest surr ounding
area,  in accor dance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones.  Rede velopment at K ew
Biothane (Site Allocation 31) is e xpected to deliver a residential use with associated open space
provision.
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
Kew Retail P ark, Bessant Dr ive, Kew
Kew Biothane Plant, Mellis A venue, Kew
Pools on the P ark and surroundings , Old Deer P ark, Richmond
Richmond Athletic Association Ground, Old Deer P ark, Richmond
113Place-based Str ategy f or Kew 12
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
30:Kew Retail
Park, Bessant
Drive , Kew
Site Area (ha):  3.91
Site Pr oposal
Comprehensive residential-led rede velopment of the site with a rang e of commer cial uses,
including retail,  offices (with the pr ovision of aff ordable workspaces),  and leisure .The
rede velopment should look to impr ove the pub lic realm,  active transpor t through the site and
links to the River Thames.
Conte xt
Kew Retail P ark is a w ell-used shopping destination made up of se ven large floor plate stores and
extensiv e surf ace car par king.
There is a need f or housing in the borough and this site is considered to be suitab le for a substantial
provision of ne w housing units .The Council e xpects that a policy compliant le vel of aff ordab le
housing is pro vided.
Due to the site’ s pro ximity to the Riv er Thames it is located within Flood Zone 3a (an area at high
risk of flooding) and is in a Flood Aler t and Warning Area as designated b y the En vironment Agency .
Any rede velopment proposal needs to tak e this into account.
The e xisting site is car-or ientated, and an y proposals should look to increase activ e travel through
the site and to wards K ew Station and the surrounding area.
There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment pro vides ne w on-site Pub lic Open Space in addition
to an y external amenity space requirements , deliv ering m ulti-functional benefits including f or nature
11412  Place-based Str ategy f or Kew
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18conser vation and biodiv ersity v alue as w ell as f or health and w ellbeing of future occupants and
users , including surrounding comm unities .
There should be an impro vement to the pub lic realm through high quality landscaping, which can
enhance and impro ve the biodiv ersity of the site .Tree lined a venues are typical of the area.
Currently the site has boundar y treatments which cut it off from the surrounding area, creating almost
an island eff ect. Proposals should be designed to impro ve the per meability of the site creating
connections with the K ew Riv erside and the Riv er Thames .
Whilst the site is not located within a main or local centre , it has f or man y years pro ved to be a
popular retail destination.  It is e xpected that commercial uses will be retained on site .The mix of
uses , such as retail, caf es, and offices should be cur ated so that the y add to the vibr ancy and vitality
of the ne w comm unity.The proposed office pro vision should pro vide aff ordab le workspace f or small
and medium siz ed companies .
Any new con venience retail pro vision should not e xceed the floor space of the e xisting units , to
protect the e xisting main centre in K ew.
The Ro yal Botanical Gardens World Her itage Site is within 500m which will need to be tak en in to
consider ation when designing the scheme .
The applicant will be required to submit a full tr anspor t assessment completed in accordance with
local and London-wide guidance .This will include a detailed assessment of its impact on the local
and str ategic road netw ork.The applicant is strongly advised to seek pre-application tr anspor t and
highw ay safety advice from Borough and TfL Officers bef ore wr iting their tr anspor t assessment.
The Urban Design Study 2021 identifies par t of K ew Retail P ark as a tall b uilding z one (7 store ys)
surrounded b y a mid-r ise buffer zones (5-6 store ys) to pro vide f or an area of tr ansition with the more
modest surrounding b uildings , in accordance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is also set out in the Urban Design Study 2021, G3
East K ew Mix ed Use and in the K ew Village Planning Guidance .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
115Place-based Str ategy f or Kew 12
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
31:Kew Biothane
Plant,  Mellis
Avenue, Kew
Site Area (ha):  0.69
Site Pr oposal
The Council suppor ts the rede velopment of this site to pr ovide f or residential uses,  including
affordable housing,  and associated open space pr ovision.
Conte xt
The main use of this site w as the processing of effluent from the bre wing oper ations on the Stag
Brewery site , run by Thames Water Utilities .
The site has been declared sur plus to requirements since the bre wery oper ations ceased in 2015.
There is an e xtant planning per mission f or a specialist e xtra care housing scheme , compr ising of
88 units , and including leisure and social f acilities .
Due to its location in a largely residential area, rede velopment f or housing, including aff ordab le
housing, is considered appropr iate.
The rede velopment of this site pro vides an oppor tunity to enhance the en vironment whilst meeting
housing needs .
Parts of the site are designated as Metropolitan Open Land and de velopment in this area w ould not
be acceptab le.The Open Land Re view 2021 f ound this area, as par t of the wider designation (P arcel
21 Mor tlake Cemeter y East, Townmead K ew, & Thames K ew East) fulfils its role f or MOL pur poses .
There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment proposal impro ves the char acter and openness of
the Metropolitan Open Land.
There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment pro vides ne w on-site Pub lic Open Space in addition
to an y external amenity space requirements , deliv ering m ulti-functional benefits including f or nature
11612  Place-based Str ategy f or Kew
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18conser vation and biodiv ersity v alue as w ell as f or health and w ellbeing of future occupants and
users , including surrounding comm unities .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is also set out in Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or G3 East K ew Mix ed Use and the K ew Village Planning
Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
117Place-based Str ategy f or Kew 12
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
32:Pools on the
Park and
surroundings,
Old Deer P ark,
Richmond
Site Area (ha):  1.96
Site Pr oposal
The Council suppor ts the contin ued use of this site f or spor ts uses,  including impr ovements and
upgrading of e xisting facilities.  Additional leisure facilities,  comm unity and other complementar y
uses will be suppor ted pr ovided the y meet identified needs and do not detract fr om the main use
of the site as a pub licly accessib le swimming facility . Any proposal w ould need to be full y justified
having assessed the significance of the b uilding and its setting,  and ha ving taken into account
the wider herita ge designations that appl y to the site .
Conte xt
The Council's Indoor Spor ts Facility Needs Assessment (2015, due to be updated in 2022) states
that there is a concer n regarding the ageing stoc k on this site and this f acility needs substantial
works and upg rading.  A par ticular concer n raised in the Assessment is the cost of maintaining and
running the f acility due to its age . Furthermore the future population g rowth of the borough will place
further pressure on capacity .
The Indoor Spor ts Facility Needs Assessment also suggests that ideally the b uilding should be
rebuilt to off er residents a moder n swimming e xperience . In addition, the gym f acilities require
investment to match the standards in other membership f acilities .
As the e xisting pools comple x is listed as Gr ade II and the site lies within a Gr ade I Histor ic Park
and Garden and Conser vation Area as w ell as within the Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew World Her itage
Site b uffer zone, any proposals will be considered within the conte xt of these designations .
11812  Place-based Str ategy f or Kew
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18A SPD f or the o verall Old Deer P ark (aligned to the Conser vation Area boundar y) was adopted b y
the Council in 2018.  It sets out (in section 4 of the SPD) that P ools on the P ark is an impor tant pub lic
facility , for swimming and health and fitness f acilities , and recognises the issues relating to the
comple x and the age of the f acility .
The SPD includes details (in section 5 of the SPD) regarding the significance of the listed status of
the P ools comple x which needs to be understood to inf orm an y scheme on this site and to ensure
it respects this significance , having regard to the Statement of Significance  .
Looking at the P ark as a whole , the Old Deer P ark SPD sets out oppor tunities to sustain the
significance of the histor ic landscape of the P ark and the f eatures it contains , as w ell as suppor ting
its wildlif e and nature conser vation role , impro ving the spor ts, recreation and comm unity f acilities
and enhancing access into and around the P ark.
Any proposal will need to tak e into account the Old Deer P ark SPD to ensure that an y prospectiv e
developments are sensitiv e to the histor ic landscape of the P ark and the f eatures it contains . Regard
should also be had to the char acter area profile and design guidance f or G1 K ew Gardens and
Riverside .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
119Place-based Str ategy f or Kew 12
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
33:Richmond
Athletic
Association
Ground,  Old Deer
Park, Richmond
Site Area (ha):  9.93
Site Pr oposal
The Council suppor ts the contin ued use of this site f or spor ts uses,  including impr ovements and
upgrading of e xisting facilities.  Additional associated leisure facilities and other complementar y
uses could be incorporated pr ovided the y have been full y justified as being necessar y to suppor t
the contin ued spor ting uses on the site , that the y demonstrate meeting identified needs,  do not
detract fr om the main use of the site as a spor ts ground,  and ha ve been de veloped to take account
of the Metr opolitan Open Land (MOL) and historic designations.
Conte xt
The e vidence as set out in the Council's Pla ying Pitch Str ategy (2015) suggests that the spor ts
ground needs to be retained;  however, impro vements are required in relation to the e xisting f acilities
including to the changing f acilities and the quality of the pla ying pitches as a result of them currently
being ‘overplayed’.The recent Action Plan updates ha ve not identified an y significant change to
the situation, although the e vidence base is due to be updated in 2022.
The Council suppor ts the pr inciple of impro vement and upg rading of f acilities to suppor t the spor ts
uses on this site .
The whole site is designated as MOL and theref ore inappropr iate de velopment w ould not be
acceptab le.The Open Land Re view 2021 f ound this area, as par t of the wider designation (P arcel
24 Old Deer P ark & K ew Gardens) fulfils its role f or MOL pur poses .
12012  Place-based Str ategy f or Kew
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18As the pa vilion is listed as Gr ade II and the site lies within a Gr ade I Histor ic Park and Garden and
Conser vation Area as w ell as within the Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew World Her itage Site b uffer
zone, any proposals will be considered within the conte xt of these designations .
It is ac knowledged that an y impro vement and upg rading of the e xisting spor ts facilities ma y require
additional de velopment to suppor t the costs of impro ving/replacing e xisting f acilities . Recognising
the histor ic and policy designations relating to the site an y such de velopment w ould need to be
clear ly justified, be f or associated leisure and other complementar y uses and pro vide f or a
comprehensiv e development approach f or the whole site , and demonstr ate that the char acter and
appear ance of the site as w ell as its histor ic significance is impro ved and enhanced.
A SPD f or the o verall Old Deer P ark (aligned to the Conser vation Area boundar y) was adopted b y
the Council in 2018.  It sets out (in section 4 of the SPD) the e xisting indoor and outdoor pro vision
at the site , including the pitches and the health and fitness f acility .  Oppor tunities f or impro vement
are identified (in section 5 of the SPD) including the details that w ould need to be addressed in an y
proposal f or rede velopment of the g randstand or an y reconfigur ation of the pitches .
Looking at the P ark as a whole , the Old Deer P ark SPD sets out oppor tunities to sustain the
significance of the histor ic landscape of the P ark and the f eatures it contains , as w ell as suppor ting
its wildlif e and nature conser vation role , impro ving the spor ts, recreation and comm unity f acilities
and enhancing access into and around the P ark.
Any proposal will need to tak e into account the Old Deer P ark SPD to ensure that an y prospectiv e
developments are sensitiv e to the histor ic landscape of the P ark and the f eatures it contains .  Regard
should also be had to the char acter area profile and design guidance f or G1 K ew Gardens and
Riverside .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
121Place-based Str ategy f or Kew 12
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1813 Place-based Strategy f or Mor tlake
& East Sheen
Place-based Strategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Area Pr ofile
The Mor tlake & East Sheen area encompasses East Sheen Town Centre , with East Sheen Residential
and East Sheen P arkside , along with Mor tlake Residential and Mor tlake Riv erside .These are char acter
areas H1, H2, H3, H4 and H5 and in the Urban Design Study 2021.
This area is predominantly residential, betw een the Riv er Thames and Richmond P ark.Towards
Richmond P ark there are attr active tree lined streets with large houses , whereas nor th of Upper
Richmond Road West the char acter is f ormed b y terr aced cottages and houses .
Across this area Sheen Common and P alewell Common pro vide unique open areas f or a r ange of
recreational activities and impor tant wildlif e habitats , along with Mor tlake Common and the open space
along the Riv er betw een Chis wick Bridge and Bar nes – with the Varsity Boat Race tr aditionally ending
at Mor tlake.
The Mor tlake Bre wery is a prominent par t of the area’ s her itage . It is a significant de velopment
oppor tunity in the borough, since bre wing oper ations ceased at the end of 2015. There are histor ic
assets - the f ormer bottling b uilding, the Maltings b uilding and the f ormer hotel b uilding, along with
histor ic brick boundar y structures that sur vive.
12213  Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18The centre of East Sheen is bisected b y Upper Richmond Road West (A205 South Circular) and
inevitab ly this has a major impact on its appear ance and char acter . Identified as a distr ict centre in
the borough’ s centre hier archy and the London Plan (see section 6 of the Plan), there is a mix of
multiple and specialist shops , pubs , restaur ants, cafes and a r ange of comm unity f acilities at the Sheen
Lane Centre .The London Plan recognises e xisting office functions , gener ally within smaller units ,
should be protected, albeit that it has medium commercial g rowth potential.
Mortlake now has limited shops and ser vices on Mor tlake High Street. There is a neighbourhood centre
at White Har t Lane .
The area as a whole is relativ ely w ell-connected, including Mor tlake Station, although the r ailway lines
and le vel crossings also f orm barr iers to mo vement.
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 on what local people v alued in their area,
Mortlake Residential (H2) receiv ed moder ately high scores f or attr activeness , green spaces , shops
and restaur ants and comm unity spir it.The highest scores receiv ed for East Sheen Town Centre (H3)
were for its shops and restaur ants, green spaces , vibrancy and comm unity spir it. East Sheen Residential
(H4) receiv ed consistently high scores across most f eatures . East Sheen Common and Residential
(H5) receiv ed par ticular ly high scores f or its attr activeness , tranquillity , and shops and restaur ants.
Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 sets out that Mor tlake Riv erside (H1) has a distinctiv e sense
of place and her itage , with an o verall high sensitivity to change , but its char acter r isks being under mined
by inconsistent b uilding typologies , the dominating presence of the main road i.e . Lower Richmond
Road and Mor tlake High Street, and its increasing disconnect from the Thames . For this area, the
strategy aims to conser ve and enhance the area’ s existing v alued f eatures and her itage assets , and
to restore Mor tlake’s histor ical prominence and relationship with the Thames . Mortlake Residential
(H2) has an o verall high sensitivity to change , with the e xisting distinctiv e char acter and the coherent
townscape , and the str ategy is to conser ve and enhance the char acter . East Sheen Town Centre (H3)
is considered to ha ve a fair sense of place and her itage with a high sensitivity to change o verall,
although the w ester n par t of the to wn centre has relativ ely lo wer sensitivity . It is recognised that the
quality and functioning of the area as a to wn centre has been negativ ely impacted b y several
unsympathetic de velopments , the dominance of v ehicle tr affic along the South Circular , and the loss
of coherence in shop frontages .The str ategy is theref ore to restore the histor ic char acter and impro ve
123Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen 13
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18its pub lic realm and sense of identity , particular ly along Upper Richmond Road to mak e it a more
attractive destination.  East Sheen Residential (H4) has a strong e xisting char acter and the to wnscape
is well-maintained with a good quality of architecture , with a high sensitivity to change .The str ategy
is to conser ve the char acter , elements , and f eatures , whilst enhancing appropr iate areas . East Sheen
Parkside (I5) has a strong e xisting char acter and a high sensitivity to change .The str ategy is to conser ve
the char acter , whilst enhancing par ticular f eatures in order to strengthen the area’ s future resilience .
The Urban Design Study contains design guidance f or each char acter area and f or Richmond borough’ s
Riverside .
Other initiatives
The Council w orks with the East Sheen Business and Retail Association (ESBRA) who w ork closely
with the comm unity dealing with local issues such as par king and funding ne w and e xciting projects ,
breathing lif e into Sheen living f or all.
Transpor t for London’ s Cycling Action Plan has highlighted oppor tunities f or additional cycle corr idors
and identified a top potential route through Sheen and Mor tlake into the neighbour ing borough of
Wands worth.
Vision
The vision f or Mor tlake is to create a ne w focus to the village b y rede velopment of the Stag Bre wery
site, creating a recreational and living quar ter and a link betw een the village and the r iverside .
The vision f or East Sheen is to retain the estab lished char acter of the area, to maintain and enhance
the distr ict centre , providing shops , services and emplo yment f or the local comm unities .There is also
the potential to mak e Milestone Green the centre of East Sheen.
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Contrib ute to a sense of activity and vibranc y in the to wn and neighbourhood centres,
retaining the mix of uses inc luding restaurants,  cafes and pubs along Sheen Lane and at
the junction of Mor tlake High Street and White Har t Lane , to maintain a sense of activity
and vibranc y, and encoura ge independent shops and b usinesses,  emphasising local
maker s and ar tisans.  Encoura ge reinstatement of shop fr onts’  original design to ac hieve
consistenc y in appearance in East Sheen Town Centre .
Enhance the sense of arriv al and quality of the pub lic realm at Mor tlake Station,  through
oppor tunities f or ar t and wa yfinding.
Incorporate f ocal points and estab lish distinctive landmarks,  without recour se to tall
buildings,  including in East Sheen Town Centre to enhance the sense of place and the
area’ s identity as a destination suc h as the space ar ound the war memorial.
Contrib ute to creating a ‘centre’  for East Sheen at Milestone Green.
Enhance the pub lic realm andcreate pub lic areas f or dwelling and “spill-out”,  rather than
just narr ow, transient spaces,  using high quality street furniture , and increase greening
through tree planting and ver ges.
Ensure ne w de velopment along the river contrib utes to its v alued leisure functions as well
as positivel y addressing Mor tlake High Street.  Enhance local distinctiveness ar ound
Mortlake River side using its relationship with the river and historic industr y.
12413  Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Enhance contin uity, connectedness and legibility of the Thames P ath r oute , to impr ove
connectivity with the wider area.
At East Sheen P arkside , enhance the quality and biodiver sity of East Sheen Common and
ensure green infrastructure is ph ysicall y connected,  notab ly along Fif e Road, The Mall,
and Spencer Gar dens,  and impr ove boundar y treatments and interface with Christ’ s School.
Consider oppor tunities to reduce the per ceived dominance of vehic les, promoting active
travel with space to create caf é seating areas and impr ove pedestrian e xperience in East
Sheen Town Centre and at Mor tlake River side.
There are site oppor tunities f or ne w de velopment in this area. Within the to wn centre boundar y,
there is some potential where the to wnscape is less intact f or de velopment to restore the historic
character .The Telephone Exc hang e and 172-176 Upper Ric hmond Road West, East Sheen (Site
Allocation 36) is an oppor tunity - if the telephone e xchang e is dec lared surplus to requirements
- for a mix ed use sc heme that contrib utes to the vitality and viability of the centre .Towards
Mortlake High Street,  there is a similar oppor tunity - if the Mor tlake and Barnes Deliver y Office ,
Mortlake (Site Allocation 35) becomes surplus - f or emplo yment or other commer cial and retail
uses.
At Sta g Bre wery (Site Allocation 34) there is a significant oppor tunity to create a ne w quar ter
for living,  with recreational and commer cial uses to g enerate vibranc y, local emplo yment,
comm unity and leisure oppor tunities. The rede velopment will create vibrant links between the
River and the to wn, enlivening the River side fr onta ge and Mor tlake High Street,  to transf orm
Mortlake while respecting the c haracter and histor y of the area. There is an oppor tunity to
accommodate tall b uildings within the sensitivities of the surr ounding conte xt, in accor dance
with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones.
At Barnes Hospital (Site Allocation 37) rede velopment is e xpected to pr ovide a ne w SEN sc hool
and health centre , along with residential.
See details in the Site Allocations within this area:
Stag Bre wery, Lower Richmond Road, Mor tlake
Mortlake and Bar nes Deliv ery Office , Mor tlake
Telephone Exchange and 172-176 Upper Richmond Road West, East Sheen
Barnes Hospital, East Sheen
125Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen 13
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
34:Stag
Brewery, Lower
Richmond Road,
Mortlake
Site Area (ha):  8.77
Site Pr oposal
The Council will suppor t the comprehensive rede velopment of this site . An appr opriate mix of
uses,  particularl y at gr ound floor le vels,  should deliver a ne w hear t and centre f or Mor tlake .The
provision of an on-site ne w 6-f orm entr y secondar y school,  plus sixth f orm,  will be required.
Appr opriate uses,  in ad dition to educational,  include residential (inc luding aff ordable housing),
emplo yment,  commer cial suc h as retail and other emplo yment g enerating uses,  health facilities,
comm unity and social infrastructure facilities (suc h as a m useum),  river -related uses as well as
spor t and leisure uses,  including the retention and/or repr ovision and upgrading of the pla ying
fields. The Council will e xpect the pr ovision of high quality open spaces and pub lic realm,  including
links thr ough the site to integrate the de velopment into the surr ounding area as well as a ne w
publicly accessib le green space link to the river side.
Conte xt
The Council has produced and adopted the Stag Bre wery Planning Br ief SPD in 2011 f or this site ,
which sets out the vision f or rede velopment and pro vides fur ther guidance on the site’ s char acter istics ,
constr aints , land use and de velopment oppor tunities . Any proposed de velopment should ha ve due
regard to the adopted br ief.
The bre wery oper ations on this site ceased at the end of 2015;  the site has been mar keted and
sold.
There is a need to create a ne w hear t for Mor tlake, which should add to the viability and vitality of
this area, f or both e xisting as w ell as ne w comm unities .
12613  Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There is a clear need f or a ne w 6-f orm of entr y secondar y school, plus a sixth f orm, in this area, as
set out in the Council’ s School Place Planning Str ategy .Theref ore, the Council e xpects an y
redevelopment proposal to allo w for the pro vision of this school.
Whilst this site is not located within a to wn centre , it falls within the Mor tlake Area of Mix ed Use .
Theref ore, it is e xpected that this site will pro vide a substantial mix of emplo yment uses , including
lower cost units suitab le for small b usinesses , creativ e industr ies and scientific and technical
businesses including g reen technology . Other emplo yment gener ating uses will also be suppor ted.
Retail and other commercial uses , such as caf és and restaur ants, will add to the vibr ancy of the
new centre as w ell as contr ibuting to the pro vision of impor tant local emplo yment oppor tunities .
Incor porating a mix of uses , including social infr astructure and comm unity as w ell as leisure , spor t
and health uses , and attr active frontages should contr ibute to creating an in viting and vibr ant ne w
centre .
The pro vision of residential uses (including policy compliant aff ordab le housing) will ensure that the
new hear t of Mor tlake becomes a vibr ant centre f or ne w comm unities .
The site is within an Archaeological Pr iority Area and par tially within the Mor tlake Conser vation
Area. The e xisting Buildings of Townscape Mer it should be retained;  the reuse of these histor ic
buildings off ers an e xcellent oppor tunity to ensure the site incor porates and promotes a cultur al and
histor ic legacy , for example b y pro viding an on-site m useum.  Any development should respond
positiv ely to the Conser vation Area, including the setting of the listed b uildings (Gr ade II) to the
north of the site .
The site is v ery close to an Air Quality F ocus Area.  In addition to the de velopment ha ving to achie ve
“Air Quality P ositiv e”, str ict mitigation measures will be required, both to mitigate an y effect on
current receptors and highw ays and on future receptors within the proposed de velopment, par ticular ly
for sensitiv e receptors , such as pupils at the secondar y school.
Links through the site , including a ne w green space and high quality pub lic realm link betw een the
River and Mor tlake Green, pro vides the oppor tunity to integ rate the de velopment and ne w
comm unities with the e xisting Mor tlake comm unity.
The pla ying fields in the south w est cor ner of the site , which are designated Other Open Land of
Townscape Impor tance (OOL TI), should be retained and/or repro vided and upg raded.  In the e vent
of repro vision and upg rading, where a comprehensiv e approach to rede velopment can be tak en in
line with P olicy 36, it ma y be acceptab le to re-distr ibute designated OOL TI within the site , provided
that the ne w open area is equiv alent or impro ved in ter ms of quantum, quality and openness . In
addition, repro vision and upg rading of the pla ying fields within the site f or spor t uses has to be
carried out in line with P olicy 37, the NPPF and Spor t England P olicy.
The adopted de velopment br ief (2011) identifies a n umber of tr anspor tation and highw ay issues .
The Council will e xpect the de veloper to w ork together with rele vant par tners , including Transpor t
for London, to ensure that where necessar y impro vements to sustainab le modes of tr avel, including
public transpor t facilities , are secured as par t of an y development proposal. The oppor tunity to
relocate the b us stopping / tur ning f acility from A vondale Road Bus station to this site should be
investigated as par t of the comprehensiv e rede velopment.
There is potential oppor tunity in the tall b uilding z one (7 store ys), with a mid-r ise zone b uffer (5-6
store ys), in accordance with P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones , although the Urban Design
Study 2021 recognises the limits due to the sensitivities of the surrounding conte xt.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is also set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in
the char acter area profile and design guidance f or H1 Mor tlake Riv erside and the Mor tlake Village
Planning Guidance SPD .
127Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen 13
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
12813  Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
35:Mortlake and
Barnes Deliver y
Office , Mor tlake
Site Area (ha):  0.08
Site Pr oposal
If the site is dec lared surplus to requirements,  appr opriate land uses inc lude emplo yment or other
commer cial and retail uses.
Conte xt
The site is located within the Mor tlake Area of Mix ed Use .
As of 2021, Ro yal Mail has no plans to relocate oper ations from this deliv ery office . However, if the
site is declared sur plus to requirements b y Royal Mail in the longer ter m, the e vidence suggests
there is a need f or emplo yment or other commercial and retail uses in this area.  Such pro vision
should create an attr active frontage to the High Street.
Only if emplo yment and other commercial or emplo yment gener ating uses ha ve been e xplored and
options discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould the pro vision of housing (including
affordab le housing) in upper floors as par t of a mix ed-use scheme be considered as a potential
redevelopment option.
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal on this site should ha ve regard to , is also set out in the Urban Design Study
2021 in the char acter area profile and design guidance f or H1 Mor tlake Riv erside and the Mor tlake
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
129Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen 13
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
13013  Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
36:Telephone
Exchang e and
172-176 Upper
Richmond Road
West, East Sheen
Site Area (ha):  0.44
Site Pr oposal
If the Telephone Exc hang e is dec lared surplus to requirements,  appr opriate land uses f or the
whole area inc lude emplo yment and commer cial uses as well as comm unity and social
infrastructure uses.  A mix ed use sc heme with housing (inc luding aff ordable housing) in upper
floor s and to the rear could be considered.
Conte xt
The major ity of the site is within East Sheen’ s town centre boundar y.
The Telephone Exchange is subject to being declared sur plus to requirements b y the telecoms
lando wner .
172-176 is in commercial use and opposite to a designated secondar y shopping frontage .
The Retail & Leisure Needs Study 2021 (phase 1) f orecasts a small increase in con venience goods
floorspace and additional f ood/be verage floorspace requirements in total of ca.  839sqm (g ross)
uses f or East Sheen to 2039.
It is ac knowledged that planning per mission has been g ranted f or the change of use of 172-176 to
a gym. This per mission has been implemented and the gym is oper ational. This means that although
a comprehensiv e rede velopment of the whole site is unlik ely, there is still oppor tunity f or impro vement
of the area.
As this is a site in one of the borough's to wn centres , and giv en the borough’ s shor tage of supply
of emplo yment land and premises , there is an e xpectation that an y proposal pro vides emplo yment
floorspace , particular ly offices which could be in the f orm of fle xible shared w orkspaces .
131Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen 13
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Any rede velopment proposal should pro vide f or emplo yment or commercial floorspace as w ell as
comm unity and social infr astructure uses , that will enab le the centre to g row and div ersify in a w ay
that responds to changes in the retail and leisure industr ies, providing commercial, b usiness and
service uses to ser ve the local comm unity. Such pro vision should create an attr active frontage along
Upper Richmond Road West.
Only if emplo yment and other commercial as w ell as social infr astructure uses ha ve been e xplored
and options discounted in line with other policies in this Plan, w ould the pro vision of housing (including
policy compliant aff ordab le housing) in upper floors and to the rear of the site as par t of a mix ed
use scheme be considered as a potential rede velopment option.
The Council ac knowledges that the area encompasses tw o diff erent sites in diff erent o wnership;
however, the Council will e xpect the lando wners to w ork together to br ing forward a scheme that
contr ibutes to the vitality and viability of East Sheen centre .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which an y
redevelopment proposal should ha ve regard to , is also set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in
the char acter area profile and design guidance f or H3 East Sheen Town Centre and the East Sheen
Village Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Private
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
13213  Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Allocation
37:Barnes
Hospital,  East
Sheen
Site Area (ha):  1.44
Site Pr oposal
The appr opriate land uses inc lude social and comm unity infrastructure uses.  Any rede velopment
proposal f or this site will be required to prioritise the pr ovision of a ne w Special Education Needs
school
Conte xt
The site pro vided health f acilities b ut has no w been deemed sur plus to requirements b y the South
West London and St George’ s Mental Health Trust.
An outline planning per mission w as granted in 2020 f or a mix of uses including a health centre ,
Special Education Needs (SEN) school and residential.
There is a clear need f or a ne w SEN school in this area as set out in the Council’ s updated School
Place Planning Str ategy .Theref ore, the Council e xpects an y rede velopment proposal to pr ioritise
the pro vision of the educational use .
Appropr iate land uses include social and comm unity infr astructure uses (including education). The
possibility of locating pr imary and/or comm unity health ser vices on this site should be in vestigated.
Only if comm unity and social infr astructure uses ha ve been e xplored and options discounted in line
with other policies in this Plan, w ould the pro vision of housing (including aff ordab le housing) and
potential f or extra-care housing, be considered as a potential rede velopment option.
The Council e xpects that the most impor tant e xisting Buildings of Townscape Mer it are retained.
Any proposal should respond positiv ely to the adjoining Queens Road Conser vation Area and the
relationship with Mor tlake cemeter y.
133Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen 13
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There is an e xpectation that an y rede velopment pro vides ne w on-site Pub lic Open Space in addition
to an y external amenity space requirements , deliv ering m ulti-functional benefits including f or nature
conser vation and biodiv ersity v alue as w ell as f or health and w ellbeing of future occupants and
users , including surrounding comm unities .
Policy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure in this Plan proposes that should a scheme come
forward for rede velopment or change of use to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing, in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , then it w ould not need
to be considered f or alter nativ e social infr astructure use nor mar keting submitted.  In those
circumstances a wholly aff ordab le housing scheme w ould be suppor ted. However, on this site the
Council is seeking social infr astructure/comm unity use along with aff ordab le housing, to meet local
education and health needs .
Design objectiv es and gener al guidance relating to the local char acter of the area, which the
redevelopment of this site should ha ve regard to , is set out in the Urban Design Study 2021 in the
character area profile and design guidance f or H2 Mor tlake Residential and the East Sheen Village
Planning Guidance SPD .
Owner ship:(pub lic/priv ate/mix ed/unkno wn)
Public and Pr ivate
Expected Implementation Timescale
Long (10-15 y ears) Medium (5-10 y ears) Shor t- term (0-5 y ears)
13413  Place-based Str ategy f or Mor tlake & East Sheen
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1814 Place-based Strategy f or Barnes
Place-based Strategy f or Barnes
Area Pr ofile
The Bar nes area encompasses Bar nes Centre and Riv erside , the residential areas including Bar nes
Bridge and Bar nes Common. These are char acter areas I1, I2, I3, I4 and I5 in the Urban Design Study
2021.
The k ey features of Bar nes are the Green, the pond and surrounding b uildings and trees which create
an outstanding village atmosphere;  Castelnau with its fine houses which pro vide a dr amatic approach
to Hammersmith Br idge;  and the f ormer Harrods depositor y building (no w con verted into flats). The
Bridge is an impor tant tr anspor t link to k ey destinations f or cyclists , pedestr ians, vehicles and r iver
traffic, and its closure f or repairs in 2020 has caused consider able impact.
The Riv er Thames and related to wpaths and open spaces are the other defining f eatures of the area.
Key open areas include Bar nes Common, the Wildlif e and Wetlands Trust London Wetland Centre ,
Leg O’Mutton reser voir and the Bar n Elms Pla ying Fields .
Barnes is identified as a local centre in the borough’ s centre hier archy (see section 6 of the Plan).
Barnes High Street and Church Road ha ve a good r ange of local shops and ser vices and there is also
an impor tant local shopping area at Castelnau which ser ves a distinct residential area that has been
amongst the most relativ ely disadv antaged in the borough.
The setting of Bar nes is strongly influenced b y the Riv er Thames border ing Bar nes on three sides , as
well as the significant open spaces of Bar nes Common and the London Wetland Centre .
As par t of the Urban Design Study consultation in 2021 on what people v alued in their area, Bar nes
High Street Local Centre (I1) receiv ed the highest score f or shops/restaur ants, Bar nes Riv erside (I2)
receiv ed the highest score f or all f eatures , and Bar nes Residential (I3) w as scored highly with the
maxim um score giv en to its g reen spaces .
135Place-based Str ategy f or Bar nes 14
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Overall strategy
Overall, the Urban Design Study 2021 recognises the char acter isation of Bar nes Centre (I1) has a
strong sense of place and is an area of high-quality to wnscape .The area’ s char acter and functionality ,
however, are negativ ely impacted b y the dominating presence of tr affic, especially along the A3003.
It recognises the e xisting char acter of Bar nes Riv erside (I2) is strong, with a distinctiv e sense of identity
and an ab undance of high-quality open space;  the quiet and sub urban quality of the area is sensitiv e
to ne w development. The to wnscape along The Terrace is a v alued f eature that f orms an impor tant
frontage to Bar nes.The Bar nes Residential Area (I3) has an o verarching sense of place from the high
quality of the Castelnau and Bar nes Green Conser vation Areas , the sense of spaciousness , and the
prevailing sense of unity across the char acter area. The e xisting char acter of Bar nes Br idge Residential
(I4) is strong, with a distinctiv e sense of place and “village”  quality . Barnes Common and Riv erside
(I5) is recognised as v ery strong due to its e xtensiv e netw ork of high-quality open spaces of metropolitan
impor tance and the distinctiv e townscape elements that border the Common. The Urban Design Study
strategy f or all of these char acter areas is conser ve, with little change e xpected o verall giv en the o verall
high sensitivity to change , and enhance the histor ic functionality around Bar nes Centre through better
prioritising pedestr ian use and accessibility .The Urban Design Study contains design guidance f or
each char acter area and f or Richmond’ s Riv erside .
Other initiatives
The Council w orks with the Bar nes Town Centre Manager , a role pro vided as par t of the Bar nes
Comm unity Association, to help attr act ne w, independent shops to Bar nes, mak e local shops more
popular with residents , build on the image of Bar nes as a tour ist destination (as a w ay of increasing
shoppers’  footfall) and to w ork with tr aders .
Vision
The vision f or Bar nes is to maintain and enhance the char acter of Bar nes as an attr active residential
area and as a place that people w ant to liv e and visit.
New development will occur through incremental intensification of small sites , with infill and con versions
that are w ell-designed to respect the char acter and br ing positiv e benefits to e xisting comm unities .
Policy
Future de velopment in this place is e xpected to:
Strengthen the r ole and function of the area’ s distinctive Barnes local centre and encoura ge
independent shops,  and suppor t the neighbourhood centre of Castelnau to ensure
day-to-da y facilities are accessib le, in accor dance with P olicy 1 Living Locall y.
Enab le future pedestrianisation of A3003 in Barnes centre to make the area more permeab le
and reduce the pr ominence of traffic. This will present an oppor tunity to create pub lic
realm f or dwelling as opposed to the e xisting,  narr ow and transient pa vements along
Barnes High Street.
13614  Place-based Str ategy f or Bar nes
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Consider oppor tunities to impr ove connectivity inc luding the High Street to Barnes Green
and to the River side and Thames P ath r oute .
Impr ove the pub lic realm to enhance the sense of arriv al at Barnes Station,  and reanimate
streets as a local hub f or shops,  cafés, and small b usinesses,  including ar ound Priest’ s
Bridg e.
Consider oppor tunities to enhance Barnes River side, preser ving vie ws along the Thames,
and to maintain a sense of activity and vibranc y, with potential f or temporar y
pedestrianisation of The Terrace to create caf é/restaurant seating or more width to impr ove
pedestrian e xperience , reduce the per ceived dominance of vehic les and better connect
the to wnscape with the Doc k Gar dens and Thames P ath.
Other policy initiativ es
The Council will suppor t through par tnership w orking pr oposals to in vestigate the f easibility
to restore a green walkwa y along Barnes Bridg e with step-free access at Barnes Bridg e
station.
There are no Site Allocations within the Bar nes area.
137Place-based Str ategy f or Bar nes 14
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1815 Policies
13815  Policies
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1816 Responding to the c limate
emer gency and taking action
Definitions f or this section / theme of the Plan:
Building Resear ch Estab lishment En vironmental Assessment Methodology (BREEAM):  BREEAM
is a sustainability assessment and cer tification scheme f or the b uilt en vironment and pro vides a widely
recognised and w ell understood fr amework for the promotion of sustainab le design.  It allo ws for the
assessment and r ating of the en vironmental lif e cycle impacts ar ising from diff erent types of de velopments ,
including energy , pollution, w ater, mater ials, health and w ellbeing, and w aste. Compliance with BREEAM
will help to mitigate the lif e cycle impacts of ne w and e xisting b uildings on the en vironment and allo w
developers to demonstr ate to the Council that de velopment is tr uly sustainab le.
Carbon: The w ord carbon is used in this Plan as shor thand f or all g reenhouse gases . London’ s carbon
accounting is measured in carbon dio xide equiv alent, which includes the con version of other g reenhouse
gases into their equiv alent carbon dio xide emissions .
Carbon Neutral: The definition of a carbon neutr al building is f or a b uilding where g reenhouse gas
emissions are minimised at all stages , including the man ufactur ing processes , during constr uction and
during use of the b uilding. The emissions that occur are balanced b y climate-positiv e initiativ es and
offsetting so that the net carbon f ootpr int over time is z ero, making or resulting in no net release of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere .
Decentralised ener gy: low- and z ero-carbon po wer and/or heat gener ated and deliv ered within London.
This includes microgener ation, such as photo voltaics on individual b uildings , through to large-scale heat
netw orks.
Low-carbon ener gy:Low carbon means less carbon dio xide. It is essentially energy that is produced
with substantially lo wer greenhouse gas emissions than con ventional f ossil fuel po wer gener ation. There
are four main types of lo w-carbon energy:  wind, solar , hydro and n uclear po wer.
Part L: Part L of the Building Regulations in England (currently 2013) set the standards f or the energy
performance of ne w and e xisting b uildings .The Go vernment is in the process of consulting on changes
to Part L for the Future Homes Standard.
Rene wable ener gy:This ref ers to energy collected from rene wable resources that are natur ally and
constantly replenished.  It includes sources lik e sunlight, wind, r ain, tides , waves, and geother mal heat.
Although most rene wable energy is sustainab le energy , some is not, f or example some biomass is
unsustainab le.
Zero-carbon: Activity that causes no net release of carbon dio xide and other g reenhouse gas emissions
into the atmosphere . Zero-carbon theref ore ref ers to both embodied energy and oper ational energy .
Embodied energy ref ers to the energy which is used in the man ufacture of the b uilding mater ials, while
operational energy is that which is used to heat, cool and po wer your home .The embodied energy of
insulation, f or example , is the energy which is used to create the insulation itself , while good insulation
will help to wards lo wering a home’ s oper ational energy .
A building which oper ates at z ero carbon does not b urn fossil fuels , has ultr a-high energy efficiency and
is 100% po wered b y rene wable energy
Zero-emission:  Activity that causes no release of air pollutants and carbon dio xide or other g reenhouse
gases .
139Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policy 3.Tackling the c limate emer gency (Strategic P olicy)
A. Climate change is no w the g reatest challenge f acing our society .The Council will promote z ero
carbon de velopment, with the aim that all b uildings and infr astructure projects in the borough will
be net-z ero carbon b y 2050. This will require substantial reductions in g reenhouse gas emissions
and will also reduce fuel po verty and impro ve long ter m energy secur ity for Richmond’ s residents
and b usinesses . Development m ust not e xacerbate climate change . Development should increase
local resilience to current and future impacts of climate changes , especially f or the most vulner able
people and proper ty.
B.This will be achie ved by requir ing all de velopment to:
1. reduce g reenhouse gas emissions in accordance with the London Plan’ s Energy Hier archy
and suppor t the tr ansition to a lo w carbon society b y maximising energy efficiency , zero and
low carbon heat and local rene wable energy gener ation;
2. follow the pr inciples of the circular econom y and suppor t effective resources use to ensure
that the y are k ept in use f or as long as possib le and thereb y minimise w aste;
3. reuse and refurbishment in pref erence to demolition and ne w constr uction;
4. demonstr ate that the y are w ell designed, fully adaptab le and resilient to the impacts of a
changing climate;
5. adapt to the changing climate b y minimising the eff ects of o verheating, mitigating the urban
heat island eff ect, managing flooding, and minimising energy consumption in accordance with
the London Plan’ s Cooling Hier archy;
6. enhance and impro ve the borough’ s green and b lue infr astructure to ensure it deliv ers
multi-functional benefits , such as enhancing micro-climates and natur al carbon sinks as w ell
as impro ving air quality;
7. adopt an integ rated approach to w ater management which considers flood r isk, sustainab le
drainage , water efficiency , water quality and biodiv ersity;
8. reduce w ater demand and meet best pr actice w ater efficiency targets;
9. adopt a circular econom y approach and minimise embodied carbon;
10. ensure that the pr inciples of activ e and sustainab le modes of tr avel are adopted;
11. promote retrofitting of e xisting b uildings , through lo w-carbon measures;
12. promote health y, sustainab le and lo w carbon lif estyles in line with the Council’ s Climate
Emergency Str ategy .
C.To ensure that Richmond is on the r ight tr ajector y to achie ve its net-z ero carbon target, responding
to climate change , including sustainab le design and constr uction, m ust be considered holistically
from the star t of the design process .Theref ore, all de velopment proposals are required to
demonstr ate ho w the y will comply with all rele vant policies on climate change and sustainab le design
during design, constr uction and oper ation of the de velopment.
D.The Council will w ork with par tners and local comm unities to impro ve the energy efficiency of the
existing b uilding stoc k and wider pub lic realm, with a par ticular f ocus on increasing energy efficiency
of homes and b usinesses , especially impro ved insulation in lofts , walls and floors .The Council’ s
Carbon Offset Fund will be used to implement projects to reduce carbon emissions across the
borough.
16.1 Richmond Council is taking rob ust action to
tackle the local and global threat of climate
change , both e xternally, in par tnership with
local organisations and residents , and
internally, minimising the Council’ senvironmental impact b y cutting carbon,
waste and pollution. This w as emphasised
when Richmond Council declared a Climate
Change Emergency in J uly 2019.
14016  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1816.2 Planning has a significant role to pla y in
minimising the borough’ s contr ibution to
climate change and ensur ing that the impacts
of climate change can be eff ectively
mitigated.  Climate change impacts are
increasingly aff ecting the da y-to-da y lives of
people who liv e in, w ork in and visit Richmond
borough. The urban heat island eff ect,
flooding e vents, and e xtreme w eather will
threaten both our health and w ellbeing and
the ph ysical f abric of the borough.
16.3 The Council’ s Climate Emergency Str ategy
sets out fiv e priority areas (air , waste, water,
nature and energy efficiency). The str ategy
outlines ho w the Council will reduce
emissions and the organisation's carbon
footpr int, including a commitment f or the
Council to become carbon neutr al by the y ear
2030 and z ero carbon b y the y ear 2050. The
strategy also highlights that w e will need to
provide comm unity leadership so that
residents and b usinesses are ab le to get
involved in pre venting and prepar ing for
climate change . Developers , local b usinesses
and residents br inging f orward all types and
all siz es of de velopment schemes within the
borough as par t of planning applications , all
have a fundamental role to pla y in helping to
meet this target. Theref ore, all ne w
development proposals coming f orward within
the borough should be z ero carbon.
16.4 To achie ve this ambitious target, w e will need
to decarbonise activities across all sectors .
This will require a tr ansition to a lo w carbon
and circular econom y which promotes the
effective use of resources and minimises
waste, ensure all jour neys are no longer
made b y petrol and diesel v ehicles b ut
instead b y zero carbon alter nativ es such as
cycling and w alking as w ell as z ero carbon
public transpor t. In addition, emissions from
all existing and ne w buildings will need to be
net-z ero carbon b y minimising energy
demand, and meeting all our energy needs
using rene wable and lo w carbon energy .
16.5 To suppor t the tr ansition to a lo w carbon
future in a changing climate , the Council will
shape places in w ays that contr ibute to
radical reductions in g reenhouse gas
emissions;  minimise vulner ability and impro ve
resilience;  encour age the reuse of e xistingresources , including the reuse and con version
of existing b uildings;  suppor t rene wable and
low carbon energy and associated
infrastructure;  and tak e full account of flood
risks.
16.6 Extensiv e retrofit will be required to
decarbonise Richmond’ s existing b uilding
stock given that lo w carbon heat solutions
require high le vels of energy efficiency .The
costs of achie ving higher standards via retrofit
are three to fiv e times higher than f or ne w
buildings and the carbon impact of dela yed
action is significant.
16.7 Policy 2 Spatial Str ategy:  Managing change
in the borough sets out a presumption in
favour of refurbishment. Whilst there will be
circumstances where demolition ma y be more
appropr iate, in gener al, because of the
substantial embodied energy sa vings made
in repur posing e xisting b uildings , compared
with the ultr a-high embodied energy costs of
demolition and reb uild, the reuse and/or
refurbishment of e xisting b uildings is
preferred.  Using the e xisting capacity of
buildings is economically , environmentally
and socially responsib le.The reuse or retrofit
of existing b uildings is also gener ally more
cost-eff ective and less contro versial, because
it conser ves and enhances e xisting places
and neighbourhoods .
16.8 Extrapolating the current ann ual London Plan
housing target of 411 per ann um for
Richmond w ould mean that around 12,000
new dw ellings could be b uilt in Richmond
betw een 2021 and 2050;  this n umber is lik ely
to increase due to Go vernment's higher
housing need calculations .The Local Plan
and its policies m ust theref ore ensure that
new development in the borough does not
create a legacy of poor perf ormance that will
require remedial action in the future and add
to Richmond’ s retrofit b urden. There is
evidence that all ne w buildings will need to
operate at net-z ero carbon b y 2030 in order
to achie ve a z ero carbon b uilt en vironment
in the UK b y 2050. This means that all ne w
buildings m ust be designed to oper ate at
net-z ero carbon b y 2025.
141Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1816.9 The climate change policies in this section
should be read alongside the rele vant policies
in the London Plan as w ell as other sectionsin this Plan, including the g reen and b lue
infrastructure , and the design policies .
Policy 4. Minimising Greenhouse gas emissions and pr omoting ener gy efficienc y (Strategic
Policy)
A. To achie ve the borough’ s target of net-z ero carbon b y 2050, all proposed de velopment will be
required to demonstr ate that the fullest contr ibution to minimising g reenhouse gas emissions has
been made on site .
This will be achie ved by requir ing:
B.All de velopment:
1. to reduce g reenhouse gas emissions on-site in accordance with the London Plan’ s Energy
Hierarchy:
a. Be lean:  use less energy and manage demand dur ing oper ation.
b.Be clean:  exploit local energy resources (such as secondar y heat) and supply energy
efficiently and cleanly .
c. Be green:  maximise oppor tunities f or rene wable energy b y producing, stor ing and using
renewable energy on-site .
d. Be seen:  monitor , verify and repor t on energy perf ormance .
2. to mak e the fullest contr ibution to supplying energy efficiently and cleanly , and to maximise
renewable and lo w carbon energy gener ation, stor age and use , through the deplo yment of
appropr iately selected, siz ed and sited technologies;
3. to promote a more ambitious use of a vailab le roof space to deliv er multi-functional benefits
(such as the co-location of rene wable energy and g reen infr astructure);
4. to adopt a circular econom y approach to b uilding design and constr uction to reduce w aste, to
keep mater ials and products in use f or as long as possib le, and to minimise embodied carbon
(see P olicy 7 on Waste and Circular Econom y).
C.All con versions and c hang es of use that result in the creation of 1 or more d wellings:
1. to pro vide an Energy Str ategy demonstr ating ho w emissions sa vings ha ve been maximised
on site at each stage of the energy hier archy;
2. to achie ve net-z ero carbon with a minim um of 35% on-site reduction be yond Building
Regulations (2013) (or an y future updating successor to these standards).
D.New-build residential de velopment of 1 or more d wellings,  and major residential de velopment
of 10 or more d wellings (inc luding c hang es of use , conversions and major refurbishments),
and non-residential de velopment of 500sqm or more:
1. to achie ve net-z ero carbon with a minim um of 60% on-site reduction;
2. to pro vide an Energy Str ategy demonstr ating ho w emissions sa vings ha ve been maximised
on site at each stage of the London Plan’ s Energy Hier archy;
3. to use lo w carbon heat and hot w ater supply;  there can be no gas boilers in ne w dw ellings or
new non-domestic de velopment in Richmond from 2024;
4. to demonstr ate ho w energy demand, including regulated and unregulated uses (including plant
or equipment), has been minimised on site through passiv e measures and b y maximising the
efficiency of b uilding f orm, fabric and systems;
14216  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 185. reduce the potential f or inter nal o verheating and reliance on air conditioning systems in
accordance with the London Plan’ s Cooling Hier archy (Policy SI 4 Managing Heat Risk);
6. assess viability of on-site rene wables and target solar technologies equal to 40% of b uilding
footpr int area (unless it can be clear ly demonstr ated that this is not pr actical);
7. disclose the anticipated Energy Use Intensity at design and pre-occupation stage .
E. Zero carbon and the Council’ s Carbon Offset Fund
1. New development proposals will be required to get as close as possib le to z ero-carbon on-site ,
rather than relying on offset fund pa yments to mak e up an y shor tfall in emissions . A cash-in-lieu
contr ibution to meet net-z ero carbon will only be considered acceptab le in instances where it
has been clear ly demonstr ated with rob ust and credib le evidence that no fur ther sa vings can
be achie ved on-site , due to site constr aints or limitations . Off-site pro vision instead of a
cash-in-lieu contr ibution is only acceptab le if an alter nativ e proposal is identified, deliv ery of
that proposal is cer tain and subject to ag reement b y the Council.
2. The London Plan’ s carbon offset pr ice is currently set at £95/t. This is gener ally considered
too lo w to actually deliv er equiv alent carbon sa vings and theref ore does not incentivise sufficient
on-site sa vings .Theref ore, it is a per verse incentiv e for de velopers to offset carbon emissions
via a cash-in-lieu contr ibution r ather than achie ving the actual sa vings on site .
In order to incentivise de velopers to implement on-site lo wer carbon str ategies where possib le,
and to ensure that an y remaining carbon shor tfall can adequately be addressed off site , the
carbon shor tfall for the assumed lif e of a de velopment (e .g. 30 y ears) will theref ore be offset
at a r ate of £300/t  as at 2021. The pr ice for offsetting carbon is regular ly reviewed. Any changes
to Richmond’ s suggested carbon offset pr ice will be updated in future guidance .
Minim um on-site total reduction in CO2 Development Type
Net-z ero with minim um 60% on-site reduction;
with a maxim um of 40% to be offset at a r ate of
£300/tMajor residential de velopment of 10 or more
dwellings (including ne w build, change of use ,
conversions , and major refurbishments).
Net-z ero with minim um 60% on-site reduction;
with a maxim um of 40% to be offset at a r ate of
£300/tMinor ne w-build residential de velopment of 1 or
more dw ellings .
Net-z ero with minim um 35% on-site reduction;
with a maxim um of 65% to be offset at a r ate of
£300/tMinor residential change of use and con versions
resulting in the creation of 1 or more dw ellings .
Net-z ero with minim um 50% on-site reduction;
with a maxim um of 50% to be offset at a r ate of
£300/t Non-residential de velopment of 500sqm Gross
Internal Area (GIA) or more (including ne w build,
change of use and major refurbishments).
Table 16.1 Summar y of net z ero carbon and on-site carbon emission reduction requirements
16.10 The pur pose of this policy is to ensure all
development in this borough minimises
Richmond’ s contr ibution to climate change .
Theref ore, all de velopment proposals should
apply the Energy Hier archy, as set out in theLondon Plan. The pr iority is to minimise
energy demand, and then address ho w
energy will be supplied and rene wable
143Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18technologies incor porated.  An impor tant
aspect of managing demand will be to reduce
peak energy loadings .
16.11 All de velopment (residential and
non-residential) should be net-z ero, which
means that a cer tain percentage of regulation
carbon emissions has to be achie ved on-site
(see Table in P olicy abo ve), with the
remaining emissions (up to 100%) to be offset
through a contr ibution to the Council’ s Carbon
Offset Fund. The targets are e xpressed as
minim um impro vement o ver the Target
Emission Rate (TER) outlined in the national
Building Regulations (2013).
16.12 While the London Plan only requires ‘major’
developments to be z ero carbon, the major ity
of de velopments in Richmond borough are
minor schemes f or which the London Plan
policy w ould not apply . In order to achie ve
our carbon reduction target as cost eff ectively
as possib le, all ne w development m ust
theref ore be fit f or the future (i.e . be
ultra-energy efficient and climate resilient,
and maximise lo w carbon and rene wable
energy). The cum ulativ e impact of all minor
developments represents a large source of
carbon emissions , and the y will pla y a
significant role in becoming a net-z ero carbon
borough b y 2050.  Development that tak es
place no w will become par t of the e xisting
built stoc k, and if the borough is not mo ving
towards a net-z ero requirement f or all
developments as par t of this Local Plan, it
would be ine vitab le for these de velopments
to be retrofitted at a significant cost in the
future .Theref ore, all de velopment will need
to reduce its g reenhouse gas emissions to
near z ero on site , and become net-z ero
carbon or net-positiv e buildings . In addition,
given that a significant propor tion of
non-residential schemes in Richmond are
less than 1,000sqm GIA, the threshold of
500sqm has been applied to non-residential
schemes to ensure that larger minor
developments also achie ve the required
emission reductions .
16.13 The Council will require an Energy Str ategy ,
setting out an assessment of energy demand
and carbon emissions from a proposed
development, which should demonstr ate the
expected energy and emissions sa vings fromenergy efficiency and rene wable energy
measures incor porated into the de velopment.
Rene wable technologies such as photo voltaic
(PV) cells , solar ther mal panels , ground and
air source heat pumps and other f orms of
renewable energy are lik ely to be appropr iate
in man y par ts of the borough, subject to other
policies within this Plan. There could also be
oppor tunities for other and/or more adv anced
renewable technologies , such as tidal
microgener ation on the Riv er Thames .It
should be noted that g round or air source
heat pumps are po wered b y electr icity, so
unless this comes from a rene wable source ,
they still gener ate carbon emissions , though
less than those associated with con ventional
types of heating, and with no on-site
emissions . Ideally solar PV should be used
for the heat pumps to be considered
renewable energy .
16.14 To ensure that de velopment proposals
comply with the policies set out in this Plan,
the approach to energy supply on
development sites should be clear ly set out
in an Energy Str ategy , which sho ws ho w
various options ha ve been considered and
includes the pro vision of sufficient and rob ust
detail to demonstr ate an achie vable str ategy .
It must demonstr ate ho w the energy
requirements will be met in line with the
London Plan’ s Energy Hier archy.The on us
will be on de velopers to pa y for the cost of
any independent assessment on behalf of
the Council.
16.15 The Council recognises that there ma y be
exceptional circumstances where it is not
technically f easib le for a de velopment to
achie ve the required on-site carbon emissions
reductions . In such cases , the applicant will
have to demonstr ate in the Energy Str ategy
the reasons wh y the target cannot be met
on-site . As par t of this e xercise , applicants
should thoroughly e xplore all measures and
potential options because man y rene wable
energy technologies can still be deliv ered
within constr ained de velopment sites where
there is v ery limited outdoor space;  for
example , roof mounted solar technologies
and air source heat pumps;  air source heat
pumps can be deliv ered within sites where
there is only v ery limited outdoor space .The
renewable energy sector is a r apidly g rowing
14416  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18sector with contin uous scientific technological
advancements , meaning that the technology
is gradually becoming cheaper , more
advanced, more efficient, more space sa ving,
and rene wable energy solutions can no w be
delivered within a r ange of diff erent
development types and sites . Any justifiab le
shortfall in on-site reductions will need to be
met through a cash-in-lieu contr ibution to the
Council's Carbon Offset Fund, ag reed through
a Section 106 legal ag reement in line with
the Planning Ob ligations SPD .
16.16 Future changes to energy efficiency
standards will be k ept under re view, and
policy requirements will be updated with the
prevailing standards if required. The
Government’ s 2019 Spr ing Statement
includes a commitment to introducing a
Future Homes Standard in 2025, which will
mean ne w build homes be future proof ed with
low carbon heating and m uch higher le vels
of energy efficiency . As an achie vable
steppingstone to the Future Homes Standard
the Go vernment is consider ing increasing the
energy efficiency requirements in P art L of
the Building Regulations f or ne w homes .
Development proposals will be e xpected to
meet ne w standards set out in future changes
to the Building Regulations , including
transitional arr angements .Whilst Building
Regulations are e xpected to be updated in
2022 and 2025, current proposals f or the
Future Homes Standard 2025 are not
ambitious enough to deliv er the sa vingsrequired to achie ve our carbon reduction
targets .Theref ore, London Plan and in
particular Local Plan policy standards will
apply until the y are superseded b y higher
national standards .
16.17 Where per mission is g ranted, conditions ma y
be included as par t of this to ensure the
provision of e vidence that the appro ved
Energy Str ategy is implemented on site .
Design stage and post-constr uction re views
will gener ally be required b y conditions .
16.18 In order to become z ero carbon in line with
the Council’ s ambitions , it is essential that
the de velopment contin ues to deliv er the
energy demand and carbon emissions
commitments once oper ational. The GLA ‘Be
Seen’  Energy monitor ing guidance should be
used to help de velopers ensure that London
Plan SI 2 has been complied with post
constr uction. Theref ore, the Council ma y
require the de veloper , through a s106
agreement, to mak e a contr ibution to co ver
the cost of the ongoing (o ver a per iod of 4
years) monitor ing of the b uilding’ s energy
efficiency through the use of smar t meters
and a w eb-based platf orm.This will require
payments to co ver the cost of the equipment,
as well as officer time to re view the outputs .
Monitor ing will also pro vide the Council with
a rob ust e vidence base against which to set
future re vised targets as par t of a longer-ter m
‘stepped approach’  to the realisation of tr ue
zero carbon or net-positiv e buildings .
Policy 5. Ener gy Infrastructure (Strategic P olicy)
A. All de velopment proposals should prepare an Energy Str ategy in accordance with the Ma yor’s
Energy Planning Guidance . All de velopments should maximise oppor tunities f or on-site electr icity
and heat production from rene wable energy sources .This approach will help reduce carbon
emissions , reduce energy costs to occupants , reduce fuel po verty and impro ve the borough’ s energy
resilience .
B.New development will be e xpected to connect to an y existing decentr alised energy netw ork (DEN).
Where netw orks do not e xist, de velopments should mak e pro vision to connect to an y future netw ork
that ma y be de veloped, ha ving regard to the possibility f or this to come f orward.
C.Major residential de velopment of 10 or more dw ellings (including changes of use , con versions and
major refurbishments), and non-residential de velopment of 500sqm or more will need:
1. to connect to , and where appropr iate e xtend, e xisting DENs in the vicinity of the site , unless
a rob ust and credib le feasibility assessment demonstr ates that connection is not reasonab ly
possib le;
145Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 182. where a connection is not f easib le, provide an assessment of the pro vision of on-site DEN;
there is an e xpectation that on-site – e ven if in the f orm of microgener ation such as solar
technologies – are f easib le; provision should also be made f or future connection to a wider
DEN netw ork should one become a vailab le;
3. where a connection or pro vision of ne w DEN is not immediately a vailab le, ensure the
development is designed in accordance with the Heating Hier archy set out in London Plan
policies SI 3 (D) and S1 4 (B).
D.Any new DENs should pr ioritise non-comb ustib le, non-f ossil fuel energy as the pr imary heat source .
Given that the carbon sa vings from gas engine combined heat and po wer (CHP) systems are
declining due to the decarbonisation of the national electr icity g rid, and increasing e vidence of
adverse air quality impacts , developers will be required to use lo w and z ero carbon heat sources
and e xisting heat netw orks will need to be decarbonised. This is to ensure there is no increase in
the amount of NOx emitted in the borough (see P olicy 53 Local En vironmental Impacts , Part D Air
Quality).
16.19 The use of decentr alised energy and local
secondar y heat sources is e xpected to pla y
a significant par t in reducing emissions from
buildings . All major residential de velopment
of 10 or more dw ellings (including changes
of use , con versions and major
refurbishments) and non-residential
development of 500sqm or more will be
expected to comply with London Plan policies
on decentr alised energy netw orks and
decentr alised energy .
16.20 The Council will require all proposed major
residential de velopment of 10 or more
dwellings (including changes of use ,
conversions and major refurbishments), and
non-residential de velopment of 500sqm or
more within an y identified heat netw ork
priority areas to fully e xplore and utilise
decentr alised energy , subject to technical and
financial viability .The Heat Netw ork Priority
Areas and clusters with oppor tunities f or DEN
are set out in London Plan P olicy SI 3 Energy
infrastructure and in the boroughwide Heat
Mapping Study respectiv ely.
16.21 Any proposals to de velop or connect to a
site-wide or distr ict heat netw ork will need to
demonstr ate compliance with all of
Richmond’ s climate change policies , be
future-proof ed and demonstr ate that heat
losses ha ve been minimised.  Given that the
carbon sa vings from gas engine combinedheat and po wer (CHP) systems are declining
due to the decarbonisation of the national
electr icity g rid, and due to the associated
adverse air quality impacts , developers will
be required to use lo w and z ero carbon heat
sources , and e xisting heat netw orks will need
to be decarbonised.  New development will
be expected to demonstr ate through its
Energy Str ategy that the most sustainab le
heating and cooling systems ha ve been
selected. This should include consider ation
of the proposed system as a whole , including
the impact of its component mater ials on
greenhouse gas emissions .
16.22 Minor ne w-build de velopments should be
designed to be ab le to connect to a local DEN
where ver reasonab ly possib le.Where
networks do not currently e xist, de velopments
should mak e pro vision to connect to an y
planned future decentr alised energy netw ork
in the vicinity of the site , having regard to
oppor tunities identified in the Heat Netw ork
Priority Areas of the London Heat Map and
in the boroughwide Heat Mapping Study .
Major residential de velopment of 10 or more
dwellings (including changes of use ,
conversions and major refurbishments), and
non-residential de velopment of 500sqm or
more that cannot immediately connect to an
existing heating netw ork should f ollow the
Heating and Cooling Hier archies set out in
London Plan policies SI 3 (D) and S1 4 (B).
14616  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policy 6. Sustainab le construction standar ds
A. Developments will be required to achie ve the highest standards of sustainab le design and
constr uction.  Applicants will be required to complete the f ollowing:
Residential de velopment
1. Development of 1 dw elling unit or more will be required to complete the Sustainab le Constr uction
Chec klist SPD . A completed Chec klist has to be submitted as par t of the planning application.
2. All ne w-build residential de velopments m ust achie ve a four-star r ating (as a minim um) under
the BRE Home Quality Mar k scheme .
3. Proposals f or con versions or change of use to residential will be required to meet BREEAM
Domestic Refurbishment ‘Outstanding’  standard or equiv alent.
4. Development that results in a ne w residential dw elling, including con versions , change of use ,
and e xtensions that result in a ne w dw elling unit, will be required to incor porate w ater
conser vation measures to achie ve maxim um w ater consumption of 110 litres per person per
day for homes (including an allo wance of 5 litres or less per person per da y for external w ater
consumption).
Non-residential de velopment
5. Development of 100sqm or more of non-residential floor space (including e xtensions) will be
required to complete the Sustainab le Constr uction Chec klist SPD . A completed Chec klist has
to be submitted as par t of the planning application.
6. F. New non-residential b uildings o ver 100sqm will be required to meet BREEAM Non-domestic
New Constr uction ‘Outstanding’  standard or equiv alent.  A ‘verification stage’  certification at
post occupancy stage m ust also be achie ved, unless it can be demonstr ated that this is not
feasib le.
7. All major non-residential refurbishment of e xisting b uildings and con versions o ver 500sqm will
be required to achie ve a final (post-constr uction) cer tified r ating of ‘Outstanding’  under BREEAM
Non-domestic Refurbishment and Fit-out ‘Outstanding’  standard or equiv alent. The scope of
works of the de velopment m ust include a full fit-out, unless it can be demonstr ated that this is
not feasib le.
Fabric efficienc y standar ds
B.New-build residential de velopment of 1 or more dw ellings , and major residential de velopment of 10
or more dw ellings (including changes of use , con versions and major refurbishments), and
non-residential de velopment of 500sqm or more should demonstr ate compliance with the f ollowing
relevant fabric efficiency targets:
Space Heating
Demand Target from
01 Jan uary 2025Zero Carbon Hub Full
FEES fr om 01
January 2023 to 31
December 2024Zero Carbon Hub
Interim FEES until 31
December 2022Type of De velopment
<15 kWh/m2/yr <39 kWh/m2/yr <43 kWh/m2/yr Block of flats and
mid-terr aced houses
<20 kWh/m2/yr <46 kWh/m2/yr <52 kWh/m2/yr Semi-detached, end of
terrace and detached
houses
147Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Space Heating
Demand Target from
01 Jan uary 2025Zero Carbon Hub Full
FEES fr om 01
January 2023 to 31
December 2024Zero Carbon Hub
Interim FEES until 31
December 2022Type of De velopment
<15 kWh/m2/yr - - Non-residential
development
Table 16.2 F abric Efficienc y Targets
16.23 The pr inciples of sustainab le design and
constr uction are designed to be holistic and
are more wide-r anging than energy
performance alone . National sustainab le
design and constr uction standards , such as
BREEAM, ensure that a de velopment’ s full
impact on the en vironment, including w ater
use, transpor t, land use , ecology , as w ell as
energy use and w aste are considered and
addressed.  Using these standards , or an y
subsequently adopted set of national
sustainab le constr uction standards , will assist
in the deliv ery of a n umber of the policies
covered in the Local Plan including in relation
to green infr astructure and sustainab le
transpor t.
16.24 BREEAM Domestic Refurbishment applies
to alter ations to e xisting dw ellings , including
domestic con versions , change of use projects
and e xtensions;  it allo ws both the e xtension
and the e xisting dw elling to be included as
part of the assessment as necessar y. A
post-refurbishment stage assessment or
review is required in order to confir m the final
'as refurbished' perf ormance of the b uilding;
this m ust be cer tified after pr actical
completion of the refurbishment w orks. If a
scheme cannot be assessed under BREEAM
Domestic Refurbishment (such as where the
proposal only relates to minor inter nal
re-modelling w ork), wr itten confir mation will
have to be pro vided as par t of the planning
application b y an accredited assessor .
16.25 Achie ving a r ating under the BRE Home
Quality Mar k is one w ay of demonstr ating the
standard of a ne w residential dw elling. The
Home Quality Mar k has been designed to
ensure the constr uction of high quality
sustainab le homes that will meet thelong-ter m needs of occupants , including
measures f or carbon emissions , sustainab le
mater ials, air quality and natur al daylight. This
scheme allo ws the sustainability credentials
of ne w homes to be compared more easily ,
and, where adhered to alongside F abric
Energy Efficiency Standard (FEES)
requirements , will help de velopers to
demonstr ate compliance with the rele vant
policies .
16.26 The BREEAM Ne w Constr uction 2018
scheme (co vered b y Part C of this policy) can
be used to assess the en vironmental lif e cycle
impacts of ne w non-residential b uildings at
the design and constr uction stages .‘New
constr uction’  is defined as de velopment that
results in a ne w standalone str ucture , or a
new-build e xtension to an e xisting str ucture .
A threshold of 500sqm has been applied to
ensure that larger minor de velopments
achie ve this requirement.
16.27 A fully fitted assessment will ensure that the
fit-out of the de velopment meets the
sustainab le design policy requirements ,
including those relating to energy efficiency ,
water efficiency , and sustainab le mater ials.
Fully fitted de velopments assessed under
BREEAM Ne w Constr uction 2018 m ust
achie ve a ‘verification stage’  certification at
post occupancy stage , unless it can be
demonstr ated that this is not f easib le.The
New Build Verification Stage incentivises
project teams to close the gap betw een the
design intent and actual in-use perf ormance
of buildings .
16.28 The BREEAM Non-Domestic Refurbishment
and Fit-out scheme assesses the
environmental lif e cycle impacts of e xisting
14816  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18non-domestic b uildings at the refurbishment
and fit-out stages .The scope of w orks being
assessed m ust include a full fit-out unless it
can be demonstr ated to the Council’ s
satisf action that the end occupier of the
development has par ticular requirements
which necessitate a shell only or shell and
core b uilding. The subsequent fit-out of the
building m ust upg rade the project to a
BREEAM Ne w Constr uction fully fitted r ating
and cer tification;  this will be secured via legal
agreement or planning condition, as
appropr iate.
16.29 For an y BREEAM scheme , if the
‘Outstanding’  rating is deemed not to be
feasib le, details m ust be pro vided to justify
this. Should the rele vant BREEAM scheme
be replaced or amended dur ing the lif etime
of the plan the equiv alent replacement
requirements will be applied b y the Council.
A Fabric Fir st appr oach
16.30 The need to ensure that a b uilding’ s energy
demand is reduced bef ore seeking to use lo w
carbon energy is widely accepted as one of
the k ey principles of good en vironmental
design.  Despite this , there is still consider able
progress which can be made to deliv er
buildings with a tr uly energy efficient b uilding
fabric.This is due to design and compliance
methodology issues , as w ell as constr uction
quality . Mater ial choices are one of the most
impor tant consider ations f or seeking to
achie ve sustainab le homes .The aim is to
take a fabric first approach.  Essentially , fabric
first is about maximising the perf ormance of
the b uilding’ s structure .This will optimise a
home’ s energy efficiency and reduce its
dependence on mechanical heating and
ventilation systems . It is impor tant theref ore,
to try to source products with strong
sustainab le credentials , including those made
from recycled or reclaimed mater ials, and
consider those which can help deliv er the
best ther mal perf ormance .
16.31 The F abric Energy Efficiency Standard
(FEES) will be applied to ne w-build residential
developments in order to reduce carbon
emissions through f abric energy efficiency .16.32 The FEES ha ve the potential to assist
scheme viability because designers will be
able to achie ve greater energy efficiency b y
impro ving b uilding f orm, in addition to
specification, which is lik ely to be cost neutr al
or potentially cost positiv e. Compliance with
the FEES le vels recommended b y the Zero
Carbon Hub not only suppor ts carbon
reduction, b ut also long-ter m energy secur ity
and the reduction of fuel po verty for future
residents .
16.33 The FEES does not apply to residential
developments in volving refurbishment and
extension;  however, these de velopments are
encour aged to maximise energy efficiency
through a f ocus on b uilding f orm (e.g. for a
proposed ne w extension) in addition to
specification, in accordance with the FEES .
16.34 In addition to compliance with the FEES , all
developments are encour aged to adopt
recognised and successful f abric first
approaches such as P assivhaus and AECB
Building Standard (pre viously kno wn as Silv er
Standard), which go be yond the policy le vels,
in order to promote best pr actice f abric
energy efficiency .
16.35 It is e vident that g reener homes are m uch
cheaper f or tenants;  lower running costs of
homes b uilt to toda y’s environmental
standards ha ve the potential to cut bills f or
occupiers . A family mo ving from an old,
poorly insulated and f ossil-fuel heated home
into a moder n home could sa ve up to £500
per y ear.
Water efficienc y
16.36 According to Waterwise , the UK has less
availab le water per person than most other
European countr ies. London is dr ier than
Istanb ul, and the south-east of England has
less w ater a vailab le per person than the
Sudan and Syr ia. London has lo wer rainfall
than the national a verage while ha ving an
extremely high population density .
16.37 This combination of limited w ater resources
and high demand has resulted in the
Environment Agency designating the Thames
Water region to be 'ser iously' w ater stressed,
meaning that more w ater is tak en from the
149Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18environment than the en vironment can
sustain in the long ter m. London's w ater
supply and demand are finely balanced, and
climate change as w ell as population g rowth
will increase the r isk of drought and impacts
on the en vironment.  Predicted higher
temper atures due to climate change and a
growing population mean that the borough’ s
estimated w ater supply a vailability (in a dr y
year) is sho wn to be in significant deficit.
Theref ore, high standards of w ater efficiency
will be required in ne w developments . New
developments , in their design, landscaping,
constr uction and oper ation, should
incor porate measures to a void w ater
wastage .
16.38 The Council has adopted the 'optional' higher
national technical standard f or water
consumption of 110 litres per person per da y
(including an allo wance of 5 litres or less per
person per da y for external w ater
consumption) in line with the national
technical standard set out in P art G of the
Building Regulations 2013.  All ne w residential
developments including con versions ,
reversions , change of use and e xtensions
that create one or more ne w dw ellings m ust
meet this target.
16.39 All minor non-residential ne w build
developments and minor non-residential
extensions of betw een 100sqm and 500sqm
are required to demonstr ate ho w all credits
for Water consumption (W at 01) w ould be
achie ved under the rele vant BREEAMscheme . A minim um of 3 credits m ust be
achie ved where r ainwater and/or g reywater
recycling is demonstr ated not to be f easib le,
in order to achie ve water credits equiv alent
to an ‘Outstanding’  standard.
16.40 Where a BREEAM assessment is not
technically f easib le, this will ha ve to be
confir med in wr iting b y an accredit BREEAM
assessor ; applicants should incor porate best
practice w ater sa ving and recycling measures
as outlined in the Sustainab le Constr uction
Chec klist SPD .
16.41 A number of w ater sa ving measures and
equipment ma y be incor porated into
developments to comply with the maxim um
water consumption le vels set out in this
policy:
There should be full use of w ater sa ving
devices , water efficient fixtures and
fittings .
Rainw ater and g rey water recycling
(water b utts or more comple x collection
and treatment systems) can significantly
reduce w ater consumption.  Grey water
recycling will need to be energy efficient.
Landscaping and gardens should be
designed to lo wer water demand.
Sustainab le Drainage Systems (SuDS),
including r ainwater har vesting and
storage from roofs and other surf aces
should be used as the y can significantly
reduce demand f or water.
Policy 7.Waste and the cir cular econom y (Strategic P olicy)
Waste
A. The Council will ensure w aste is managed in accordance with the pr inciples of the Circular econom y.
1. All de velopments , including con versions and changes of use are required to pro vide adequate
refuse and recycling stor age space and f acilities f or the separ ate collection of dr y recyclab les
(card, paper , mixed plastics , metals , glass) and f ood, which allo ws for ease of collection and
which residents and occupiers can easily access , in line with the guidance and advice set out
in the Council's SPD on Refuse and Recycling Stor age Requirements .
2. All de velopments need to ensure that the management of w aste, including the location and
design of refuse and recycling f acilities , is sensitiv ely integ rated within the o verall design of
the scheme , in accordance with policies on Local Char acter and Design.
15016  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 183. Where appropr iate de velopment proposals should mak e use of the r ail and the w aterw ay
netw ork for the tr anspor tation of constr uction, demolition and other w aste. Development
proposals in close pro ximity to the r iver should utilise the r iver for the tr anspor t of constr uction
mater ials and w aste where pr acticab le.Transpor ting goods b y water can mean lo wer carbon
emissions whilst also remo ving v ehicles from the roads , subject to v essels using ideally z ero
carbon or lo w carbon technologies .
4. All major de velopments and engineer ing w orks, and where appropr iate de velopments that are
likely to gener ate large amounts of w aste, are required to produce site w aste management
plans to arr ange f or the efficient handling of constr uction, e xcavation and demolition w aste
and mater ials.
B.The borough’ s waste sites are saf eguarded.  Proposals aff ecting e xisting w aste management sites ,
as well as proposals f or ne w or additional w aste management f acilities , will be assessed against
the policies of the West London Waste Plan (2015) and the London Plan.
Circular econom y
C.A circular econom y is an alter nativ e to a tr aditional linear econom y (mak e, use , dispose) in which
we keep resources in use f or as long as possib le, extract the maxim um v alue from them while in
use, then reco ver and regener ate products and mater ials at the end of each ser vice lif e.
1. All de velopment proposals are required to adopt a circular econom y approach to b uilding
design and constr uction to reduce w aste, to k eep mater ials and products in use f or as long as
possib le, and to minimise embodied carbon.  All de velopment should:
a. Prioritise the reuse and retrofit of e xisting b uildings where ver possib le bef ore consider ing
the design of ne w buildings .
b.Be designed f or dur ability and fle xibility as w ell as easy disassemb ly and reuse to minimise
waste dur ing the ‘in-use’  and ‘end of lif e’ phases of the de velopment.  Building shape and
form should be designed to minimise embodied carbon and limit the need f or repair and
replacement.
c. Ensure resource efficiency and reduce embodied carbon emissions b y sourcing and
prioritising mater ials that can easily be maintained, repaired and rene wed across the
development lif etime .
d.  Minimise the en vironmental impact of mater ials b y specifying sustainab ly-sourced, lo w
impact and re-used or recycled mater ials; this should include identifying oppor tunities f or
the retention and reuse of e xisting mater ials on site (e .g. re-using demolition mater ial on
site).  Mater ials should be locally-sourced where ver possib le to minimise tr anspor t
emissions .
2. All de velopment resulting in the creation of 10 or more dw ellings or 500sqm or more
non-residential GIA m ust submit a Circular Econom y Statement (utilising the guidance and
principles set out b y the GLA (Conser ve resources , increase efficiency and source sustainab ly,
Design to eliminate w aste (and f or ease of maintenance) and Manage w aste sustainab ly and
at the highest v alue)) and under take a Whole Lif e-Cycle Carbon assessment propor tionate to
the scale of de velopment and demonstr ate that whole lif e-cycle carbon sa vings ha ve been
maximised.
151Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Waste
16.42 Boroughs are required to allocate sites and
identify w aste management f acilities in order
to pro vide sufficient capacity to manage the
appor tioned tonnages of w aste, as set out in
the London Plan. To achie ve this , the Council
adopted the West London Waste Plan
(WLWP) in 2015 in par tnership with the West
London Waste A uthor ity boroughs of Brent,
Ealing, Harro w, Hillingdon and Hounslo w (this
also includes the Old Oak and P ark Royal
Development Cor poration). The Plan sets out
how the boroughs will jointly manage their
waste appor tionment requirements as set out
in the London Plan. The WLWP is due f or
review by 2031.
16.43 This policy seeks to minimise the amount of
waste going to landfill and contr ibutes
towards the borough being more
self-sufficient in dealing with its w aste. In
addition, the Council considers the la yout,
siting, function and design of recycling and
refuse stor age f acilities to be an integ ral par t
of the de velopment process . Proposals f or
new developments should integ rate refuse
and recycling within the scheme without
causing undue noise and odour n uisance or
other impacts on amenity and living
conditions .
16.44 Waste sites should only be released to other
land uses where w aste processing capacity
is re-pro vided else where within London,
based on the maxim um achie vable
throughput of the intended site o ver the last
five years.
16.45 The Council will apply the policies of the
WLWP when dealing with applications
affecting e xisting w aste sites , such as the
Centr al Depot in Twickenham, the Civic
Amenity site in Townmead Road or an y other
sites with w aste management or treatment
facilities as identified in the WLWP. In
addition, the policies of the WLWP and the
London Plan will be used f or assessing
proposals f or ne w or additional w aste
management f acilities in the borough.Circular econom y
16.46 The aim of a circular econom y is to address
the prob lems of resource use b y rejecting the
take-mak e-dispose model of production and
consumption that has persisted in the past.
Instead, w aste is “designed out”  and mater ials
are k ept at a high v alue f or longer through
reuse , repair and recycling.
16.47 A more circular econom y will:
1. reduce w aste,
2. drive greater resource productivity ,
3. deliver a more competitiv e econom y,
4. position the UK to better address
emerging resource secur ity/scarcity
issues in the future , and
5. help reduce the en vironmental impacts
of production and consumption.
16.48 The constr uction of a de velopment uses
energy and resources , which represent its
embodied carbon emissions . As b uildings
become more energy efficient and energy
gener ation is decarbonised, the propor tion of
operational emissions will significantly reduce
and embodied carbon will represent a higher
propor tion of whole lif e-cycle carbon
emissions . Addressing these carbon
emissions are k ey to achie ving UK, London
and Richmond Borough targets on net z ero.
All ne w build de velopment will be e xpected
to endea vour to minimise embodied carbon
in line with best pr actice targets contained
within the latest industr y guidance .
16.49 Circular econom y oppor tunities in
developments might include using mater ials
with a lo wer embodied carbon (e .g. timber
rather than concrete fr ame), using more
recycled content in the mater ials and finding
other w ays to enhance reco very and
recyclability (e .g. reinf orcement free
concrete).  Mechanical and electr ical ser vices
should theref ore be designed to allo w easy
repair , reco very, reconditioning and reuse
whilst also optimising f or perf ormance and
carbon emissions . Encour aging a ‘fabric first’
approach to b uilding design can also
minimise mechanical plant and ser vices in
favour of natur al ventilation.
15216  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1816.50 Circular Econom y Statements are intended
to cover the whole lif e-cycle of a de velopment
and to demonstr ate ho w a de velopment will
incor porate Circular Econom y measures into
all aspects of the design, constr uction and
operation process . A Circular Econom y
Statement should demonstr ate:
1. how all mater ials ar ising from demolition
and remediation w orks will be re-used
and/or recycled
2. how the proposal’ s design and
constr uction will reduce mater ial
demands and enab le building mater ials,
components and products to bedisassemb led and re-used at the end of
their useful lif e
3. oppor tunities f or managing as m uch
waste as possib le on site
4. adequate and easily accessib le stor age
space and collection systems to suppor t
recycling and re-use
5. how much w aste the de velopment is
expected to gener ate, and ho w and
where the w aste will be managed in
accordance with the w aste hier archy
6. how perf ormance will be monitored and
repor ted.
16.51 The Ma yor has pub lished guidance on the
production of Circular Econom y Statements  .
Policy 8. Flood risk and sustainab le draina ge (Strategic P olicy)
A. All de velopments should a void, or minimise , contr ibuting to all sources of flooding, including fluvial,
tidal, surf ace w ater, groundw ater and flooding from se wers, taking account of climate change and
without increasing flood r isk else where . Development will be guided to areas of lo wer risk by applying
the 'Sequential Test' as set out in national policy guidance , and where necessar y, the 'Exception
Test' will be applied.  Unacceptab le de velopments and land uses will be refused in line with national
policy and guidance , the Council's Str ategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) and as outlined in the
table belo w.
B.To enab le de velopment, proposals m ust pro vide mitigation and resilience against flood r isk, taking
advice from the Lead Local Flood A uthor ity (LLF A) as appropr iate, and pro vide appropr iate
compensation to e xisting flood r isk le vels and v olumes , addressing the predicted 1 in 100 y ear Risk
of Flooding from Surf ace Water (RoFSW) mapped depths as a minim um.
C.In Flood Zones 2 and 3, all proposals on sites of 10 dw ellings or more or 1000sqm of non-residential
development or more , areas at Risk of Flooding from Surf ace Water in a 1 in 100 y ear e vent or
greater , or on an y other proposal where saf e access/eg ress cannot be achie ved, a Flood Emergency
Plan m ust be submitted.
D.Where a Flood Risk Assessment is required, on-site atten uation to alle viate fluvial and/or surf ace
water flooding o ver and abo ve the En vironment Agency's floodplain compensation is required where
feasib le.
E. Where possib le, land within major de velopment sites should be saf eguarded f or potential flood
mitigation use through the activ e consider ation of predicted flood mapping from all sources .
Flood Risk
AssessmentException
TestSequential Test Land use and de velopment
– restrictionsZone
Required f or
all
development
proposalsRequired
for
essential
utility
infrastructureRequired f or essential
utility infr astructureThe functional floodplain as
identified in the Council’ s
Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment will be protected
by not per mitting an y form of
development on unde veloped
sites unless it:Zone 3b
153Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Flood Risk
AssessmentException
TestSequential Test Land use and de velopment
– restrictionsZone
• is for Water Compatib le
development;
• is for essential utility
infrastructure which has to be
located in a flood r isk area and
no alter nativ e locations are
availab le and it can be
demonstr ated that the
development w ould be saf e,
without increasing flood r isk
elsewhere and where possib le
would reduce flood r isk overall.
Rede velopment of e xisting
developed sites will only be
suppor ted if there is no
intensification of the land use
and a net flood r isk reduction
is proposed;  any restor ation of
the functional floodplain will be
suppor ted.
Proposals f or the change of
use or con version to a use
with a higher vulner ability
classification will not be
permitted.
Required f or
all
development
proposalsRequired
for more
vulner able
developmentRequired f or all
developments unless
exceptions outlined in
the suppor ting te xt to
this policy applyLand uses are restr icted to
Water Compatib le, Less
Vulner able and More
Vulner able de velopment.
Highly Vulner able
developments will not be
permitted.Zone3a
and
areas at
Risk of
Flooding
from
Surface
Water in
Self-contained residential
basements and bedrooms at
basement le vel will not be
permitted.a 1 in 100
year
event.
Required f or
all
developmentRequired
for highly
vulner able
developmentRequired f or all
developments unless
exceptions outlined in
the suppor ting te xt to
this policy applyNo land use restr ictions
Self-contained residential
basements and bedrooms at
basement le vel will not be
permitted.Zone 2
proposals
unless f or
change of
use from
15416  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Flood Risk
AssessmentException
TestSequential Test Land use and de velopment
– restrictionsZone
water
compatib le to
less
vulner able
A Drainage
Statement is
required f orNot
applicab leNot applicab le No land use restr ictions Zone1
sites all major
developments .
Required f or
all other
development
proposals
where there
is evidence of
a risk from
other sources
of flooding,
including
surface
water, ground
water and
sewer
flooding
Table 16.3 Flood Zones,  Restrictions,  and Requirements
Throughflo w and gr ound water:
F.In line with the Council’ s SFRA, the f ollowing catchment areas ha ve been designated as throughflo w
and g roundw ater policy z ones:
1. Richmond Hill (Richmond)
2. Strawberr y Hill (T wickenham)
3. Marb le Hill (T wickenham)
4. St. Margarets West
G. Subsurf ace str ucture de velopment proposals within these z ones need to fulfil site-specific
requirements to demonstr ate that basements , cellars , and other subsurf ace str uctures can be saf ely
developed without increasing throughflo w and g roundw ater related flood r isk.
Sustainab le Draina ge
H. The Council requires the use of Sustainab le Drainage Systems (SuDS) in all de velopment proposals
to manage surf ace w ater r unoff as close to its source as possib le, using the most sustainab le
solutions to reduce r unoff v olumes and r ates. Ideally , all surf ace w ater should be managed on site .
The de velopment m ust not increase flood r isk else where and where possib le reduce flood r isk
overall. Applicants will ha ve to demonstr ate that their proposal complies with the f ollowing:
155Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 181. A reduction in surf ace w ater discharge to g reenfield r un-off r ates where ver feasib le.
2. Where g reenfield r un-off r ates are not f easib le, this will need to be demonstr ated b y the
applicant, and in such instances , the minim um requirement is to achie ve at least:
a. a runoff r ate of 2 l/s or belo w, or
b.a 50% atten uation of the site's surf ace w ater r unoff at peak times based on the le vels
existing pr ior to the de velopment.
Flood def ences
I. Applicants will ha ve to demonstr ate that their proposal complies with the f ollowing:
1. Retain the eff ectiveness , stability and integ rity of flood def ences , riverbanks and other f ormal
and inf ormal flood def ence infr astructure .
2. Ensure the proposal does not pre vent essential maintenance and upg rading from being carr ied
out in the future .
3. Unless e xceptional circumstances are demonstr ated f or not doing so , development should be
set bac k from r iverbanks and e xisting flood def ence infr astructure to allo w for an y foreseeab le
future maintenance and upg rades in a sustainab le and cost eff ective way (16 metres f or the
tidal Thames and 8 metres f or other r ivers where possib le).
4. Take into account the requirements of the Thames Estuar y 2100 Plan and the Riv er Thames
Scheme , and demonstr ate ho w the current and future requirements f or flood def ences ha ve
been incor porated into the de velopment.
5. The remo val of f ormal or inf ormal flood def ences is not acceptab le unless this is par t of an
agreed flood r isk management str ategy b y the En vironment Agency .
J.In addition, in line with the requirements of the Thames Estuar y 2100 Plan, de velopments adjoining
the Riv er Thames m ust maintain and where necessar y enhance or r aise flood def ences (or sho w
how the y could be r aised in the future), demonstr ating that the y will contin ue to pro vide adequate
flood protection f or the lif etime of the de velopment.  In alignment with the Council’ s SFRA,
developments on the r iver should mak e the most of the oppor tunities presented b y regener ation
and rede velopment on r iver corr idors to reduce fluvial flood r isk through location, la yout and design
of de velopment.  Oppor tunities should also look at flood compatibility , flood resilience and maximising
open space f or flood w ater.
Basements in areas of Flood Risk
K. Basements within flood aff ected areas of the borough represent a par ticular ly ele vated r isk to lif e
as the y ma y be subject to v ery rapid in undation.  Applicants will ha ve to demonstr ate that their
proposal complies with the f ollowing:
Basements,  basement e xtensions,  conversions of basements to a higher
vulnerability c lassification or self-contained units will not be permitted.Flood Zone 3b
(Functional
Floodplain)
In areas of Extreme , Significant and Moder ate Breach Hazard (as set out in the
Council's SFRA):Flood Zone 3a
(Tidal / Fluvial)
• New basements :
restricted to Less Vulner able / Water Compatib le use only .
15616  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Basements,  basement e xtensions,  conversions of basements to a higher
vulnerability c lassification or self-contained units will not be permitted.Flood Zone 3b
(Functional
Floodplain)
More Vulner able’ uses will only be considered if a site-specific Flood Risk
Assessment demonstr ates that the r isk to lif e can be managed.  Bedrooms
at basement le vels will not be per mitted.
Highly Vulner able’ such as self-contained basements/bedrooms uses will
not be per mitted.
• Existing basements :
No basement e xtensions , con versions or additions f or ‘Highly Vulner able’
use
More Vulner able’ uses will only be considered if a site-specific Flood Risk
Assessment demonstr ates that the r isk to lif e can be managed.
In areas of Lo w or No Breach Hazard (as set out in the Council's SFRA):
• New basements: if the Exception Test (where applicab le) is passed, basements
may be per mitted f or residential use where the y are not self-contained or used
for bedrooms
• Existing basements: basement e xtensions , con versions or additions ma y be
permitted f or existing de velopments where the y are not self-contained or used
for bedrooms .
If a basement, basement e xtension or con version is acceptab le in pr inciple in
terms of its location, it m ust ha ve inter nal access to a higher floor and flood
resistant and resilient design techniques m ust be adopted.
In areas of Extreme , Significant and Moder ate Breach Hazard (as set out in the
Council's SFRA):Flood Zone 2
• New Basements:  if the Exception Test (where applicab le) is passed, basements
may be per mitted f or residential use where the y are not self-contained or used
for bedrooms .
• Existing Basements : basement e xtensions , con versions or additions ma ybe
permitted f or existing de velopments where the y are not self-contained or used
for bedrooms .
If a basement, basement e xtension or con version is acceptab le in pr inciple in
terms of its location, it m ust ha ve inter nal access to a higher floor and flood
resistant and resilient design techniques m ust be adopted.
No restr ictions on ne w or e xtensions to e xisting basements Flood Zone 1
Basement and cellar de velopments within these throughflo w and g roundw ater
policy z ones m ust be confined to the cur tilage of the site . In addition, the y should
not e xceed a maxim um of 50 percent of each garden or open space area of the
site.Through-flo w and
ground-w ater policy
zones
157Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Basements,  basement e xtensions,  conversions of basements to a higher
vulnerability c lassification or self-contained units will not be permitted.Flood Zone 3b
(Functional
Floodplain)
A Screening Assessment m ust be carr ied out f or all basement and cellar proposals
in the throughflo w and g roundw ater policy z ones . Information pro vided in the
screening assessment should address the f ollowing areas:
a. Subterr anean char acter istics
b. Land stability (including site slope)
c. Flood r isk and dr ainage (including throughflo w, groundw ater and surf ace
water).
If the proposed subsurf ace de velopment ma y have an impact on the local
environment, or if fur ther in vestigation w ork is required, then a Basement Impact
Assessment, carr ied out and signed off b y a char tered prof essional, is required.
Table 16.4 Basements in Areas of Flood Risk
Climate Chang e Allo wance
L. In line with the recommendations set out in the Council’ s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, submitted
FRAs ha ve to utilise the ’upper end’  climate change scenar ios when implementing the climate
change allo wances f or surf ace w ater and fluvial flood r isk. Assessments of tidal flood r isk should
use the current TE2100 crest le vels guidance and breach modelling to account f or worst-case
scenar ios.
16.52 The En vironment Agency produces Flood
Maps f or Planning with a nationally consistent
delineation of “high”  (Flood Zone 3), “medium”
(Flood Zone 2) and “low” (Flood Zone 1) flood
zones , which are updated and pub lished on
a quar terly basis . In addition, the Council’ s
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, which is
updated regular ly, sub-divides the
Environment Agency's Flood Zone 3 into
“high probability”  (Zone 3a) and the
“functional floodplain”  (Zone 3b).  Applicants
need to use both flood maps to identify the
flood r isk rele vant to their site . Explanations
for the flood z ones , land uses and their flood
risk vulner ability , are set out in national policy
and guidance .
Sequential Test and Exception Test
16.53 Future de velopment in Zone 3a and Zone 2
will only be considered if the 'Sequential Test'
has been applied in accordance with national
policy and guidance .16.54 The Sequential Test is required f or all
developments e xcept f or de velopment
proposals categor ised as ‘Highly Vulner able’
– ‘Highly Vulner able’ development is not
permitted (see ‘Land Uses and De velopment
Restr ictions’  section of this tab le).
Developments categor ised as ‘Essential
Infrastructure’  and ‘More Vulner able’ can only
be considered f ollowing application of the
Exception Test.
16.55 The Sequential Test is the first stage in
addressing flood r isk where this is an issue
in the deter mination of a planning application.
Following the application of the Sequential
Test (where required), the tw o-par t Exception
Test as set out within the NPPF and PPG has
to be applied, the aim of which is to ensure
that wider sustainability benefits and the
safety of users of a de velopment are tak en
into account in the decision-making process .
It is strongly recommended that applicants
satisfy themselv es that their proposals are
15816  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18capab le of passing both the Sequential and
Exception Tests pr ior to the submission of an
application.
16.56 The Council has adopted its o wn Sequential
Test approach and de velopment
requirements f or town centres and local
centres in the borough.  Man y of the borough’ s
proper ties are located in and around to wn
and local centres . Some centres are located
in Flood Zones 2 and 3;  however, relocating
development a way from these centres and
their immediate surrounding vicinity is not
always a realistic option due to the comm unity
role these areas pla y in the borough.  In order
to sustain the contin uing role of these centres ,
development can be used as a w ay to help
manage and reduce flood r isk in these areas .
Theref ore, the Council – in liaison with the
Environment Agency – has de veloped a local
Sequential Test approach. The local
Sequential Test approach is applicab le for
town centres , local centres , and areas that
fall within the 800m b uffer boundar y for each
centre . An 800m b uffer was selected as it is
considered a comm unity sustaining w alking
distance f or a person not living with/ha ving a
physical disability .
16.57 The Sequential Test will not be required if the
development proposal meets at least one of
the following:
It is within a to wn centre or local centre
boundar y;
It is for residential de velopment or a
mixed-use scheme and within the 800m
buffer area identified within the to wn
centre or local centre .
16.58 The local Sequential Test approach is also
applicab le for cer tain de velopment proposals
outside of the requirements abo ve.The
Sequential Test will not be required if the
proposed de velopment:
Is a site allocation in the Local Plan that
has already been sequentially tested,
unless the use of the site being
proposed is not in accordance with the
allocations in the Local Plan.
Is for the rede velopment of an e xisting
single residential proper ty.
Is for a con version or change of use .16.59 The Sequential Test will be required in all
other cases .
16.60 The on us is on the applicant to demonstr ate
that the Sequential Test can be passed, and
theref ore the necessar y rele vant inf ormation
needs to be submitted as par t of the planning
application.  It is f or the Council to consider
the e xtent to which the Sequential Test
consider ations ha ve been satisfied.  In line
with the NPPF and PPG, the Council will
refuse applications that f ail the Sequential
Test even where the Exception Test has been
passed.  Further guidance and advice can be
found in the Council’ s SFRA, NPPF and PPG.
Functional Floodplain
16.61 The functional floodplain (Zone 3b), as
identified within the Council’ s SFRA, has to
be preser ved, and where possib le, increased
(such as through rede velopment proposals)
and the impedance to the flo w of floodw ater
reduced.
16.62 Rede velopment of e xisting de veloped sites
will only be suppor ted if there is a net flood
risk reduction.  Net flood r isk reduction
includes both on- and off-site measures ,
including reducing the land use vulner ability ,
raising of floor le vels, reduction in r un-off ,
increasing flood stor age capacity , reduced
impedance to flood w ater flo w and the
incor poration of flood resilient and/or resistant
measures . Finished floor le vels are to be
raised to a minim um of 300mm abo ve the 1
in 100 fluvial or 1 in 200 tidal flood le vel
(whiche ver is g reater), including an allo wance
for climate change , as recommended in the
Council's SFRA, or to the maxim um
acceptab le height possib le belo w this , should
sufficient justification be pro vided.
Oppor tunities to restore the functional
floodplain to its or iginal state / condition are
encour aged and will be suppor ted.
16.63 The borough contains a n umber of islands in
the Riv er Thames .Where the access and
egress to and from the island is within the
functional floodplain, f or the pur poses of ne w
development, such islands will be considered
and treated as functional floodplain (Zone
3b), e ven if par ts of the islands ma y be within
an area of lo wer probability of flooding.
159Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Flood Risk Assessments
16.64 Flood r isk assessments (FRA) will be required
in line with national policy and guidance .
National policy and guidance , as w ell as the
BSI Code of Pr actice on Assessing and
managing flood r isk in de velopment (BS
8533:2011), pro vide detailed inf ormation on
the requirements f or assessing and managing
flood r isk in de velopment and ho w to produce
site-specific Flood Risk Assessments . All ne w
development needs to tak e account of the
latest climate change allo wances .This should
be included as par t of the Flood Risk
Assessment process .This will help minimise
vulner ability and pro vide resilience to flooding
in the future .
16.65 Flood Risk Assessments need to consider
flood r isk from all sources . In addition to
fluvial and tidal flooding, proper ties and
infrastructure within the borough are also at
risk of flooding from other , more localised
sources , such as surf ace / g roundw ater /
sewer flooding due to surcharging of se wers
and dr ains or due to the f ailure of
infrastructure . Flooding can also occur a way
from the floodplain as a result of de velopment
where off-site infr astructure is not in place
ahead of de velopment (also see P olicy 9
‘Water Resources and Infr astructure’).  In
addition, a Flood Risk Assessment is also
required f or smaller de velopment proposals
in Flood Zone 1, where there is e vidence of
a risk from other sources of flooding identified
in the SFRA, sources that need to be
assessed and mitigated.
Sustainab le draina ge
16.66 These mimic natur al drainage patter ns to
manage r ainfall and surf ace w ater r unoff
close to the source .They manage the
transpor t of w ater and the speed that it r uns
off hard surf aces bef ore it enters
watercourses .They can be designed to store
water and control its infiltr ation into the
ground to allo w for evaporation and
transpir ation.
16.67 Developments should reduce surf ace w ater
discharge in line with the Sustainab le
Drainage Hier archy set out in P olicy SI13 ofthe London Plan, and the actions should also
be tak en in line with the London Sustainab le
Drainage Action Plan (LSD AP).
16.68 The borough is v ery susceptib le to surf ace
water flooding.  Surface w ater flooding
happens when the g round and r ivers cannot
absorb hea vy rainfall and when man-made
drainage systems ha ve insufficient capacity
to deal with the v olume of r ainfall.Typically ,
this type of flooding is localised and happens
very quic kly, making it v ery difficult to predict
and giv e warnings .With climate change
predicting more frequent shor t-duration, high
intensity r ainfall and more frequent per iods
of long-dur ation r ainfall, coupled with an
ageing Victor ian se wer system and increasing
pressure from g rowing populations , surf ace
water flooding is lik ely to be an increasing
problem.
16.69 Theref ore, to reduce the r isk of surf ace w ater
and se wer flooding, all de velopment
proposals in the borough that could lead to
changes to , and ha ve impacts on, surf ace
water r un-off are required to f ollow the
London Plan dr ainage hier archy:
1. store r ainwater f or later use r ainwater
use as a resource (f or example
rainwater har vesting, b lue roofs f or
irrigation)
2. use infiltr ation techniques , such as
porous surf aces in non-cla y areas
rainwater infiltr ation to g round at or close
to source
3. rainwater atten uation in g reen
infrastructure f eatures f or gradual
release (f or example g reen roofs , rain
gardens)
4. rainwater discharge direct to a
watercourse (unless not appropr iate)
5. controlled r ainwater discharge to a
surface w ater se wer or dr ain
6. controlled r ainwater discharge to a
combined se wer.
16.70 If discharging surf ace w ater to a pub lic se wer,
developers are required to pro vide e vidence
that capacity e xists in the pub lic se werage
netw ork to ser ve their de velopment in the
form of wr itten confir mation.  See also P olicy
9 Water Resources and Infr astructure .
16016  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1816.71 The Council’ s SFRA identified reducing the
rate of discharge from de velopment sites to
greenfield r unoff r ates as one of the most
effective ways of reducing and managing
flood r isk within the borough.  Greenfield
run-off is the surf ace w ater dr ainage regime
from a site pr ior to de velopment. To maintain
the natur al equilibr ium of a site , the surf ace
water discharge from a de veloped site should
not e xceed the natur al greenfield r un-off r ate.
Where g reenfield r un-off r ates are not
technically f easib le, applicants will be
expected to clear ly demonstr ate ho w all
oppor tunities to minimise final site r unoff , as
close to g reenfield r ate as pr actical, ha ve
been tak en. In such instances , the minim um
requirement is to achie ve at least a r unoff
rate of 2 l/s or belo w, or a 50% atten uation
of the site's surf ace w ater r unoff at peak
times , based on the site's perf ormance pr ior
to de velopment.
16.72 Applicants and de velopers will need to submit
evidence , as par t of Flood Risk Assessments
and/or requirements set out in the Council’ s
Sustainab le Constr uction Chec klist SPD , that
the abo ve drainage hier archy has been
followed and SuDS ha ve been utilised where
feasib le.
16.73 In addition to the abo ve requirements , under
the Flood and Water Management Act 2010,
the Local Planning A uthor ity has to consult
the Lead Local Flood A uthor ity on SuDS f or
all major de velopment proposals .Theref ore,
applicants ha ve to submit dr ainage and
surface w ater management designs as par t
of the planning process .The satisf actor y
performance of SuDS depends not only on
good design b ut also adequate maintenance ,
and pro vision f or adoption and maintenance
must be made from the outset. The Council
will use planning conditions or ob ligations to
make sure that arr angements are in place f or
ongoing maintenance o ver the lif etime of the
development.  Borough-specific guidance on
SuDS can be f ound within the Council's SuDS
Guidance Document as w ell as in the
Council's SFRA.Flood def ences
16.74 Development proposals adjacent to flood
defences will be required to protect the
integ rity of flood def ences and allo w access
for future maintenance and upg rading.
Development should be set bac k from flood
defences to allo w for an y foreseeab le future
maintenance and upg rades in a sustainab le
and cost-eff ective way.
16.75 Natur al flood management methods should
be emplo yed in de velopment proposals due
to their m ultiple benefits including increasing
flood stor age and creating leisure areas and
habitat.
16.76 The protection of people , proper ties and
infrastructure from the r isk of fluvial and tidal
flooding is essential in this borough and the
integ rity of the flood def ence infr astructure
must theref ore be maintained.  Flood def ence
infrastructure includes f ormal and inf ormal
flood def ences and such def ences ma y not
always be recognisab le and can include
mounds , buildings and w alls.
16.77 There is a statutor y requirement f or the
Council to consult the En vironment Agency
for an y development that could aff ect flood
defence infr astructure;  as a guide , this
requirement applies to proposals within an
area of 20 metres from the top of the bank of
a main r iver.There are also par ts of the
borough, where the f ormal flood def ence is
further than 20 metres a way from the top of
the bank of the r iver, particular ly in relation
to the Riv er Thames , and this needs to be
taken account of in an y development proposal
that could aff ect the def ences .
16.78 Proposals f or rede velopment should seek
oppor tunities to set bac k the de velopment
from e xisting flood def ences .The Council, in
conjunction with the En vironment Agency ,
will seek a b uffer zone of 8 metres on the
borough's r ivers (including the fluvial Thames)
and 16 metres f or the tidal Thames where
possib le.This is to allo w for the maintenance
and future upg rading of the flood def ences
as well as f or impro vements to flood flo w and
flood stor age capabilities . Applicants are
strongly encour aged to liaise with the
Environment Agency f or an y development
161Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18that could aff ect flood def ence infr astructure
as their consent will be required f or an y works
that could aff ect the flood def ences .
Basements and subterranean de velopments in
flood aff ected areas
16.79 While P olicy 54 Basements and subterr anean
developments applies to basement proposals
in the whole borough, the f ocus of this policy
is on basements within flood aff ected areas
of the borough, where the y represent a
particular ly high r isk to lif e, and it is essential
that careful consider ation is giv en to their
design and use . If proposing a basement in
flood aff ected areas , this policy in addition to
Policy 54 applies .
16.80 Basements ma y be subject to v ery rapid
inundation of floodw ater and it is essential
that the minim um design requirements as set
out in this policy as w ell as in the Council's
SFRA are r igorously adhered to .The Council
has produced a Basement Assessment User
Guide (2021)  , which pro vides advice where
proposals include a basement, cellar , or other
subsurf ace str ucture . It is designed to guide
users through the basement assessment
process and ensure that the correct
suppor ting inf ormation is submitted with a
planning application.  In addition, the Council
has produced Guidance on Basement
developments , which pro vides advice on both
planning as w ell as non-planning matters f or
all basement constr uction in the borough.  It
covers per mits and requirements and local
amenity , constr uction and design issues .
16.81 This policy restr icts basement de velopments
in areas of Extreme , Significant and Moder ate
Breach Hazard, as set out in the Council's
SFRA and ‘More Vulner able’ (such as
residential) uses will only be considered if a
site-specific Flood Risk Assessment can
demonstr ate that the r isk to lif e can be
managed.  As the SFRA is updated regular ly,
the applicant will need to confir m with the
Council whether a de velopment proposal is
located within a breach hazard area. This
includes throughflo w and g roundw ater policy
zones (see SFRA), wherein a Screening
Assessment m ust be carr ied out as par t of
the planning application submission f or all
basement and cellar proposals .16.82 No essential ser vices or stor age space f or
key pro visions and equipment should be
located at basement le vel where the y need
to remain oper ational dur ing a flood e vent.
By vir tue of the lo w lying nature of
basements , they are vulner able to man y
types of flooding and in par ticular se wer
flooding. Theref ore, all ne w basements with
a waste outlet (such as toilets , bathrooms ,
utility rooms) will need to be protected from
sewer flooding through the installation of a
suitab le (positiv ely) pumped de vice, which
will need to be sho wn in dr awings submitted
with a planning application.
16.83 The Council's SFRA sets out fur ther guidance
on basements , including ho w to assess
ground floor le vel and inter nal access le vel
requirements f or basements .The SFRA also
sets out the locations of through-flo w and
ground-w ater policy z ones . Subsurf ace
structure de velopment proposals within these
zones need to fulfil site-specific requirements
to demonstr ate that basements , cellars , and
other subsurf ace str uctures can be saf ely
developed without increasing throughflo w and
groundw ater related flood r isk.
16.84 A Screening Assessment is required as par t
of the planning application submission f or all
basement and cellar proposals within the
throughflo w and g roundw ater policy z ones .
The Screening Assessment should address
the impacts of the proposed subsurf ace
development on the area’ s subterr anean
character istics , land stability , and flood r isk
and dr ainage . If the Screening Assessment
deter mines that the proposed subsurf ace
development ma y have an impact on the local
environment, or if it deter mines that fur ther
investigation w ork is required, then a
Basement Impact Assessment is required.
16.85 The Basement Impact Assessment,
under taken by an appropr iate char tered
professional or specialist, m ust include , but
is not limited to , the f ollowing details:
1. Detailed borehole inf ormation on or from
nearb y to the de velopment site . At least
two data recordings should tak e place
within a per iod of at least 12 months to
demonstr ate an y potential seasonal
variations .These measurements should
16216  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18identify the geological conditions on or
close to the de velopment site , the
infiltr ation potential, and the height of
any groundw ater.
2. Mitigation if the identified potential
impacts of the proposed subsurf ace
development are not acceptab le. If, for
example , the assessment identifies that
the proposed de velopment ma y result
in water ing ress to the ne w developmentand/or to neighbour ing proper ties, then
mitigation measures should be proposed
to reduce and/or alle viate the r isk of
flooding.
16.86 To ensure that such de velopment is f easib le
and will not adv ersely impact the site ,
neighbour ing proper ties, or the wider natur al
environment, such assessments should be
completed pr ior to an y planning per mission
being g ranted.
Policy 9.Water resour ces and infrastructure (Strategic P olicy)
A. The borough’ s water resources and supplies will be protected b y pre venting de velopment that w ould
pose a threat to the borough’ s rivers, surf ace w ater and g roundw ater quality and quantity .This
includes pollution caused b y water r un-off from de velopments into w aterw ays.
Water quality
B.The de velopment or e xpansion of w ater supply or w astewater f acilities will nor mally be per mitted,
either where needed to ser ve existing or proposed ne w development, or in the interests of long-ter m
water supply and w aste w ater management, pro vided that the need f or such f acilities outw eighs
any adv erse land use or en vironmental impact.
C.The Council e xpects de velopment proposals to:
1. protect the w ater quality of r ivers and g roundw ater; where r ivers ha ve been classified b y the
Environment Agency as ha ving ‘poor’  status , any development aff ecting such r ivers is
encour aged to impro ve the w ater quality in these areas .
2. seek to impro ve the w ater en vironment and ensure that adequate w astewater infr astructure
capacity is pro vided;
3. take action to minimise the potential f or misconnections betw een f oul and surf ace w ater
netw orks.
Water and Se wage Infrastructure
D.New major residential and major non-residential de velopment will need to ensure that there is
adequate w ater supply , surf ace w ater, foul dr ainage and se werage treatment capacity to ser ve the
development.
E. Planning per mission will only be g ranted f or de velopments which increase demand f or water ser vices
if there is:
1. sufficient capacity already , or
2. Extra capacity can be pro vided in time to ser ve the de velopment, and will not adv ersely aff ect
the en vironment and amenities of local residents .
F.Applicants f or major de velopments will be required to pro vide e vidence in the f orm of wr itten
confir mation as par t of the planning application that capacity e xists in the pub lic se werage and w ater
supply netw ork to ser ve their de velopment.
G. Any new water supply , sewerage or w aste w ater treatment infr astructure m ust be in place pr ior to
occupation of the de velopment.  Financial contr ibutions ma y be required f or ne w developments
towards the pro vision of , or impro vements to , such infr astructure .
163Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Water Quality
16.87 Population increase means e xtra demand f or
water, while climate change sim ultaneously
is putting a str ain on w ater supplies
particular ly through the increasing frequency
of pro-longed summer drought conditions and
higher summer temper atures . Development
can ha ve significant detr imental impacts on
water resources .This ma y be b y placing
additional str ain on e xisting w ater supplies ,
or by affecting flood patter ns through
increasing the amount of imper meab le land
in areas at r isk of flooding. The e xisting se wer
system ma y not ha ve capacity f or increases
in wastewater and from increases in hea vy
rainfall events due to climate change .
16.88 The Council seeks to protect and impro ve
water quality to ensure that the Blue Rib bon
Netw ork is health y, attractive and off ers a
valuab le ser ies of habitats . Proposals that
have the potential to lead to a reduction in
water quality will be resisted.
16.89 The pollution of w ater resources through
development ma y also cause significant
harmful impacts on the health and w ellbeing
of sensitiv e receptors , both directly and
indirectly , along with the deg radation of the
natur al en vironment and local amenity .
16.90 Under the Water F ramework Directiv e (WFD),
there are f our river water-bodies in this
borough, all of which f ail to achie ve ‘good’
ecological status under the WFD .The
Beverley Brook, the Thames (upstream of
Teddington) and the Cr ane w ater-bodies ha ve
been classified as ha ving ‘poor’  ecological
status and the Longf ord Riv er has ‘moder ate’
ecological status . Under the WFD , any
deter ioration of w ater bodies (g roundw ater
and surf ace w aters) needs to be pre vented;
‘good status’  or ‘good ecological potential’
should be achie ved by 2027. Theref ore,
developments adjacent to , or with the
potential to aff ect, these r ivers are
encour aged to include measures such as
managing the r un-off or impro ving surf ace
water outf alls, in order to impro ve their w ater
quality .16.91 Some local surf ace w ater and g roundw ater
bodies in the g ravel aquif er are h ydraulically
connected.  Potentially contaminativ e uses
will be directed a way from locations that are
sensitiv e in ter ms of g roundw ater and surf ace
water receptors in order to protect the surf ace
water courses and g roundw ater quality in the
borough’ s aquif ers.
Water and se wera ge provision
16.92 Many existing w ater mains , sewerage
systems and treatment w orks are becoming
overloaded.  It is essential to ensure that such
infrastructure is in place ahead of
development to a void unacceptab le impacts
on the en vironment such as se wage flooding
of residential and commercial proper ty,
pollution of land and w atercourses plus w ater
shortages with associated lo w-pressure w ater
supply prob lems. Consequently , development
should only tak e place where the ne w
demand upon e xisting infr astructure is tak en
into account.
16.93 Applicants f or major de velopment proposals
(both residential as w ell as non-residential)
are required to pro vide e vidence that
adequate capacity e xists in the pub lic
sewerage and w ater supply netw ork to ser ve
their de velopment in the f orm of wr itten
confir mation. This statement should be
submitted as par t of the planning application.
16.94 Where capacity does not e xist and to a void
overloading of e xisting infr astructure , a
drainage str ategy should be pro vided to sho w
the required infr astructure and its funding.
Where there is a capacity prob lem and no
impro vements are prog rammed b y Thames
Water Utilities , the de veloper will be required
to contact Thames Water to ag ree what
impro vements are required and ho w the y will
be funded.  If impro vements in off-site
infrastructure are not prog rammed, planning
permission will only be g ranted where the
developer funds appropr iate impro vements .
Any sewerage/w aste w ater treatment
infrastructure m ust be in place pr ior to first
occupation of the de velopment.  A financial
contr ibution ma y be required to wards the
provision of , or impro vements to ,
16416  Responding to the climate emergency and taking action
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18infrastructure . Sewers and associated
infrastructure will need to be protected fromnew constr uction and tree planting
165Responding to the climate emergency and taking action 16
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1817 Delivering ne w homes and an
affordable bor ough f or all
Policy 10.  New Housing (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Borough's ten y ear housing target is 4,110 homes .The Council will e xceed the minim um
strategic dw elling requirement, where this can be achie ved in accordance with other Local Plan
policies .
B.The f ollowing amounts of housing are indicativ e ranges in these broad areas of the borough o ver
the ne xt 10 y ears:
Appr ox. No of units Wards (1)Area
1,100 – 1,200 South Richmond;  North
Richmond;  KewRichmond
250 - 300 Ham, P etersham and Richmond
Riverside(2)Ham & P etersham
Neighbourhood Area
1,100 – 1,200 Twickenham Riv erside;  St
Margarets and Nor th
Twickenham;Twickenham
South Twickenham; West
Twickenham
900 – 1,000 Hampton Nor th; Hampton;
Fulw ell and Hampton Hill;
Teddington;  Hampton WickTeddington and the Hamptons
800-900 East Sheen;  Mortlake and
Barnes Common;  BarnesBarnes and East Sheen
100-200 Whitton;  Heathfield Whiton
Table 17.1 Housing Targets
17.1 The London Plan 2021 sets a ten y ear target
of 4,110 homes f or net housing completions .
This is to co ver the per iod 2019/20 -2028/29
although it w as finally confir med on
publication of the London Plan in March 2021,
and can be rolled f orward for future y ears
beyond 2029.  In accordance with London
Plan P olicy H1 this target is e xpected to be
achie ved, through optimising the potential f or
housing deliv ery on all suitab le and a vailab lebrownfield sites .The Local Housing Needs
Assessment 2021 analysis considers
demog raphic trends and a scenar io to
understand the potential population g rowth
associated with the deliv ery of 411 homes
per ann um.
17.2 The Go vernment ha ve set out the impor tance
of building the homes that comm unities need
and putting in place measures to supply
1 New ward boundar ies to come into eff ect in Richmond at the ne xt Council elections in Ma y 2022.
2 The Ham, P etersham and Richmond Riv erside w ard boundar y extends fur ther than the neighbourhood area
including Richmond Hill.
16617  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18housing deliv ery.There is a standard method
for assessing local housing need which
provides a star ting point in deter mining the
number of homes needed in an area, and
Government guidance is clear that the
responsibility f or the o verall distr ibution of
housing need in London lies with the Ma yor.
In December 2020 Go vernment pub lished a
revised methodology with a 35% uplift applied
to London, ho wever the Go vernment is clear
this will only be applicab le once the ne xt
London Plan is being de veloped.
17.3 A housing tr ajector y is pub lished and ann ually
updated, in the Council’ s Housing A uthor ity’s
Monitor ing Repor t (AMR). This is required b y
the NPPF and identifies a supply of specific
deliverable sites sufficient to pro vide fiv e
years supply of housing. This is assessed
against the housing requirements together
with an additional b uffer of 5% (mo ved
forward from later in the plan per iod) to
ensure choice and competition in the mar ket
for land.
17.4 Although the housing target is monitored on
an ann ual basis , the London Plan 2021 at
paragraph 4.1.10 sets out that the increase
in housing deliv ery required b y the target ma y
be achie ved gradually and boroughs are
encour aged to set a realistic , stepped housing
delivery target o ver a ten-y ear per iod.This is
considered rele vant to the borough, giv en the
consider able increase e xpected in small sites
delivery whereb y there will be a time lag f or
the change in the policy conte xt towards
incremental intensification to result in
proposals coming f orward, and giv en some
identified large sites are e xpected to deliv er
in years fiv e to ten.  Government has also
acknowledged the disr uption to housing
delivery and monitor ing caused b y restr ictions
in 2020 in response to the CO VID-19
pandemic.
17.5 The latest housing Ann ual Monitor ing Repor t
(reviewed ann ually) sets out that the borough
is on course to meet and e xceed the str ategic
dwelling requirement o ver a ten y ear per iod.
This is reflected in the broad e xpected patter n
of future housing land supply set out in par t
B abo ve, which sets out indicativ e ranges f or
the broad areas and are not to be regarded
as an y lower or upper limit, as the o veralltarget is to be e xceeded. The site allocations
as set out within this Plan will contr ibute to
this deliv ery.
17.6 The r ationale from Go vernment and the
Mayor of London f or driving a step change
increase in housing deliv ery is clear . Meeting
the higher housing target in the London Plan
2021 will be a challenge , given the constr aints
in the borough and meeting other plan
priorities.The borough is char acter ised b y
large areas of protected open land and
constr aints such as flood r isk, and the
remaining area is b uilt up , much of it being
within designated Conser vation Areas . As
such there are f ew large potential housing
sites a vailab le and there is pressure on land
for other k ey uses including schools and
emplo yment to suppor t the achie vement of
sustainab le comm unities .
17.7 The Urban Design Study 2021 has identified
capacity f or growth in the borough. The
Council will encour age higher density
development in more sustainab le locations ,
such as main centres and areas better ser ved
by pub lic transpor t, subject to compatibility
with estab lished char acter . Development
should optimise site capacity through the
design-led approach. This, along with local
factors , such as pro ximity to f acilities and to
public transpor t routes , and the char acter of
the surrounding area, will be tak en into
account in reaching the appropr iate density
for a par ticular site , see P olicy 28 Local
character and design quality , Policy 44
Design Process , and P olicy 45 Tall and
Mid-Rise Building Zones . Some additional
housing will also be pro vided through
conversions and through change of use to
housing from other uses where this w ould not
conflict with other policies . A significant
increase is e xpected in deliv ery from small
sites, as set out in P olicy 16 Small Sites .
17.8 There is a need to retain land in emplo yment
use, as set out in the theme ‘Increasing jobs
and helping b usiness to g row and bounce
back following the pandemic ’. Housing
delivery against the borough target is capab le
of being met without the release of
emplo yment land, although there ma y be
167Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18limited potential f or enab ling housing gain on
emplo yment land if proposals increase the
level of e xisting emplo yment floorspace .
17.9 Proposals should optimise the potential of
sites.The major ity of housing deliv ery in the
borough is e xpected to be on pre viously
developed land.  An updated Brownfield Land
Register   of sites appropr iate f or residential
development is pub lished each y ear. Even
some cleared sites within the borough
gener ally ha ve a former use , while the
major ity of open land within the borough that
would be regarded as g reenfield is co vered
by protectiv e designations based on an up to
date e vidence base , and thus other policies
in this Plan w ould pre vent b uilding on
greenfield sites .
17.10 The Go vernment’ s Housing Deliv ery Test
(HDT) is an ann ual measurement of housing
delivery:
Results of the 2018 HDT sho wed 1,332
homes deliv ery 2015/16 to 2017/18
against 945 homes required, a
measurement of 141% and theref ore no
action required.
Results of the 2019 HDT sho wed 1,147
homes deliv ery 2016/17 to 2019/20against 945 homes requirement, a
measurement of 121% and theref ore no
action required.
Results of the 2020 HDT sho wed 1,024
homes deliv ery 2017/18 to 2019/20
against 918 homes requirement, a
measurement of 112% and theref ore no
action required.
17.11 For the 2020 measurement, a reduction in
the per iod for measur ing total homes required
was applied, using an 11-month per iod for
the 2019/20 monitor ing y ear, to account f or
disruption to housing deliv ery and monitor ing
linked to the CO VID-19 pandemic.  For the
2021 measurement, Go vernment ha ve
announced a f our-month reduction will be
applied to account f or contin ued fluctuations
due to CO VID-19 disr uptions . In accordance
with the Go vernment thresholds , if future
delivery falls belo w 95% of the housing
requirement then an action plan will be
produced to assess the causes of
under-deliv ery and identify actions to increase
delivery in future y ears.The stepped
requirement set out abo ve will be used in
future Housing Deliv ery Tests. See also
Policy 55 Deliv ery and Monitor ing.
Definition f or Aff ordable Housing
Genuinely Aff ordab le Housing- The Council considers the f ollowing to be gen uinely aff ordab le housing
products:
Social Rent
London Aff ordab le Rent
London Living Rent (only when deliv ered in compliance with the Council’ s Inter mediate Housing
Policy Statement 2019 or an y further update .)
Shared Ownership (only when deliv ered in compliance with the Council’ s Inter mediate Housing
Policy Statement 2019 or an y further update .)
Policy 11.  Affordable Housing (Strategic P olicy)
A. All ne w housing de velopments in the borough should pro vide at least 50 per cent of the total n umber
of habitab le rooms as aff ordab le housing on site .The aff ordab le housing being pro vided should be
genuinely aff ordab le for the major ity of residents in the borough.
B.A contr ibution to wards aff ordab le housing will be e xpected on all housing sites .The f ollowing
requirements apply:
16817  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 181. on all f ormer emplo yment sites at least 50% on-site pro vision. Where possib le, a greater
propor tion than 50% aff ordab le housing on individual sites should be achie ved.
2. on all other sites capab le of ten or more units g ross 50% on-site pro vision. Where possib le, a
greater propor tion than 50% aff ordab le housing on individual sites should be achie ved.
3. on sites belo w the threshold of ‘capab le of ten or more units g ross’, a financial contr ibution to
the Aff ordab le Housing Fund commensur ate with the scale of de velopment, in line with the
sliding scales set out belo w and in the Aff ordab le Housing SPD
% Aff ordable Housing No of units pr oposed
(gross)
For an y units replacing
emplo yment
floorspaceFor ne w build
development or
redevelopment (whereFor con versions and
reversions (where
there is no loss of
former emplo yment
floorspacethere is no loss of
former emplo yment
floorspace)
90% 45% 36% 9
80% 40% 32% 8
70% 35% 28% 7
60% 30% 24% 6
50% 25% 20% 5
40% 20% 16% 4
30% 15% 12% 3
20% 10% 8% 2
10% 5% 4% 1
Table 17.2 Aff ordable Housing Contrib ution Sliding Scale
C.Where on site pro vision is required, an application should be accompanied b y evidence of meaningful
discussions with a Registered Pro vider which ha ve informed the proposed ten ure, size of units and
design to address local pr iorities and e xplored funding oppor tunities .
D.Where on site aff ordab le housing is pro vided on site , the Council will require an aff ordab le housing
tenure split of 70% aff ordab le rented housing and 30% inter mediate housing b y habitab le room.
The inter mediate housing will be deliv ered in line with the Council’ s Inter mediate Housing P olicy
Statement.
E. If the minim um le vel of aff ordab le housing is not pro vided in line with P art B (1) and B(2) the
application f or de velopment will be refused.
F.Site-specific viability inf ormation will only be accepted in e xceptional cases , deter mined b y the
Council.  Any proposals where site-specific viability e vidence is accepted m ust pro vide the maxim um
amount of aff ordab le housing, inf ormed b y detailed viability e vidence .The cost of an y independent
review must be co vered b y the applicant.
G. If a site proposes a non-compliant le vel of aff ordab le housing and is g ranted per mission it will be
subject to detailed re view mechanisms throughout the per iod up to full completion of the de velopment,
including an adv anced stage re view mechanism.  Sites that meet the 50% target f or aff ordab le
169Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18housing will not be subject to a late stage re view, only an ear ly stage re view to incentivise
implementation.
H. In exceptional circumstances , where aff ordab le housing cannot pr actically be pro vided on site , or
off-site pro vision w ould create a better contr ibution (in ter ms of quantity and/or quality), the Council
may accept pro vision of aff ordab le housing off-site in the same area.
I. Developments in volving the pro vision of aff ordab le housing will be e xpected to achie ve the same
high quality standards as the pr ivate housing element of the scheme in ter ms of accessibility , inter nal
space requirements , external appear ance and design quality and pro vision of pr ivate outdoor space .
J.The Council will not accept the loss of an y existing aff ordab le housing and will e xpect an y estate
regener ation to pro vide the equiv alent amount of aff ordab le housing b y habitab le room, and where
possib le, achie ve an uplift in pro vision.
17.12 Richmond is a borough with a plethor a of
attributes such as its pub lic par ks, the r iver
Thames and thr iving centres which mak e it
an attr active place to w ork and liv e.This
results in people from not just London b ut all
over the w orld wanting to mak e Richmond
their home . However, due to the scarcity of
land in the borough and other f actors it is no w
experiencing an acute aff ordab le housing
crisis. Not enough aff ordab le housing is being
built to help alle viate the e ver-growing need.
Theref ore, the Council will do e verything in
its po wer to mak e sure o ver the plan per iod
we hit the 50% target.
17.13 The borough of Richmond has some of the
highest house pr ices in the United Kingdom.
To put the v alues into perspectiv e belo w is a
table of a verage house pr ices across all
housing types in Richmond compared with
London, outer London and the UK (Land
Registr y HPI J une 2021).Aff ordab le housing
does not just benefit the people who reside
in these proper ties.To have a tr uly mix ed and
balanced comm unity w e need to pro vide
homes that our teachers , firefighters , police
officers , nurses , trades people , mechanics ,
and retail w orkers can aff ord.This is not an
exhaustiv e list b ut without these w orkers the
borough w ould be simply w orse off . Having
genuinely aff ordab le proper ties to rent or b uy
means that residents can ha ve more income
to spend in the local econom y which benefits
local b usinesses .
Average house price Area
£702,846 RichmondAverage house price Area
£510,229 London
£458,390 Outer London
£265,668 U.K
Table 17.3 A verage House Prices
17.14 The need f or aff ordab le housing in the
borough is demonstr able, which has been
evidenced b y the Council’ s Local Housing
Need Assessment 2021 (LHNA). This study
looks at the current need in the borough,
need from ne wly-forming households and
existing households f alling into need min us
the supply of aff ordab le housing which is
equal to the net need per ann um of aff ordab le
housing. The LHNA estimates a net ann ual
need of 1,123 aff ordab le rented and 552
home o wnership products to be pro vided
betw een 2021-2039. This is significantly
higher than Richmond’ s overall ann ual
housing target of 411 homes per ann um
during the current London Plan per iod
(2019-2041).
17.15 Richmond has a finite amount of large-scale
developab le sites due to v arious constr aints ,
including the Thames and the v arious par ks
and open spaces . Small sites mak e a
significant contr ibution to housing supply .The
London Plan H2 has set a minim um target of
delivering 234 homes per y ear from small
sites, 57% of the o verall ann ual housing
target. The cum ulativ e impact of these sites
should contr ibute to aff ordab le housing
provision, justified b y the e vidence base and
local circumstances .Without these
17017  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18contr ibutions it w ould be a significant
challenge to deliv er the amount of aff ordab le
housing this borough needs .
17.16 Contr ibutions from small sites will be secured
via a Planning Ob ligation.  Financial
contr ibutions made to the r ingfenced
Affordab le Housing Fund are allocated to the
Council's Housing Capital Prog ramme and
used to help fund ne w affordab le housing, or
to fund acquisition of land and pr ivate
proper ties for this pur pose , or for enhanced
provision through re-modelling e xisting
affordab le units or suppor ted schemes , in
pursuance of housing and planning
objectiv es.The financial contr ibution will not
be con verted into the actual deliv ery of units
on an identified link ed site , unless suitab le,
as it is vital that aff ordab le housing is
delivered in the most eff ective way.
17.17 The aff ordab le housing policy applies to all
new housing de velopment, including changes
of use f or wholly residential and mix ed-use
sites incor porating residential use , where
planning per mission is required. The
affordab le housing pro vision (on-site or
off-site) or an y financial contr ibution should
be calculated in relation to g ross r ather than
net de velopment.  In London the major ity of
development is bro wnfield and does not need
to be incentivised, as in man y cases the
building will only ha ve been made v acant f or
the sole pur pose of re-de velopment, theref ore
the Vacant Building Credit will not apply . A
flowchar t to follow, setting out the policy
requirements and the mechanism f or
assessing the contr ibutions from individual
sites is set out in the Aff ordab le Housing
SPD, for each proposal to mak e an adequate
contr ibution to wards aff ordab le housing which
is directly , fairly and reasonab ly related in
scale and kind to the de velopment proposed.
It is considered necessar y to mak e it
acceptab le in planning ter ms, and the
absence of an ob ligation will be considered
as under mining the Council’ s housing
strategy and har m the pro vision of aff ordab le
housing in the area.
17.18 In the conte xt of the Local Plan, gen uinely
affordab le housing is pr imarily considered to
be homes rented at either social rent or
London Aff ordab le Rent le vels.The Councilpriority is social rented homes , as this is most
affordab le product a vailab le. London
Affordab le Rent will be acceptab le if e vidence
is pro vided that it will be aff ordab le to the
major ity of residents living in the borough.
Intermediate housing (such as Shared
Ownership , London Living Rent ) on site will
only be considered gen uinely aff ordab le when
delivered in compliance with the Council’ s
Intermediate Housing P olicy Statement 2019
(and an y further updates to this).  At
application stage the aff ordab le housing
products aff ordability will be assessed on the
total cost of the home , including ser vice
charges . First Homes and Star ter Homes are
not considered to be aff ordab le in the conte xt
of Richmond due to the borough’ s high house
prices.There are areas of the borough where
even a 50% discount on open mar ket value
would not reduce the pr ice under the
£420,000 cap set b y National Go vernment
for First Homes .These e xtremely large
reductions ha ve the ability to impact the
viability of schemes which in tur n could
jeopardise the pro vision of aff ordab le rented
homes , which is the pr iority need in the
borough.  More research will be under taken
over the course of the de velopment of the
plan on the eff ects of First Homes on the
delivery of aff ordab le housing in Richmond.
17.19 The threshold (10 units or abo ve) is
expressed in ter ms of the capability of the
site, in order to o vercome attempts to e vade
thresholds . For example , these could be b y
lowering densities , providing unit siz es
significantly abo ve the Nationally Descr ibed
Space Standards , failing to pro vide the
required mix of units , phasing de velopment,
submitting subsequent applications on the
same site or adjoining sites , or b y incremental
acquisition of sites . In these circumstances
the Council w ould apply the aff ordab le
housing policy requirements .
17.20 London Plan P olicy H5 has set out a
threshold approach where if a site meets 35%
affordab le housing or 50% in the case of
public sector or industr ial land, then the y will
not need to submit a viability assessment at
the application stage .This policy is aimed at
fast tr acking applications through the system
that pro vide the threshold le vel without being
held up b y potentially protr acted discussions
171Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18regarding viability . Richmond’ s affordab le
housing need is so g reat and the borough
has such a limited supply of major sites , using
the threshold approach w ould ha ve a
detrimental impact on the Council achie ving
its goal of pro viding 50% aff ordab le housing
across the borough.
17.21 In the current Local Plan, the ten ure split is
80/20 in f avour of aff ordab le rent o ver
intermediate products .The need f or
affordab le rent has not changed in the
borough b ut there has been a change in
policy within the London Plan.  London Plan
Policy H6 prescr ibes the aff ordab le housing
tenure split that London Boroughs should be
applying in their policies .This is 30% lo w cost
rent (social or London Aff ordab le Rent), 30%
intermediate (i.e London Living rent or Shared
Ownership) and 40% to be deter mined b y the
borough.  As the o verriding need as e videnced
by the LHNA in Richmond is f or low cost
rented homes the whole of the 40% will be
towards that product. This is the reasoning
for the policy’ s 70/30 split in f avour of
affordab le rented products .The Council will
still suppor t (potentially through g rant) an y
development, especially on pub lic sector land,
that pro vides a ten ure split of 80/20.
17.22 The Council will r igorously test their
affordab le housing targets to mak e sure that
they are viab le through what is called a Whole
Plan Viability Study . If it is confir med that the
policy compliant le vel of aff ordab le housing
required on sites is viab le then the Council
will not accept an ything less . Applications
submitted that pro vide less aff ordab le housing
than set out in policy will be rejected. The
Council will in e xtraordinar y circumstances
and on a case-b y case basis accept viability
arguments if it can be demonstr ated that the
site has abnor mal costs that could not be
foreseen, f or example infr astructure pro vision
that could not ha ve been f oreseen at The
Whole Plan Viability stage .The Council will
only accept viability arguments once it has
been confir med that the applicant has
explored with the rele vant Council officers
the a vailability and application of g rant to
increase or pro vided a better ten ure of
affordab le housing.17.23 Where viability e vidence is required this will
need to f ollow the guidance set out int RICs
Assessing Viability in Planning under the
National Planning P olicy F ramework 2019 f or
England (2021), National Planning P olicy
Guidance , the Council’ s Affordab le Housing
SPD and the GLA’ s Affordab le Housing and
Viability SPG. The Council will e xpect all
developers to ensure that the y identify and
get the Council’ s appro val of a Registered
Provider to suppor t the deliv ery of aff ordab le
housing on site at the time of submission of
a planning application. The on us will be on
developers to pa y for an y viability assessment
if the proposal is not policy compliant and an y
cost of independent assessment.  If build
costs need to be assessed, then de velopers
will also need to pa y for these to be re viewed
by an independent Quantity Sur veyor.
17.24 As evidenced b y the LHNA the Council has
a substantial need f or aff ordab le housing.  As
small sites which are not in emplo yment use
(less than 10 units and/or 1000sqm) aren’t
required to pro vide on-site aff ordab le housing,
this requires schemes abo ve the threshold
to deliv er 50% to help achie ve our target.
Theref ore, payments in lieu will be strongly
resisted. The Council only has a finite n umber
of deliv erable sites due to the v arious
constr aints in the borough.  Offsite deliv ery or
a payment in lieu w ould mean an oppor tunity
to deliv er actual aff ordab le housing w ould be
missed.  If in the e xtraordinar y circumstance
that off-site pro vision is acceptab le, then the
Council will e xpect that the aff ordab le housing
is maximised on both sites .The Council will
only accept this arr angement if the total
number of aff ordab le habitab le rooms o ver
both sites equal 50% of the total n umber of
habitab le rooms .
17.25 Affordab le housing will be secured on site b y
way of a legal ag reement. To incentivise
developers to b uild out their per missions in
a timely manner an ear ly stage re view will be
inser ted into all legal ag reements secur ing
affordab le housing with a tr igger date of 12
months after the date of the decision. The
Council will be resisting an y development
which pro vides less than 50% aff ordab le
housing on site . If in the e xtraordinar y
circumstance that an application is appro ved
providing less than 50% aff ordab le housing,
17217  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18an adv anced stage re view mechanism will
be used to mak e sure that the scheme
provides a policy compliant le vel (50%) of
affordab le housing if viability impro ves over
the lif e cycle of the de velopment.  Review
mechanisms in line with national policy
guidance cannot be used to tr y and reduce
the amount of aff ordab le housing being
provided.
17.26 The Council e xpects all ne w developments
in the borough to be ten ure b lind.The
schemes should be designed and managed
so that all residents ha ve equal access to thecommon areas , open space and not restr icted
on the use of the site based on the v alue of
their home .The Council will strongly resist
the use of gates which separ ate areas within
a development.  If this is required due to
safety reasons then e vidence will need to be
provided which sho ws all residents will ha ve
access to the gated area.  Affordab le Housing
schemes should be designed with the same
ethos and attention to detail as a mar ket
housing scheme . Policy 44 sets out the
design process the Council e xpects
developers to f ollow where it is open mar ket
housing or aff ordab le housing.
Policy 12.  Housing Needs of Diff erent Gr oups
A. The loss of e xisting housing will be resisted where it meets identified specific comm unity needs ,
unless it can be sho wn that:
1. the accommodation is no longer needed, or
2. that the e xisting accommodation will be adequately re-pro vided to an equiv alent or g reater
standard in a diff erent w ay or else where , or
3. the ne w accommodation will instead meet another identified pr iority local need.
B.Planning per mission will be g ranted f or ne w accommodation where housing is pro viding f or an
identified local need, across a r ange of ten ures, providing the y are on a site and in a location suitab le
for that par ticular use , and in accordance with en vironmental, tr anspor t, par king and other rele vant
policies . A legal ag reement will be necessar y to secure the nature of pro vision, and an y necessar y
future control in ter ms of eligibility and aff ordability f or future occupiers .The f ollowing will be tak en
into account:
1. All residential uses are e xpected to contr ibute to the highest pr iority aff ordab le housing needs
as set out in P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing, and contr ibute to creating mix ed, balanced and
inclusiv e comm unities .The highest pr iority is f or on-site gener al needs aff ordab le housing.
2. All residential uses should demonstr ate ho w higher standards of accessib le and inclusiv e
design ha ve been met.
3. Proposals which pro vide adaptations and alter ations to enab le residents to liv e independently
and saf ely remaining in their e xisting proper ty will be suppor ted. Proposals f or ne w specialist
older persons’  housing will be assessed against London Plan P olicy H13, where it meets
identified local need as set out in the Council’ s Local Housing Needs Assessment, housing
and commissioning str ategies , including ho w an aff ordab le housing contr ibution has been
maximised.  Applicants f or specialist older persons’  housing should demonstr ate ho w the design
will address the needs of people with dementia and other long-ter m health conditions , and be
informed b y discussions with pro viders and demonstr ate accordance with the Council’ s
commissioning and housing str ategies . An Oper ational Management Plan will be required to
secure minim um le vels of care and eligibility restr ictions to pr ioritise local needs .
4. Proposals f or suppor ted housing will be suppor ted where the y have been designed to meet
identified local needs and are in accordance with the Council’ s housing and commissioning
strategies and London Plan P olicy H12.  Proposals should demonstr ate ho w the design will
address the le vel of suppor t needed f or future residents , and be inf ormed b y discussions with
providers and demonstr ate accordance with the Council’ s commissioning and housing str ategies .
173Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 185. Proposals f or custom, self-b uild and comm unity-led housing will be suppor ted where it can be
demonstr ated that the residential density of the site has been optimised and other policy
requirements ha ve been met, including those f or aff ordab le housing in accordance with P olicy
11 Aff ordab le Housing.
6. Proposals f or student accommodation to meet the needs of local institutions will be suppor ted
where the maxim um le vel of accommodation is secured as aff ordab le student accommodation
in accordance with London Plan P olicy H15.
7. Proposals f or Build to Rent of an y size will be assessed against London Plan P olicy H11
including the need to secure aff ordab le rented pro vision in per petuity , along with mechanisms
for long-ter m management.
8. Proposals f or pur pose-b uilt shared living of an y size will be assessed against London Plan
Policy H16, which emphasises design, living conditions and the basis to secure tenancies .
Proposals will need to address the need f or a contr ibution to aff ordab le housing.
C.The e xisting Traveller site at Pr iest Close and Chapter Way pre viously ref erred to as Bishops Gro ve,
Hampton will be protected.  Sites f or tempor ary or per manent use f or Gypsies and Travellers should
meet the f ollowing cr iteria:
1. The site can pro vide f or a satisf actor y arrangement of pitches , permanent b uildings and open
space;
2. The use of the site w ould ha ve no significant adv erse eff ect on the amenity of occupiers of
adjoining land;
3. The use of the site w ould be acceptab le in ter ms of visual amenity and;
4. The use could be suppor ted b y adequate social infr astructure in the locality , including access
to education and health ser vices .
17.27 Different types of accommodation are
recognised as impor tant in the borough,
particular ly to pro vide aff ordab le options and
meet the needs of residents who ma y
otherwise ha ve difficulty finding alter nativ e
accommodation.  Existing accommodation
needs to be protected giv en the constr aints
of land supply and ne w accommodation
encour aged recognising aff ordability issues
in the borough. The limited land supply
means that ne w developments m ust be
directed at identified pr iority local needs .
17.28 The r ange of housing to meet specific
comm unity needs can include sheltered
housing with care suppor t, staff ed hostels ,
residential care homes/n ursing homes ,
almshouses , extra-care housing, pro vision
by local colleges , hotels and other institutions
for their students and/or staff .These include
suppor ted housing pro vision f or children,
older persons and other client g roups .17.29 Local need should be identified on the basis
of up to date e vidence and related to the
Council’ s housing and associated str ategies ,
including specific re views concer ning
suppor ted housing f or specific client g roups ,
or other rele vant str ategies . Strategies
produced b y third par ties demonstr ating local
need should ha ve been subject to
consultation with appropr iate bodies or
verification to demonstr ate the rob ustness of
the e vidence to the Council. The type of
accommodation proposed f or an y site m ust
be kept under regular re view and not
assumed to ha ve sta yed the same , as
comm unities needs can change within a shor t
time per iod. Evidence will be considered in
light of the Council's research and str ategic
priorities. If there is no e vidential need ar ising
within the borough, other pr iorities should be
addressed and the capacity f or con ventional
housing should not be compromised.  Limited
land means that de velopment to
accommodate needs ar ising from outside the
borough will not gener ally be suppor ted.
17417  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1817.30 The Local Housing Needs Assessment 2021
is a boroughwide assessment pro viding
updated e vidence on housing need.  It
provides details regarding the need f or
different f orms of specialist housing.  Housing
Learning and Impro vement Netw ork (LIN)
have under taken an assessment of need f or
specialised housing and accommodation f or
older people in Richmond.  A stage 2 update
of the LHNA will be under taken in 2022 to
taken into account the latest inf ormation and
to assist in pr ioritising local housing needs .
17.31 The Richmond Housing and Homelessness
Strategy 2021-26 sets out the Council’ s
commitment to suppor ting the needs of
vulner able residents and ho w through
partnership w orking there will be appropr iate
suppor t so that people can access suitab le
housing. This includes ensur ing that
appropr iate housing and suppor t is availab le
to enab le older people and people with
disabilities to maintain their independence . It
recognises the need f or accommodation
pathw ays that meet the needs of people with
learning disabilities and mental ill health, and
ensur ing that care lea vers ha ve access to
appropr iate housing that meets their needs .
17.32 The Council has a role in commissioning,
working with the mar ket including de velopers
and our other par tners to ensure that
sufficient and appropr iate quality housing and
suppor t is a vailab le to enab le residents to
maintain independence , making a str ategic
shift from tr aditional residential and n ursing
care to more independent living and
suppor ting people to liv e at home or in a
home lik e setting where ver possib le.The
Council’ s Mar ket Position Statement 2018/19
contained inf ormation on the adult social care
and suppor t mar ket, setting out details on
supply and demand, planned changes and
emerging trends f or ser vices .This will be
updated and supplementar y information on
the projected need f or accommodation-based
care is due to be pub lished shor tly.
17.33 It is recognised that Richmond has an ageing
population with increasing le vels of disability
and fr ailty. As set out in the LHNA, population
growth is projected to be concentr ated in
older age g roups (those aged 65 and o ver),
with this age g roup being projected toincrease b y 50% from 2021 to 2039 in the
latest official projections .There is a projected
significant increase to 2039 in the o ver-75
population and the increasing n umber of older
people with dementia related needs . Although
some households will seek to do wnsiz e,
barriers can include financial inequalities ,
suitability of housing, and social f actors ,
which f orm a comple x picture and a cautious
view should be tak en about the willingness
of households to mo ve to smaller homes .The
Housing LIN analysis sets out current
anticipated lik ely need (pre valence r ate) and
the associated estimated need
(units/bedspaces) f or each type of specialised
housing and accommodation f or older people ,
but assumed that up to 50% of this estimated
need could be met through the pro vision of
mainstream housing.  It ma y be possib le
through minor la yout changes or
impro vements , or enab ling w orks such as
ground floor e xtensions , to enab le people to
stay in their o wn homes .
17.34 Government guidance emphasises self-b uild
or custom b uild to div ersify the housing
market and increase consumer choice . Since
2016 the Council has been required to k eep
and ha ve regard to a register of people who
are interested in a self-b uild or custom-b uild
home in the borough. The Council has been
granted an e xemption b y Go vernment from
the duty to per mit  enough ser viced plots of
land to meet the demand f or self-b uild and
custom houseb uilding. The reason f or this is
the demand f or self-b uild and custom
houseb uilding is g reater than 20% of the land
identified b y the Council as being a vailab le
for future housing. This calculation is r un each
year to see if the threshold is still e xceeded
and if so , the e xemption remains .
17.35 Student housing will only be suppor ted where
it meets demonstr able local need and does
not compromise capacity f or con ventional
homes or under mine policies to secure mix ed
and balanced comm unities . It must not
prejudice the supply of aff ordab le housing
and other pr iority suppor ted housing.  It should
be brought f orward in conjunction with an
existing local institution and demonstr ate that
the proposed design will meet their needs ,
including details on aff ordability .The LHNA
does not identify an y current need f or
175Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18additional student accommodation. The future
strategy f or St Mar y's Univ ersity proposes
growth in students will be deliv ered through
a combination of impro vements and
development on-site alongside the ongoing
relationships with e xternal par tners .
17.36 The Pr ivate Rented Sector (PRS) can assist
in meeting a r ange of needs and be
particular ly suitab le for cer tain locations .The
LHNA modelled the distr ibution of PRS
dwellings in the borough at 24%.  Purpose
built schemes are ref erred to as ‘Build to
Rent’  and it is recognised these are oper ated
on a diff erent model to b uild for sale . It can
for example off er longer ter m tenancies/more
certainty o ver long ter m availability and
ensure eff ective management through single
ownership .The London Plan sets out the
affordab le housing off er can be solely
Discounted Mar ket Rent at a gen uinely
affordab le rent secured in per petuity .Wholly
PRS proposals are unlik ely to be suppor ted
where the y do not contr ibute to the borough’ s
highest pr iority need f or aff ordab le housing.
17.37 Large-scale pur pose-b uilt shared living
schemes , often called co-living, are a
relativ ely ne w form of housing, which can
provide a housing option f or households who
cannot or choose not to liv e in self-contained
homes or HMOs , often targeted at tr ansient
younger , high skilled prof essional households
and individuals .The LHNA did not identify a
particular need f or co-living in the borough,
given the borough has a higher propor tion of
families and older persons . However, there
is an oppor tunity f or creating mix ed
comm unities in which some people with
additional needs (e .g. learning disabilities or
physical disabilities) liv e alongside others
from the y ounger , high-skilled g roup who
provide some suppor t as a condition of their
tenancy .This ma y be a w ay to secure
suppor ted housing on a larger site , to meet
a range of needs within a de velopment.
17.38 Theref ore all proposals f or the pro vision (or
loss) of housing to meet specific comm unity
needs will be assessed ha ving regard to the
Council’ s Housing and Homelessness
Strategy , Commissioning e vidence and
strategies including those f or associated client
group.This will be considered along with theadvice of the Council in its housing and
commissioning roles including adult health
and social care , as w ell as where rele vant
the advice of Achie ving f or Children and the
SW London Clinical Commissioning Group
or an y other rele vant NHS or health body .
Proposals f or the de velopment of an y
specialist housing should demonstr ate that
there is a local need f or such accommodation.
17.39 Provision is encour aged in accessib le
locations and integ rated within comm unities ,
particular ly to ensure that pro vision suppor ts
access to e xisting personal and comm unity
netw orks and can reduce the need f or formal
care and suppor t. High quality design
standards will be required, rele vant to client
needs and their e xpected beha viours , ,
including inclusiv e design and pro vision of
internal and e xternal space . For example
older people’ s accommodation should
address specific needs such as stor age of
electr ic buggies in dr y locations , increasing
wheelchair housing and tur ning circles f or
day centre b uses . For example an y proposed
shared living m ust pro vide adequate space
to address inclusiv e access - designing
co-living to ADM Volume 2/BS 8300 and
taking note of some aspects of ADM Volume
1 M4(3) f or the wheelchair
adaptab le/accessib le rooms .The Council’ s
Specialist Housing Occupational Therapist
may be ab le to off er guidance at an ear ly
stage to ensure inclusiv e access is
maximised in an y housing to meet the needs
of diff erent g roups .
17.40 Innovative moder n methods of constr uction,
such as modular housing par tly constr ucted
off-site , are also encour aged where it can
assist housing deliv ery in ter ms of
constr uction and sustainability .To
innovatively address future suppor ted housing
needs , the use of fle xible layouts and
adaptab le space that can mak e use of digital
technology and could be altered to meet
different needs o ver time is encour aged.  For
example there could be fle xibility whether
providing suppor t for mental health or people
with lear ning disabilities , providing the design
allows for the comple xity of needs and the
care and suppor t that will be needed, and the
potential impacts and infr astructure needs
can be assessed. There are oppor tunities f or
17617  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18inter-gener ational and integ rated
developments , as suggested in par agraph
17.37 abo ve.The Council’ s housing and
commissioning officers should be in volved at
an ear ly stage in discussions with pro viders
to ensure proposals will meet local identified
suppor ted housing needs , and e vidence of
these discussions submitted with an
application.  Applications are e xpected to be
submitted with details of ho w the design and
management will pro vide the necessar y level
of super vision, management, care and
suppor t, including in Oper ational
Management Plans (including minim um le vels
of care).  A cascade will be sought to ensure
the units are will be first off ered to eligib le
persons residing within the borough, f or
example f or a minim um per iod of 3 or 6
months .
17.41 However, as identified in the LHNA the need
for aff ordab le homes remains substantial and
is theref ore a higher pr iority to those identified
above.Where proposed residential pro vision
does not itself meet the NPPF definition of
affordab le housing, aff ordab le housing policy
requirements as set out in P olicy 11
Affordab le Housing will be applicab le to all
site proposals f or accommodation considered
under this policy and it is e xpected that
schemes will be designed to accommodate
the pr iority needs f or aff ordab le housingalongside other types of housing f or specific
groups . As set out In P olicy 11 Aff ordab le
Housing the threshold approach to f ast tr ack
applications pro viding lo wer levels of
affordab le pro vision in proposals to meet the
needs of diff erent g roups , such as aff ordab le
student accommodation or specialist older
persons housing, is not considered
appropr iate in the borough conte xt.
17.42 The Council's research on Gypsies and
Travellers in 2013 and 2015 (repor t pub lished
in 2016) suggested that there is no
demonstr ated need f or additional pitches;
although there is a need to protect the
existing site .There ma y be oppor tunities f or
other inno vative solutions to impro ve suppor t
to address needs such as pro viding floating
suppor t to those in br icks and mor tar to
address issues of isolation, managing a home
and maintaining a tenancy .The Council’ s
research is due to be updated in 2022, which
will also ac knowledge some recent
unauthor ised encampments .The London
Plan also sets out in the suppor ting te xt to
Policy H14 that the Ma yor will initiate and lead
a London-wide gypsy and tr aveller
accommodation needs assessment, and will
work to suppor t boroughs in finding w ays to
make pro vision f or gypsy and tr aveller
accommodation.
Policy 13.  Housing Mix and Standar ds
A. Development should gener ally pro vide a mix of siz es and types of accommodation.  Areas within
PTALs 3-6 or within 800m distance of a station or to wn centre boundar y should pro vide a higher
propor tion of small units (studios and 1 beds).  For mar ket housing, there is highest demand f or 2
and 3 beds .The aff ordab le housing mix should be based on discussions with a Registered Pro vider(s)
to reflect local needs , in accordance with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing. The housing mix should be
appropr iate to the site-specifics of the location.
B.All ne w housing de velopment, including con versions , are required to comply with the Nationally
Descr ibed Space Standard.  As also set out in London Plan P olicy D6 on pr ivate inter nal space , the
minim um floor to ceiling height m ust be 2.5m f or at least 75 per cent of the Gross Inter nal Area of
each dw elling.  New homes significantly abo ve the minim um standard that do not mak e efficient use
of land will be resisted.
C.All ne w housing de velopment, including con versions , should pro vide adequate e xternal space .
Purpose b uilt, w ell designed and positioned balconies or terr aces are encour aged where ne w
residential units are on upper floors , if the y comply with P olicy 46 Amenity and Living Conditions .
Regard should be had to the Council’ s Residential De velopment Standards SPD as appropr iate.
D.Amenity space f or all ne w dw ellings , including con versions , should be:
177Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 181. private, usab le, functional and saf e;
2. easily accessib le from living areas;
3. orientated to tak e account of need f or sunlight and shading;
4. of a sufficient siz e to meet the needs of the lik ely n umber of occupiers;  and
5. accommodation lik ely to be occupied b y families with y oung children should ha ve direct and
easy access to adequate pr ivate amenity space .
E. At least 10% of all ne w build housing (via w orks to which Appro ved Document M (ADM) Volume 1
of the Building Regulations applies) is required to meet Building Regulation Requirement M4 (3)
‘wheelchair user dw ellings’  and all other ne w build housing (created via w orks to which P art M
volume 1 of the Building Regulations applies) is required to meet Building Regulation Requirement
M4 (2) ‘accessib le and adaptab le dw ellings’, in accordance with London Plan P olicy D7.  Design
and Access Statements , submitted as par t of de velopment proposals , should include an inclusiv e
design statement as set out in London Plan P olicy D5 to demonstr ate ho w the highest standards
of accessib le and inclusiv e design ha ve been achie ved.
17.43 The Local Housing Needs Assessment 2021
analysis considers demog raphic trends and
a scenar io to understand the potential
population g rowth associated with the deliv ery
of 411 homes per ann um.The boroughwide
assessment suggests an appropr iate mix f or
affordab le and mar ket homes , taking account
of household changes and the ageing
population.  However a r ange of f actors
influence demand, as w ell as the mix that will
be considered appropr iate based on a
site-specific assessment.  Regard should be
had to the nature of the site and char acter of
the area, to up-to-date e vidence of need as
well as the e xisting mix and tur nover of
proper ties at the local le vel. A mix is e xpected
to accommodate the needs of both y oung
and old people , including options f or
downsizing. The appropr iate mix f or
affordab le housing should be based on
meaningful discussions with a Registered
Provider(s) as required b y Policy 11
Affordab le Housing to inf orm ten ure and siz e
of units , recognising there ma y be par ticular
scope to pro vide smaller units to create a
chain of mo ves which can free up large under
occupied aff ordab le homes .
17.44 Housing standards f or inter nal and e xternal
space and inclusiv e access apply to all
tenures.
17.45 It is recognised that adequate space in the
home has an eff ect on health, div ersity and
comm unity cohesion and that insufficientspace pro vision in the housing stoc k will
theref ore impact on local ser vices . It is an
impor tant issue in the borough giv en the
scarcity of housing land supply and
particular ly to pre vent sub-standard
accommodation in small units . It is impor tant
to mak e efficient use of land and cater f or
changing lif estyles , including home w orking,
and accord with requirements f or inclusiv e
access .The pandemic has fur ther highlighted
the impor tance of ha ving access to outdoor
and indoor space , particular ly with the
potential f or future w orking patter ns in some
sectors to retain a high propor tion of home
working.
17.46 The Council has theref ore adopted the
Nationally Descr ibed Space Standard and
the optional higher Building Regulations P art
M for inclusiv e access .The Go vernment has
since Apr il 2021 required all ne w homes
created through per mitted de velopment r ights
to comply with the Nationally Descr ibed
Space Standard.
17.47 The space standards are minima which
applicants are encour aged to e xceed.
Although as set out in London Plan par agraph
3.6.2 and of par ticular rele vance in the
borough due to limited land supply , dwellings
with floor areas significantly abo ve the
Nationally Descr ibed Space Standard will be
resisted - due to the le vel of housing need
and the need to mak e efficient use of land.  If
oversiz ed units are proposed, their impact
17817  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18should be assessed assuming g reater
occupancy as to the potential infr astructure
impacts .
17.48 The Nationally Descr ibed Space Standard
sets a minim um ceiling height of 2.3 metres
for at least 75% of the g ross inter nal area of
the dw elling.  Following the approach set in
the London Plan P olicy D6 and par agraph
3.6.3 to address the impacts of the unique
urban heat island eff ect and the f act that the
major ity of housing de velopments in London
are made up of flats , a minim um ceiling height
of 2.5m f or at least 75% of the g ross inter nal
area is required so that ne w housing is of
adequate quality , especially in ter ms of
daylight penetr ation, v entilation and cooling,
and sense of space .
17.49 Private outside space is desir able in all
circumstances . For external amenity space ,
London Plan P olicy D6 states a minim um of
5 sqm of pr ivate outdoor space should be
provided f or 1-2 person dw ellings and an
extra 1 sqm should be pro vided f or each
additional occupant, and it m ust achie ve a
minim um depth and width of 1.5 metres .
Proposals should demonstr ate their
capability , to accommodate fur niture , access
and activities , based on the n umber of future
occupants .
17.50 Unlik e the other standards in this policy , part
E should apply to all dw ellings created via
works to which Appro ved Document M (ADM)
Volume 1 applies which at the time of wr iting
gener ally limits the application to ne w build
dwellings .The London Plan suppor ting te xt
to Policy D7 sets out guidance including f or
shared approach routes , application to all
tenures, step-free access into dw ellings and
where there ma y be fle xibility around
provision of a lift to all dw elling entr ances .
There ma y be the oppor tunity e ven where
step-free access is not possib le, for dw ellings
at entr ance le vel to meet other requirements
for M4(2) and M4(3) to maximise inclusiv e
access . It is ac knowledged that homes to
M4(3) ma y need larger floorspace elements
than the minim um standard, to deliv er
compliant wheelchair adaptab le / accessib le
homes .17.51 Guidance should be sought from the
Council’ s Specialist Housing Occupational
Therapist at an ear ly stage in designing
wheelchair dw ellings and guidance can be
provided on meeting requirements (an
informal Accessib le and Inclusiv e Housing
overview note and guidance applicab le to a
site proposal is a vailab le).The Council will
negotiate through site-specific discussions
the most eff ective way to maximise pro vision
for wheelchair use in aff ordab le housing. This
will include ha ving regard to identified local
needs through w aiting lists of those needing
wheelchair accessib le accommodation in the
borough through the Richmond housing
register , which has a separ ate queue f or
people seeking specially designed or adapted
proper ty (mainly f or wheelchair users)
suitab le for persons with ph ysical disabilities .
All ne w build housing to M4(3) that is
affordab le housing to which the Council has
nomination r ights m ust be b uilt out as fully
wheelchair ‘accessib le’ i.e. a home readily
useab le by a wheelchair user at the point of
completion.  All ne w build housing to M4(3)
that is f or shared o wnership or mar ket
housing m ust be easily ‘adaptab le’ to
wheelchair housing.
17.52 The guidance in the London Plan sets out the
detail that should be contained in the inclusiv e
design statement as par t of the Design and
Access Statement. These should be
propor tionate to the scale and type of
development.
17.53 Where de velopments are not ab le to meet
policy requirements f or housing mix and
standards , the applicant should identify the
shortcomings and demonstr ate reasons wh y,
including that suitab le alter nativ e layouts or
provision such as alter nativ e amenity space
in the f orm of roof terr aces , roof gardens and
balconies (in accordance with P olicy 46
Amenity and Living Conditions which also
considers the impact on e xisting occupants)
have been considered and incor porated
where ver possib le.
17.54 For amenity space , while front garden or
courtyard space can contr ibute to the o verall
quantum, this should gener ally not f orm a
significant propor tion of the pro vision unless
179Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18it can be demonstr ated that it meets the tests
set out in the abo ve policy par ticular ly that it
can be considered functional and saf e.
17.55 The ‘Good Quality Homes f or All Londoners
Guidance’  being prepared b y the Ma yor
(consultation dr aft October 2020) pro videsguidance in Module C on housing design
standards f or use when designing or
assessing ne w housing. The Council will
consider an update to the Residential
Development Standards SPD .
Policy 14.  Loss of Housing
A. Existing housing should be retained. The net loss of e xisting aff ordab le housing units – o verall and
in ter ms of social rented housing – will be resisted.  Existing larger houses in m ultiple accommodation
(HMOs) will be protected where the y are of a reasonab le standard.  Loss of hostels , staff
accommodation, and shared and suppor ted accommodation that meet an identified housing need
should be satisf actor ily re-pro vided to an equiv alent or better standard.  A change of use from housing
to shor t-stay holida y rental accommodation to be used f or more than 90 da ys a y ear will be resisted.
B.Proposals f or reversions and con versions should assess the suitability of the proper ty and design
consider ations .
C.Rede velopment of e xisting housing should nor mally only tak e place where:
1. it has first been demonstr ated that the e xisting housing is incapab le of impro vement or
conversion to a satisf actor y standard to pro vide an equiv alent scheme (consider ing embodied
carbon and the circular econom y); and, if this is the case
2. In accordance with London Plan P olicy H8, e xisting housing should be replaced b y new housing
at existing or higher densities with at least the equiv alent le vel of o verall floorspace .
3. the proposal does not ha ve an adv erse impact on local char acter , according with P olicy 28
Local Char acter and Design Quality;  and
4. the proposal pro vides a satisf actor y standard of accommodation, including accessib le design,
as set out in P olicy 13 Housing Mix and Standards .
17.56 Existing housing is v alued in the borough due
to the constr aints of limited land supply and
high land v alues .The London Plan housing
target f or the Council will be challenging to
achie ve and an y loss of e xisting units
exacerbates this .The London Plan places an
emphasis on optimising use of land, including
at Policy H8 that an y loss of e xisting housing
should be replaced b y new housing at
existing or higher densities .
17.57 The policy is aimed at individual smaller sites ,
rather than large scale remodelling.
17.58 Houses in m ultiple occupation (HMOs) can
provide a v alued source of cheaper
accommodation, par ticular ly for young and
transient g roups in the population, who ha ve
not reached a stage where the y can or w ant
to buy, for people who are unab le to gainaccess to other f orms of housing and f or
people who w ould otherwise be homeless .
HMOs can reduce pressure on other
elements of the housing stoc k.Their quality
can, ho wever, give rise to concer n.The
Council maintain a register of licensed HMOs
which need to comply with management
regulations and local minim um amenity
standards .Where the y are of a reasonab le
standard the y should gener ally be protected,
to accord with London Plan P olicy H9. This
applies to larger HMOs (f or more than six
people) which are defined as being a ‘sui
gener is’ use.
17.59 It is unla wful f or homes in Greater London to
be used as shor t-term holida y rented
accommodation f or a cum ulativ e per iod of
more than 90 da ys a y ear without seeking
planning per mission. The use of dw ellings as
18017  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18short-term holida y rentals can ha ve a
detrimental impact on neighbours’  residential
amenity and comm unity cohesion in the wider
area where concentr ated in a par ticular
location. The use also reduces the supply of
homes a vailab le for people to liv e in, and
given the pressures on housing supply in the
borough, the per manent loss of housing stoc k
is theref ore resisted.
17.60 There is a presumption f or the applicant to
first assess the potential f or retaining and
refurbishing e xisting b uildings .This reflects
the climate change emergency and the need
to consider the whole lif e cycle of
development, including the e xisting b uildings
embodied carbon, giv en the suppor t for
upgrading and reusing e xisting b uildings as
set out in P olicy 4 Minimising Greenhouse
gas emissions and promoting energy
efficiency and P olicy 28 Local Char acter and
Design Quality .There should be full
consider ation as to whether e xisting housing
can be impro ved or con verted to a
satisf actor y standard.  Proposals f or
redevelopment will be assessed f or benefits
on the balance of the quality of housing
provision, par ticular ly in respect of design and
amenity consider ations and the impact on
character and the streetscene , informed b y
the Urban Design Study 2021 and the
Council's Village Planning Guidance SPDs .
17.61 There is a presumption against the loss of
housing units , but exceptions ma y be
considered if other policy pr iorities are met,
and wider benefits pro vided such as an
increase in emplo yment uses , affordab le
housing or housing to meet identified
comm unity needs , provision of health
facilities , or infr astructure . Given the housing
needs and emphasis on optimising capacity
on sites , proposals should gener ally not
involve the net loss of more than one unit.
17.62 It is recognised that Registered Pro viders are
subject to comple x financial regulations and
have to address specific needs .Theref ore,
exceptions to policy will be considered in
cases where con versions , reversions or
redevelopment will result in aff ordab le units
being retained and managed as aff ordab le
housing b y a Registered Pro vider or similar
body, in fur therance of the Council’ s Housingand related Str ategies . Any proposals
replacing e xisting aff ordab le housing and f or
estate rede velopment will need to accord with
Policy 11 Aff ordab le Housing and London
Plan P olicy H8.
17.63 Reversions of houses con verted into flats
back into a single-f amily dw elling house will
only be considered acceptab le if the proper ty
was or iginally b uilt as a single-f amily dw elling
house , and it can be demonstr ated the loss
of a unit will be outw eighed b y environmental,
street scene , transpor t or par king benefits
which could not be easily achie ved without
the re version.  Evidence of tangib le benefits
is required from an applicant to justify an
exception on this basis .This can include
assessments of sustainability or the poor
standards of e xisting units . Reversions should
not in volve the combining of more than tw o
units due to the borough’ s housing needs . A
stronger justification f or an e xception needs
to be made if there is a g reater loss of
existing units , given re versions will be
gener ally resisted due to the loss of e xisting
stock.
17.64 The con version of larger types of houses to
flats can mak e a contr ibution to meeting
certain housing needs and pro vides the
oppor tunity to meet the need f or small units .
However, it m ust be recognised that only
certain types of proper ty are suitab le for
conversion, and that there are some areas
where con versions w ould be incompatib le
with the e xisting char acter of the area, or lead
to unacceptab le par king conditions . In
consider ing in pr inciple the suitability of a
proper ty for con version the Council will tak e
into account:
1. the siz e of the proper ty and its ph ysical
character istics , including la yout and siz e
of rooms;
2. on-street par king conditions and
on-street par king restr ictions;  the
adequacy of pub lic transpor t and access
to local ser vices and f acilities to accord
with P olicy 1 Living Locally;
3. the amount of off-street par king which
would be appropr iate and its location,
which m ust not unduly aff ect the
amenities of adjoining premises or the
character of the area;
181Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 184. the location of the proper ty and the need
to ha ve regard to the char acter of
existing residential areas , including that
of specific roads , as identified in the
Urban Design Study 2021 and the
Council's Village Planning Guidance
SPDs , to accord with P olicy 28 Local
Char acter and design quality;
5. the eff ect on the amenities of adjoining
premises;
6. the e xtent to which the proper ty
contr ibutes to meeting specific
comm unity needs in accordance with
Policy 12 Housing Needs of Diff erent
Groups .
17.65 In cases where the Council accepts that in
principle a proper ty ma y be suitab le for
conversion, the design of the con version will
be required to pro vide a satisf actor y standard
of accommodation and contr ibute positiv elyto its surroundings . If a proper ty is considered
suitab le for con version, the Council will tak e
account of the f ollowing design consider ations
in assessing the proposal:
1. number of units in relation to siz e of
proper ty and la yout in accordance with
Policy 13 Housing Mix and Standards;
2. level of da ylighting and sunlight and
avoidance of o verlooking in accordance
with P olicy 46 Amenity and Living
Conditions;
3. mix of unit siz es, and par ticular ly the
need to increase the supply of small lo w
cost units f or rent and o wner-occupation
in accordance with P olicy 13 in Housing
Mix and Standards;
4. access to pr ivate amenity space in
accordance with P olicy 13 Housing Mix
and Standards .
Policy 15.  Infill and Bac kland De velopment
A. Proposals are e xpected to optimise the potential f or housing deliv ery on all suitab le and a vailab le
brownfield sites in accordance with London Plan P olicy H1. This includes:
1. sites with e xisting or planned pub lic transpor t access le vels (PT ALs) 3-6 or which are located
within 800m distance of a tube/r ail station or to wn centre boundar y (ref erred to as Areas f or
Intensification);
2. mixed-use rede velopment of car par ks and lo w-density retail par ks and super markets, provided
it is demonstr ated that the par king is no longer needed;
3. housing intensification on other appropr iate lo w-density sites in commercial, leisure and
infrastructure uses , subject to the repro vision of the non-residential uses if required in
accordance with other Plan policies;
4. the rede velopment of sur plus utilities and pub lic sector o wned sites , subject to conf ormity with
other Plan policies;
5. small sites , in accordance with P olicy 16 Small Sites;
6. enab ling residential on f ormer emplo yment sites only to enab le emplo yment-led intensification,
as required b y policies in the section on ‘Increasing jobs and helping b usinesses to g row’
B.Policy 28 Local char acter and design quality and P olicy 44 Design process require all proposals to
follow a char acter- and design-led approach to site optimisation.  All infill and bac kland de velopment
must reflect the char acter of the surrounding area and protect the amenity and living conditions of
neighbours . In consider ing applications f or infill and bac kland de velopment the f ollowing f actors
should be addressed:
1. Retain plots of sufficient width f or adequate separ ation betw een dw ellings;
2. Retain similar spacing betw een ne w buildings to an y estab lished spacing;
3. Retain appropr iate garden space f or adjacent dw ellings;
4. Respect the local conte xt, in accordance with P olicy 28 Local char acter and design quality;
5. Enhance the street frontage (where applicab le) taking account of local char acter ;
18217  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 186. Incor porate or reflect mater ials and detailing on e xisting dw ellings , in accordance with P olicy
28 Local char acter and design quality;
7. Retain or re-pro vide f eatures impor tant to char acter , appear ance or wildlif e, in accordance with
Policy 42 Trees, Woodland and Landscape;
8. Result in no unacceptab le adv erse impact on neighbours , including loss of pr ivacy to e xisting
homes or gardens , in accordance with P olicy 46 Amenity and Living Conditions;
9. Provide adequate ser vicing, recycling and refuse stor age as w ell as cycle par king;
10. Result in no unacceptab le impact on neighbours in ter ms of visual impact, noise or light from
vehicular access or car par king.
11. Result in no significant loss of garden land, unless in some cases a w ell-designed bac kgarden
development at an intimate scale with appropr iate mitigation such as to impro ve biodiv ersity ,
accords with all the f actors abo ve and there is no identified har m to the local area.
17.66 Infill de velopment is considered as sites
within street frontages including the
development of a gap in an otherwise b uilt-
up frontage .This policy could apply to a
separ ate unit or units or an e xtension to an
existing unit or outb uildings , including upw ard
extensions , and could include side garden
plots . Each site will be assessed as to
whether it is considered suitab le for
development.
17.67 The London Plan e xpects a fundamental
transformation in ho w ne w homes are
delivered.  Infill sites ma y be small-scale .
Further details are set out under P olicy 16
Small Sites , in suppor t of London Plan P olicy
H2 on Small Sites which e xpects boroughs
to pro-activ ely suppor t new homes on small
sites, and the specific nature of proposals on
small sites .The London Plan e xpects
incremental intensification to pla y an
impor tant role in contr ibution to wards the
housing targets f or small sites , and the Areas
for Intensification are mapped under that
policy .
17.68 It is impor tant that infill de velopment
reinforces the char acter of streets b y
reflecting the scale , mass , height, f orm,
fenestr ation and architectur al details of its
neighbours .
17.69 The char acter of streets has often been
weakened b y infilling space betw een
dwellings . In consider ing ne w infill
development, the width of the remaining and
the ne w plot should be similar to thatprevailing in the immediate area and the
estab lished spacing betw een dw ellings ,
building line and height should be maintained.
17.70 Char acter is also deter mined b y mater ials
and architectur al details and these should
reflect e xisting mater ials and predominant
styles , in accordance with P olicy 28 Local
Char acter and Design Quality’, in the Design
Quality SPD , in v arious Conser vation Area
Appraisals , the Urban Design Study 2021 and
the Council's Village Planning Guidance
SPDs .
17.71 The ‘Good Quality Homes f or All Londoners
Guidance’  being prepared b y the Ma yor
(consultation dr aft October 2020) is a suite
of documents that pro vide guidance on
ensur ing land is used in the best w ay to
deliver the r ight quantity of ne w housing, at
the right quality , in the r ight place , embedding
high-quality design at the centre of housing
delivery.
17.72 Land in b uilt-up areas such as pr ivate
residential gardens , parks and allotments are
excluded from the definition of pre viously
developed land in the NPPF and the London
Plan.  Most bac kland de velopment in the
borough in volves loss of garden land. The
NPPF recognises Plans should consider the
case f or setting policies to resist inappropr iate
development of residential gardens and that
the desir ability of maintaining an area’ s
prevailing char acter and setting (including
residential gardens) f orms par t of the
consider ation of making efficient use of land.
183Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18There are direct and indirect v alues of
gardens associated with contr ibuting to local
character , providing saf e and secure amenity
and pla y space , suppor ting biodiv ersity ,
helping to reduce flood r isk and mitigating the
effects of climate change including the heat
island eff ect.
17.73 In the borough, residential gardens are
particular ly valued as par t of an area’ s
prevailing char acter and setting, and f or the
ecological, climate change and gener al
amenity v alue, and are theref ore protected.
In assessing local ecological v alue, the
Council will tak e into account the length and
overall siz e of the gardens and v alue of
adjacent land as larger areas suppor t a wider
range and n umber of species , and that the
integ rity of habitats should not be har med as
set out in P olicy 35 Biodiv ersity and
Geodiv ersity . Gardens are impor tant in
estab lishing the char acter of cer tain par ts of
the borough and this is recognised in the
Urban Design Study 2021, as elements of
townscape that are v alued or where their
decline is a negativ e quality f or examplewhere front gardens are pa ved over.They
are also recognised in the Design Quality
SPD, in v arious Conser vation Area
Appraisals , and the Council's Village Planning
Guidance SPDs . Policy 42 Trees, Woodlands
and Landscape’  recognises the v alue of trees
in the borough, including f or example f or
wildlif e habitats and pro viding shading. They
also contr ibute to reducing surf ace w ater
run-off . Some of these qualities ma y be
measur able, some ma y not be perceiv ed by
the visual appear ance and upk eep of a site .
There could be an oppor tunity through
mitigation to a void a net loss of garden land,
and consider whether the proposal br ings a
net gain in housing units . Overall
consider ation will need to be made on a
case-b y-case basis .These f actors mean that
developments that in volve a significant loss
of garden land will nor mally be unacceptab le.
This is par ticular ly the case while the Council
has an identified future housing land supply ,
as housing deliv ery from bac kgarden
development is not needed to meet the
borough’ s housing target.
Policy 16.  Small Sites
A. The Council will suppor t the deliv ery of the small sites target of 234 ne w homes per ann um in
accordance with London Plan P olicy H2.
B.In accordance with the London Plan, intensification is encour aged on small sites with good pub lic
transpor t accessibility (PT AL 3-6) and on sites within 800m of a tube , rail station or Major or Distr ict
town centre boundar y (as defined in the London Plan).
C.Proposals f or small sites will need to ha ve regard to the e xisting to wnscape char acter , as set out
in the Urban Design Study 2021, with proposals reflecting the b uilding typology and demonstr ating
how the y accord with the broad str ategy f or planning and management set out in the design guidance
for each char acter area.
D.The Council will suppor t proposals f or well-designed ne w homes on small sites (up to 0.25 hectares)
to meet local needs , in accordance with en vironmental, tr anspor t, par king and other rele vant policies ,
see P olicy 15 Infill and Bac kland De velopment.  Proposals on small sites are e xpected to:
1. Demonstr ate a char acter- and design-led approach b y setting out ho w the proposed
development tak es into account the e xisting conte xt, assessing the site and surrounds f or the
sensitivity to change , and ensur ing that design elements reflect the small sites and rele vant
character area design guidance in the Urban Design Study 2021 and accord with P olicy 28
Local char acter and design quality . In par ticular :
a. in areas where the str ategy is to ‘conser ve’, proposals should clear ly address ho w the y
will reflect and where appropr iate, enhance e xisting char acter f eatures through positiv e
change;
18417  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18b.in areas where the str ategy is to ‘enhance’, proposal should clear ly address ho w the y will
contr ibute to restor ing the e xisting char acter ;
c. in areas where the str ategy is to ‘impro ve’, proposals should demonstr ate ho w the y will
impro ve the char acter of the area including an y new features which supplement and
suppor t the e xisting essential char acter of the area;  and/or
d. in areas where the str ategy is to ‘transform’, proposals should demonstr ate ho w the y will
remo ve detr acting f eatures and add ne w elements to change the char acter .
2. Provide high quality living en vironments with good le vels of da ylight, sunlight and pr ivacy
without adv ersely impacting on amenity of adjoining residential occupiers .
3. Ensure a sensitiv e integ ration into the e xisting streetscene , respecting the propor tions and
spaces of and betw een e xisting b uildings that are char acter istic of the locality .
4. Demonstr ate ho w the impact on e xisting infr astructure , such as tr anspor t, health and education,
has been tak en into account.
5. Result in no net loss of e xisting biodiv ersity or significant loss of open space or garden land.
6. Ensure the design, la yout and mater ials respect and respond to the histor ic en vironment and
any rele vant her itage assets , responding positiv ely to the local char acter as identified in the
Urban Design Study and Conser vation Area Appr aisals/Statements .
7. Ensure the scale , height, massing, density , propor tions , form, mater ials and detailing are
appropr iate to the site and its conte xt, while also e xplor ing oppor tunities f or extensions including
additional floors , if in accordance with P olicy 28 Local char acter and design quality and the
design guidance in the Urban Design Study 2021.
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
Areas f or incremental intensification (as set out in the London Plan) to be added to the P olicies Map K ey
with an advisor y to chec k with the Council f or the latest mapping inf ormation. This is to ar ticulate the
spatial e xtent of the area where intensification is encour aged.  It ma y be updated b y changes to pub lic
transpor t accessibility , any changes to tube or r ail stations (if planned) or to the boundar ies of Major or
District to wn centres (which could include changes close to the borough boundar y).
17.74 Small sites f or residential de velopment are
often the most difficult type of residential
development to deliv er, with fr agmented land
ownership and high le vels of o wner
occupation in e xisting residential areas in the
borough. There are often concer ns raised b y
existing local comm unities regarding the
impact of ne w development, such as the
detrimental impact on char acter and amenity
and the cum ulativ e impacts on local
infrastructure , such as tr anspor t, health,
education and other comm unity f acilities .
17.75 However, the London Plan sets a str ategic
priority to increase the r ate of housing
delivery from small sites , particular ly in OuterLondon.  It sets small sites targets f or each
borough, as a component of the o verall
housing target, based on trends in housing
completions on sites of this siz e and the
estimated capacity f or net additional housing
supply from intensification in e xisting
residential areas , taking into account PT AL,
proximity to stations and to wn centres , and
heritage constr aints .  For Richmond, it
expects 2,340 net housing completions on
small sites (belo w 0.25 hectares in siz e) over
the 10 y ear per iod from 2019/20 to 2028/29.
17.76 The supply of large sites fluctuates and in
some y ears completions from large sites ha ve
fallen as lo w as 7%, while in other y ears ha ve
185Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18risen to 70%.  Average net completions on
small sites 2013/14 to 2019/20 ha ve already
been a veraging 176 homes per ann um.The
relativ e contr ibution from large and small sites
in each borough ma y fluctuate across the
target per iod, as recognised in the London
Plan. The London Plan suppor ts boroughs in
using windf all assumptions in their fiv e-year
housing tr ajector ies based on the small sites
targets because , in contr ast with recent
annual trends on small sites , the figures are
considered to better reflect a minim um
baseline f or housing deliv ery given the ne w
policy f ocus on de veloping small sites f or
housing in the London Plan and the pac kage
of measures outlined in the London Housing
Strategy . It is theref ore considered
appropr iate to include a windf all of 234 homes
per ann um from y ears three to fiv e in the fiv e
year housing land supply .17.77 The London Plan e xpects incremental
intensification of e xisting residential areas
within PT ALs 3-6 or within 800m distance of
a station (tube or r ail in the borough or close
to the boundar y) or to wn centre boundar y
(distr ict and major centres in the borough or
those close to the boundar y), to pla y an
impor tant role in contr ibuting to wards the
housing targets f or small sites .This currently
covers appro ximately 54% of the borough
(see Figure 1 belo w).Within these areas
incremental intensification is activ ely
encour aged;  beyond these areas proposals
may still be f ound acceptab le pro vided no
unacceptab le impact(s) are identified when
assessed against policies in this Plan. This
type of intensification can tak e a n umber of
forms, such as:  new build, infill de velopment,
residential con versions , rede velopment or
extension of e xisting b uildings , including
non-residential b uildings and residential
garages , where this results in net additional
housing pro vision.
18617  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Map of the Areas f or Incremental Intensification areas set in the London Plan.  (Note this represents a snapshot at the current
time, as it ma y be updated b y any chang es to transpor t accessibility and centre boundaries within the bor ough and c lose
to boundaries)
17.78 The London Plan e xpects this Plan to
recognise that local char acter e volves over
time. Small sites pro vide the oppor tunity f or
comm unities to g row organically while
maintaining their or iginal char acter or e volving
it incrementally based on a consensual
approach. The Council’ s Urban Design Study
2021 has assessed capacity f or growth
across the borough, consider ing the
sensitivity to change and sim ultaneously the
probability of change , to understand the
potential de velopment capacity of individual
character areas across the borough to both
tall and mid-r ise b uildings and small sites .
The UDS pro vides design guidance f or small
site de velopments concer ning the conte xt,
massing, mater ials, heritage , frontage , and
detailing. This is alongside specific designguidance f or each char acter area, which sets
out the rele vant str ategy , an analysis of
existing f eatures and where there are
oppor tunities to impro ve char acter . In the
borough conte xt, as outlined in the section
‘Protecting what is special and impr oving
our areas’ , with large par ts of the borough
sensitiv e to change , it is vital that small scale
development is sympathetic to the area’ s
valued f eatures and her itage assets . It is
critical that de velopment in e xisting
comm unities on smaller , constr ained sites
near to e xisting dw ellings is the product of
careful design, applying the char acter- and
design-led pr inciples , which adds v alue.
187Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all 17
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1817.79 The Council will consider producing fur ther
supplementar y planning document(s) or
toolkits to inf orm small site design
expectations on residential-led projects , along
with updates to the Design Quality SPD
(2006) and Small and Medium Housing Sites
SPD (2006). The ‘Good Quality Homes f or
All Londoners Guidance’  being prepared b y
the Ma yor (consultation dr aft October 2020)
also pro vides guidance in Module B on
assessing the quality of small sitedevelopment and prepar ing design codes to
increase housing supply from small sites .The
guidance recognises the common small
housing de velopment types of street-f acing
and bac kland conditions associated with
terraces and semi-detached houses , which
produce diff erent design challenges and
oppor tunities .
17.80 All small sites are e xpected to mak e a
contr ibution to aff ordab le housing, in line with
Policy 11 Aff ordab le housing.
18817  Deliv ering ne w homes and an aff ordab le borough f or all
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1818 Shaping and suppor ting our to wn
and local centres as the y adapt to
chang es in the wa y we shop and
respond to the pandemic
Policy 17:  Suppor ting our centres and pr omoting culture (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will suppor t shopping, leisure and culture uses , providing spaces f or businesses and
services and promoting comm unity and cultur al exchange which contr ibutes to the vitality and
viability of our centres , through div ersifying their off er and adapting to meet changing needs . New
development proposals will be suppor ted which:
1. Reflect the centre’ s role and function within the hier archy and is of a scale appropr iate to the
size of the centre and the catchment that it ser ves. Direct major ne w development f or retail,
leisure and b usiness uses to the to wn centres as set out in P olicy 18 De velopment in centres;
2. Suppor t diversification and repur posing of high streets and centres to contr ibute to wards retail,
leisure , business , educational, healthcare , comm unity and cultur al floorspace , encour aging
hubs with clusters of uses that suppor t the centre hier archy to become k ey meeting places
and oppor tunities f or link ed trips, at diff erent times of the da y and night, in accordance with
Policy 1 Living Locally;
3. Protect e xisting retail and commercial uses in our centres , including space that can be
repur posed and adapted to reflect moder n retail and w orkspace needs , in accordance with
Policy 21 Protecting the Local Econom y. Uses that pro vide activ e frontages are required at
ground floor le vel as set out in P olicy 18 De velopment in centres . Residential use will be
suppor ted on upper floors and/or to the rear , provided it does not compromise the ongoing use
of surrounding commercial space;
4. Provide high quality en vironments which promote local distinctiv eness with regard to the
character of an individual centre , respecting her itage and to wnscape char acter . Enhance the
public realm, including with the use of urban g reening and mitigation to address climate change ,
to pro vide a sense of place and destination in our centres . Event spaces , tempor ary uses and
proposals f or ‘meanwhile uses’  of vacant spaces within the centre hier archy will be suppor ted
where it can be demonstr ated that the y can be appropr iately managed and their impact on the
streetscene does not giv e rise to adv erse en vironmental impacts .
5. Enhance the connections betw een uses , impro ving legibility and w ayfinding, and access to
digital infr astructure . Provide oppor tunities f or activ e travel, suppor ting the Health y Streets
Approach, in accordance with P olicy 1 Living Locally;  and
6. Enhance the Cultur al Quar ters in Richmond and Twickenham Town Centres and other e xisting
cultur al clusters in smaller centres , and can demonstr ate suitab le management of adv erse
impacts ar ising from their proposals .
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
The e xisting to wn centre boundar ies and Areas of Mix ed Use will be retained on the P olicies Map to
delineate the centre hier archy.
The Twickenham Area Action Plan boundar y will be remo ved from the P olicies Map .
189Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic 18The centre hierar chy
18.1 The centre hier archy is sho wn belo w:
Delineated b y Name of Centre Type of Centre
Town centre boundar yRichmond (3)
Twickenham
Teddington
East Sheen
WhittonTown Centres
Area of mix ed-use boundar y(4) Barnes (High Street & Church Road)
East Twickenham
Hampton Hill
Hampton Village
Ham P arade
Kew Gardens
St MargaretsLocal centres
Area of mix ed-use boundar y Castelnau
Friars Stile Road
Hampton Wick
Heathside (P owder Mill Lane)
Sheen Road
Kingston Road (T eddington)
Stanle y Road (T eddington)
White Har t Lane (Bar nes/Mor tlake)Neighbourhood centres
Area of mix ed-use boundar y Ashb urnham Road
Fulw ell
Ham Street/Bac k Lane
Hampton Nurser y Lands
Hospital Br idge Road
Kew Green
Kew Road
Lower Mor tlake Road
Nelson Road
St Margarets Road (par ade to the nor th
of A316)
Sandycombe Road (K ew)
Strawberr y Hill
Twickenham Green
Waldeg rave Road
Whitton RoadLocal shopping par ades
Table 18.1 The Centre Hierar chy
3 Richmond is classified as a ‘major centre’  and the remaining 4 to wn centres are classified as ‘distr ict centres’  in
the London Plan’ s town centre netw ork
4 there are a small n umber of centres which do not ha ve an AMU boundar y. In these locations proposals are e xpected
to be located within or near to designated shopping frontages where the major ity of commercial de velopment is
located.
19018  Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemicThe five to wn centres
18.2 The borough’ s five main centres compr ising
the pr incipal centre of Richmond and the f our
district centres of Twickenham, Teddington,
East Sheen and Whitton mak e up the first tier
of the borough’ s centre hier archy.They have
an impor tant role to pla y, providing shops ,
services , emplo yment oppor tunities , housing
and being a f ocus f or comm unity and cultur al
life.
18.3 The policy de velops the approach set out in
the o verall Spatial Str ategy of this Plan b y
steer ing major de velopment into the fiv e town
centres . Richmond to wn centre in par ticular
is where the major ity of commercial
development is e xpected to be f ocused.
Local and neighbourhood centres and parades of
local impor tance
18.4 There are se ven Local centres (Bar nes, East
Twickenham, Hampton Hill, Hampton Village ,
Ham P arade, Kew Gardens and St
Margaret’ s), eight neighbourhood centres
(Castelnau, F riars Stile Road, Hampton Wick,
Heathside (P owder Mill Lane), Sheen Road,
Kingston Road, Stanle y Road and White Har t
Lane) and 15 impor tant local shopping
parades that pro vide local ser vices .
18.5 Local and neighbourhood centres as w ell as
parades of local impor tance pro vide a f ocus
for local comm unities and oppor tunities to
meet, shop , work and spend leisure time .
These ha ve become more impor tant f or their
contr ibution to enab ling Living Locally , and
in response to the CO VID-19 pandemic ha ve
often thr ived, perhaps due to their higher
propor tion of independent, locally based
services , benefitting from people w orking from
home and being restr icted in their
movements .The successful function of the
smaller centres of the borough is of special
impor tance as the benefits f or residents and
local comm unities are significant;  they are
both quantifiab le but can also be more
intangib le. A successful local centre pro vides
goods and ser vices that result in a reduced
need to tr avel, and is easier to access
through activ e travel with a shor t jour ney by
walking or cycling.  It also suppor ts local
business , which in tur n benefits the widercomm unity. Local centres in par ticular can
create or f oster a sense of comm unity and
inclusiv eness that adds to the cohesiv eness
of the surrounding comm unity.
18.6 The siz e and function of these centres v ary
consider ably, ranging from larger local
centres , such as Bar nes and Hampton Hill
with a good r ange of f ood and compar ison
shops , independent and specialist shops ,
comm unity and cultur al facilities , through to
parades with a small n umber of shops
meeting v ery local b ut valued needs .
18.7 The siz e of a proposed de velopment should
reflect the siz e and function of the rele vant
centre (as set out in the tab le abo ve). For
example , a large retail store should not be
added to a small par ade so that it eff ectively
operates as a stand-alone store . Larger
centres (often local centres in the hier archy)
will ha ve a div erse role , in some cases
significant leisure off ers and ha ve, or are
developing, niche roles . Such centres should
be ab le to de velop their cultur al and tour ism
potential or specialist shopping off er.The
Council will seek to suppor t businesses that
are successful and e xpanding.
Adapting our high streets to future retail needs
18.8 Exper ian’s latest e xpenditure projections
recommend relativ ely modest le vels of g rowth
with histor ic trends . In the past the e vidence
base has identified a need f or modest
additional retail floorspace as a whole dr iven
primarily by the borough’ s rising population.
Structur al changes to the retail sector w ere
already underw ay and will ha ve been
acceler ated b y the CO VID-19 pandemic ,
including shifts in customer beha viour and
growth in online shopping, ho wever a
significant contr action in ter ms of commercial
floorspace needs is not e xpected at this
stage .The borough Retail & Leisure Needs
Study 2021 (phase 1) f orecasts that up to
2034, there is a combined o ver-supply of
1,121 sqm g ross of retail, f ood/be verage
floorspace and other non-retail ser vices .
However, by 2039 there is an under-supply
of 5,031 sqm g ross across the board.  In
addition, there is a potential requirement f or
191Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic 18about 4,000 sqm g ross of leisure/cultur al
floorspace b y 2034 and 7,000 sqm g ross b y
2039.
18.9 Together with a borough-wide centre v acancy
rate of 8.2% in designated frontages (T own
Centre Land Use Retail Sur vey 2020), the
priority in the shor t to medium ter m will be
the reoccupation of v acant shop units ,
potentially f or non-retail uses including
food/be verage outlets , leisure , enter tainment
and cultur al uses , which theoretically could
accommodate the need f or all ne w town
centre uses up to 2034.
18.10 There is currently no requirement to allocate
sites f or major retail de velopment.  In the shor t
to medium ter m up to 2034 there is emphasis
on repur posing e xisting floorspace , with the
study finding the e xisting stoc k of premises
can pla y a role in accommodating projected
growth, through v acant proper ties and g rowth
in sales densities (tur nover per square metre).
The borough’ s centres are also e xpected to
play a role in pro viding f or ne w emplo yment
floorspace , including adaptab le workspaces ,
as sets out in the theme ‘Increasing jobs and
helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k
following the pandemic’ .
18.11 In the longer-ter m str uctur al implications are
difficult to predict and quantify at this ear ly
stage , such as the impact on the mix of to wn
centre uses and customer beha viour . Phase
2 of the borough Retail & Leisure Needs
Study will be a detailed quantitativ e and
qualitativ e assessment of the need (including
a new household sur vey) for ne w retail,
leisure and other main to wn centre uses
within the borough, and is due to be
under taken in ear ly 2022 to inf orm the ne xt
draft of this Plan.
18.12 A Richmond P artnership Conf erence in 2021
and a ser ies of vir tual Comm unity
Conversations within each area of the
borough, ha ve suppor ted the Council’ s
approach to unloc k the potential of ourcentres , as becoming destinations be yond
shopping to attr act and retain visitors , as
people centred places are appealing to
pedestr ians, and using digitalisation
creativ ely.To adapt to meet future needs , it
is vital that our centres capitalise on their
locally distinctiv e features , such as the
cultur al and leisure off er and r iverside
settings , to pro vide a sense of place , as set
out in rele vant place-based str ategy in section
5 of this Plan.  In par ticular , Cultur al Quar ters
and clusters are identified in P olicy 18
Development in centres . As w ell as the
provision of goods , services and attr actions ,
the pub lic realm within our centres and
connections betw een uses need to encour age
people to dw ell, with w alkab le en vironments .
This can be achie ved through increased
greening, street fur niture , pub lic ar t, event
and perf ormance spaces including f or
tempor ary and meanwhile uses , as w ell as
infrastructure f or visitors such as pub lic toilets
and w ayfinding.  Spaces should be
repur posed at diff erent times to ser ve both
the da y and night-time economies . As set out
in the place-based str ategies in section 5 of
this Plan, some of these other initiativ es ma y
be under taken by par tners that the Council
works with to suppor t our centres , including
the current Business Impro vement Distr icts
and b usiness associations .
New Permitted De velopment Rights
18.13 The Council has recently made a
non-immediate Ar ticle 4 Direction to remo ve
permitted de velopment r ights f or a change of
use from Class E to residential. This co vers
the e xtent of the borough’ s designated centre
hierarchy, identified f or their contr ibution to
the o verall vitality and viability of our centres
and recognising the impor tance of ha ving
access to local shops and ser vices to enab le
Living Locally . It is the Council’ s intention to
contin ue to enf orce its Ar ticle 4 Direction to
require de velopment in volving the loss of
retail floorspace to go through planning
permission.
19218  Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemicPolicy 18.  Development in centres
A. Development proposals f or town centre , comm unity, healthcare , educational and cultur al uses will
be suppor ted in the borough's designated centres where the y:
1. are in k eeping with the centre's role and function within the hier archy and are of a scale
appropr iate to the siz e of the centre and the catchment it ser ves, in line with P olicy 2 Spatial
Strategy;
2. retain e xisting commercial or comm unity floorspace and incor porate a fle xible design such that
the site could respond to changing mar ket demand and requirements to eff ectively accommodate
appropr iate alter nativ e uses in the future , helping to enhance the long-ter m resilience of the
centre;
3. provide unit(s) of a siz e and f ormat to accommodate to wn centre uses that will be fit f or pur pose
and viab le in the long ter m, including adequate width, la yout, street frontage , access to f acilities
and ser vicing;
4. optimise the potential of the site b y contr ibuting a suitab le use or mix of uses that enhance the
vitality and viability of the centre , particular ly where this div ersifies the centre’ s offer;
5. do not adv ersely impact on the vitality and viability of the centre in which the de velopment is
proposed, or another centre;
6. contr ibute to wards emplo yment floorspace , providing suitab le pro vision f or small b usinesses
or fle xible workspace , where required b y policies in ‘Increasing jobs and helping b usiness
to gr ow and bouncebac k following the pandemic ’;
7. suppor t the Cultur al Quar ters in Richmond and Twickenham to wn centres and other e xisting
clusters of cultur al facilities and creativ e industr ies in our centres , as suppor ted b y Policy 26
Visitor Econom y; and
8. would not result in an o ver-concentr ation of similar uses (such as betting shops , pub lic houses ,
bars and tak e-aways) in an y one area, where this w ould result in an adv erse cum ulativ e impact
on the amenity of nearb y users , including residents , in accordance with P olicy 19 Managing
Impacts .
B.Within our centres , the borough has designated frontages which are par ticular ly impor tant to the
vitality and viability of the centre .  Primary shopping areas , as sho wn b y the K ey and Secondar y
frontages on the P olicies Map and at Appendix 1, are the vibr ant cores of our centres where retail
uses will be protected and promoted, and outside of this area other comm unity and lear ning uses
will be encour aged.  In designated frontages , development proposals should:
1. provide g round floor commercial or comm unity use , to maintain and promote the contin uity of
active frontages at g round floor and / or pro vide a direct ser vice to visiting members of the
public;
2. retain or pro vide a shopfront, or where this is not possib le, provide a ‘shop-lik e’ appear ance ,
to avoid a detr imental visual impact and respect the her itage and char acter of the centre , in
accordance with P olicy 28 Local char acter and design quality and shopfronts guidance;  and
3. integ rate with and add to the ph ysical attr activeness of the area within which it is located,
avoiding b lank w alls and f açades , and contr ibute to a saf e, secure and inclusiv e environment.
C.Major de velopment and/or de velopments which gener al high le vels of tr ips should be located within
a town centre boundar y. Else where de velopment in the Areas of Mix ed Use should accommodate
development ser ving a more localised pro vision, which ma y include oppor tunities f or retail, recreation,
and smaller-scale emplo yment uses . For centres , or par ts of centres where no boundar y exists,
proposals should be w ell-related to designated shopping frontages .
D.Residential uses will be per mitted in centres as f ollows:
193Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic 181. High density mix ed-use de velopment, including residential, will be suppor ted in appropr iate
locations , as identified within Site Allocations and P olicy 45 Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones ,
subject to compliance with P olicy 28 Local Char acter and Design Quality and other policies in
this Plan.
2. conversion to residential of upper floors or the rear of g round floor occupied b y a commercial
or comm unity use will be per mitted, where this can be designed to pro vide a high le vel of
residential amenity without compromising the e xisting or potential oper ation of uses on the
ground floor par ticular ly in the cores of our centres .
E. Where a proposal in volves a change of use not suppor ted b y policy , the Council will require
satisf actor y evidence of full and proper mar keting of the site .The applicant will be e xpected to
under take mar keting in line with the requirements set out in Appendix 2.
F.Proposals outside of designated to wn centres , including e xtensions to e xisting retail and leisure
developments of more than 200sqm g ross, should satisfy the Sequential Test as set out in national
policy and guidance . Out of centre de velopment is not considered appropr iate in line with the London
Plan. When assessing proposals f or de velopment outside of e xisting centres , applicants will ha ve
to comply with the requirements of national policy and guidance in relation to impact assessments .
For retail and leisure de velopments , including e xtensions , of o ver 500sqm g ross, the Council will
require an Impact Assessment. The scope of such assessments will need to be ag reed with the
Council bef ore submitting a planning application.  Applications that f ail the sequential test and/or
where the impact assessment (where required) demonstr ates significant adv erse impact will not be
permitted. Where necessar y and justified, the council will use conditions and/or planning ob ligations
to limit uses consented within Classes E, F1 or F2 in order to achie ve the objectiv es of this policy
and to a void the prolif eration of main to wn centre uses outside of to wn centres .
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
The e xisting k ey and secondar y frontages will be retained on the P olicies Map , and are listed at Appendix
2.
Cultur al Quar ters will be sho wn on the P olicies Map as f ollows:
Richmond:  the area f ocused on the ref erence and lending libr aries, Museum of Richmond, Richmond
Theatre , Orange Tree Theatre , Duk e Street Church, with potential to link with uses in the to wn
centre and along the Riv erside .
Twickenham:  the area f ocused on the Civic Centre , York House and Gardens , the Mar y Wallace
Theatre , Twickenham Museum and Libr ary, with potential to e xtend into the to wn centre and along
the Riv erside .
18.14 This policy b uilds on the approach set out in
the spatial str ategy , and accords with London
Plan P olicies SD6 and SD7, taking a to wn
centre first approach. The types of
development appropr iate in the fiv e town
centres compr ise retail de velopment
(including w arehouse clubs , factor y outlet
centres and mar kets); leisure , enter tainment
facilities the more intensiv e spor t and
recreation uses (including cinemas ,restaur ants, drive-through restaur ants, bars
and pubs , night-clubs , health and fitness
centres , indoor bo wling centres , and bingo
halls);  offices;  and ar ts, culture and tour ism
development (including theatres , museums ,
galler ies and concer t halls , hotels and
conference f acilities).
19418  Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic18.15 Focusing de velopment in the to wn centres
will result in sustainability benefits , including
a reduction in the need to tr avel by car .
Theref ore, major commercial de velopment
should be located within the defined Town
Centre Boundar ies (with the e xception of
retail uses which m ust be in, adjacent or
well-related to designated frontages).
18.16 Several centres are designated wholly or in
part as Conser vation Areas .The place-based
strategies in section 5, and P olicy 45 Tall and
Mid-Rise Building Zones identify where there
is potential f or growth.The Site Allocations
include a n umber of sites within the to wn
centres where there ma y be future
oppor tunities to pro vide commercial, b usiness
and ser vice uses to ser ve the local
comm unity that enab le the centres to g row
and div ersify:
Richmond - Site Allocation 24:
Richmond Station, Richmond, and Site
Allocation 25:  Former House of F raser,
16 Paved Cour t 20 King Street 4 To 8
And 10 P aved Cour t And 75 - 81 George
Street, Richmond.
Twickenham - Site Allocation 15:  Station
Yard, Twickenham , Site Allocation 16:
Twickenham Telephone Exchange , Site
Allocation 17: Twickenham P olice
Station, and Site Allocation 18:
Twickenham Riv erside and Water
Lane/King Street.
East Sheen - Site Allocation 36:
Telephone Exchange and 172-176
Upper Richmond Road West, East
Sheen.
Whitton - Site Allocation 19: Telephone
Exchange , Ashdale Close , Whitton.
Teddington - Site Allocation 6:
Telephone Exchange , Teddington, Site
Allocation 7: Teddington Deliv ery Office ,
Teddington, and Site Allocation 9:
Teddington P olice Station, P ark Road,
Teddington.
Designated fr onta ges
18.17 The designation of frontages seeks to ensure
the vitality and vibr ancy of the to wn centres ,
through the promotion of attr active and
engaging streetscapes , whilst also promoting
a compact retail core .The designated K eyand Secondar y Shopping F rontages are
shown on the P olicies Map and listed in
Appendix 1- List of K ey and Secondar y
Shopping F rontages . Key frontages are
located in the most centr al areas , where retail
already predominates . Secondar y frontages
have been designated in areas that, whilst
not core , still pla y an impor tant suppor ting
role to the retail centre .They suppor t the k ey
frontages and are also areas where some
degree of div ersification w ould be per mitted,
whilst still retaining their pr imarily retail
function.
18.18 The Area of Mix ed Use boundar y delineates
the smaller centres and par ades in the
hierarchy.There are a small n umber of AMUs
which are not in the centre hier archy as their
retail function is limited. These are Mor tlake,
Thames Street (Hampton), Hampton Road
(Twickenham) and Cro wn Road (St
Margarets) AMUs , where rele vant par ts of
the policy apply , to ensure contin ued
commercial and comm unity uses of an
appropr iate scale .
18.19 To ensure their long-ter m sustainability , it is
impor tant that to wn centres and high streets
can adapt to changing consumer demands
and beha viours and the challenges posed b y
online retail.
18.20 There w as a long estab lished policy approach
of limiting the change of use a way from retail.
The Go vernment introduced a significant
change to the Use Classes Order in 2020,
which combined se veral diff erent to wn centre
uses including shops , cafés and restaur ants,
offices , gyms and health centres into one use
class- Class E (commercial, b usiness and
service) uses .There is a Class F f or
comm unity and lear ning uses . Permission is
not required to change betw een an y of the
uses within the ne w Class E. The introduction
of Use Class E, in remo ving the distinction
betw een retail and other non-retail
commercial, b usiness and ser vices uses ,
makes the implementation of this approach
challenging in pr actice;  this policy will apply
where planning per mission is required f or a
change of use . Notwithstanding, the Local
Plan recognises the benefit of maintaining a
concentr ated retail core , and theref ore retains
the frontage designations as the pref erred
195Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic 18locations f or shops within g round floor units ,
encour aging retail de velopment to locate
within these .
18.21 Class E includes such a broad r ange of uses
that could ha ve significant detr imental
impacts on to wn centres vitality , vibrancy and
viability especially f or shops , leisure and
services . It is theref ore appropr iate to require
impact assessments to assess and mitigate
potential impacts where appropr iate.The
thresholds set out in the policy reflect the type
of gener ally small scale retail applications
that come f orward in the borough.
18.22 Where necessar y and justified, the Council
will use conditions and/or planning ob ligations
to limit uses consented within Class E in order
to achie ve the objectiv es of this policy , to
meet the scale and type of de velopment
needed and maintain the function of the
primary shopping areas , in line with the NPPF
and PPG to ensure the vitality of our to wn
centres .
18.23 The Council’ s policy approach b uilds on the
Use Class changes to enab le flexibility within
the to wn centres whilst contin uing to maintain
a predominance of compar ison and
convenience shopping uses abo ve all other
town centre uses to ensure the contin ued
vitality and viability . It is also considered vital
in meeting the pr inciples of “living locally”  by
contin uing to promote local oppor tunities f or
shops and ser vices within 400 metres of most
people’ s homes .
Diver sifying our centres
18.24 It is recognised f or our centres to contin ue to
thrive, there is a need f or div ersification and
adaptation, including to ne w inno vative forms
of retailing, accommodating ne w space where
there is identified demand and managing ne w
development and the tr ansition of an y sur plus
retail floorspace to other uses , such as
cultur al and b usiness .The Council suppor ts
the enhancement of quality leisure and
cultur al uses that contr ibute to activities
during the da y and night and appropr iately
manage the impacts of such uses , in
accordance with P olicy 19 Managing impacts .18.25 The spaces within and around our centres
can ha ve an impor tant pub lic function, with
high streets , pub lic squares , parks, gardens
and other open spaces pro viding
oppor tunities f or people to meet and socialise .
When consider ing the quality of place , key
factors to be considered are design of
shopfronts , accessibility regardless of ability
and saf e places .The Council will w ork with
partners to promote a quality urban realm b y
promoting a Health y Streets approach in
developments , as set out in P olicy 1 Living
Locally .
18.26 The borough has a r ich cultur al off er, linked
with its her itage assets and oppor tunities f or
leisure and recreation, pro viding f or residents
and visitors , and attr acting tour ists.The
Council’ s Culture Richmond 2021 to 2031
sets out the vision f or an inno vative and
sustainab le cultur al offer, with our ar ts, library,
parks, spor t and fitness ser vices more closely
aligned to broader culture pr iorities. Man y
venues and f acilities identified in the
place-based str ategies in section 5 of this
Plan, and on the London Cultur al
Infrastructure Map . London’ s Arcadia
including K ew Gardens , parks, histor ic
buildings and landscapes betw een Hampton
Cour t and K ew along the Riv er Thames are
referred to in par agraph 7.5.12 in the London
Plan.
18.27 The London Plan P olicy HC5 sets out that
development plans should identify and
promote ne w, or enhance e xisting,
locally-distinct clusters of cultur al facilities ,
venues and related uses defined as Cultur al
Quar ters, especially where the y can pro vide
an anchor f or town centre rene wal, and
identify , protect, and enhance str ategic
clusters of cultur al attr actions . Although
dispersed across the borough, there are
clusters of e xisting f acilities in the to wn
centres . In par ticular , Richmond and
Twickenham ha ve been identified in this Plan
as Cultur al Quar ters, and other centres ha ve
existing clusters of cultur al facilities and
creativ e industr ies.These create an attr active
and vibr ant area f or residents , workers and
visitors , as w ell as reflecting the local
character and distinctiv eness of our places .
There is the potential to g row this cultur al and
comm unity off er, to help with div ersifying our
19618  Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemiccentres , and f or our centres to act as
gateways and hubs connecting places
through activ e travel – to wn centres ma y be
the point where visitors arr ive at a station and
can then access other cultur al attr actions
through w alking or cycling or r iver transpor t.
18.28 Whilst residential uses can contr ibute to the
overall vitality of a centre , housing on the
ground floor contr ibutes less to vitality than
most commercial or comm unity uses .
Theref ore, commercial or comm unity uses
will be e xpected to front the street. There is
a growing trend to con vert the rear of
premises to residential use .Where
conversion is acceptab le, the access to an y
residential unit should be from the front r ather
than the rear where pr acticab le. Any
residential proposed will need to address the
requirements of other policies in the Plan
including P olicy 13 Housing Mix and
Standards , Policy 46 Amenity and living
conditions .
18.29 Residential de velopment contr ibutes to the
overall health of centres and to meeting the
Borough’ s housing target.  London Plan P olicySD6 par t D sets out the suitability of to wn
centres to accommodate a div erse r ange of
housing, including smaller households , Build
to Rent, older people’ s housing, if in
accordance with P olicy 12 Housing Needs of
Different Groups .There is scope to increase
housing stoc k in the centres , such as through
increased densities or introducing housing in
upper floors , provided that this does not lead
to an unacceptab le loss of commercial or
comm unity space , and that the commercial
or comm unity uses on the g round floor remain
of a viab le siz e, with adequate f acilities and
servicing.
18.30 Phase 2 of the borough Retail & Leisure
Needs Study , a detailed quantitativ e and
qualitativ e assessment of the need (including
a new household sur vey) for ne w retail,
leisure and other main to wn centre uses
within the borough, will be under taken in ear ly
2022 to inf orm the ne xt draft of this Plan. This
will also include an assessment of a viab le
typology f or small commercial premises
suitab le for future small to wn centre uses .
Policy 19.  Mana ging impacts
A. The Council will suppor t proposals which contr ibute to cultur al and creativ e activities dur ing the da y
and at night-time to stim ulate vibr ancy and viability and promote div ersity in our centres , and
managing the impacts b y ensur ing:
1. New proposals and e xtensions to e xisting uses should be of a type and siz e appropr iate to
their location, the hours of use proposed, the nature and char acter of the area;  and
2. Where there are proposals f or ne w residential proper ties and the y are located in close pro ximity
to estab lished or planned uses with late night licences , the proposed residential use will need
to demonstr ate that it is capab le of mitigating its impact, on estab lished uses and future
occupiers .
B.Proposals f or evening and f ood and dr ink uses should be accompanied b y a management plan,
including mitigation measures f or an y negativ e impacts of these uses . Impacts such as noise and
light pollution on local wildlif e and biodiv ersity should be considered through appropr iate location,
design and scheduling.  Applications f or food and dr ink uses where home deliv ery of food is proposed
should include a Deliv ery and Ser vicing Plan to enab le assessment of impacts .
C.The use of outdoor areas including garden areas , rooftops , forecour ts and pa vements in association
with f ood and dr ink uses will be suppor ted only where:
197Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic 181. this w ould not cause unacceptab le har m to the amenity of adjoining residential proper ty and
the area gener ally, taking into account the siz e and type of the proposal, the hours of use
proposed and the nature and char acter of the area;  and
2. in the case of pa vements , the width of the f ootw ay is adequate to allo w this without obstr ucting
pedestr ian flo w, and the use is arr anged so as not to be a hazard to people with disabilities
and older people and f amilies with small children. This ma y require a suitab le means of
enclosure or boundar y to demarcate the e xtent of the use . Stopping up of pub lic highw ay to
provide pr ivate outdoor seating areas will be resisted, especially in to wn centres .
D.Over-concentr ation of uses
1. The Council will resist proposals that result in an o ver-concentr ation of similar uses (such as
betting shops , pub lic houses , bars and tak e-aways) in an y one area and/or that w ould result
in an adv erse impact on the amenity of nearb y users as w ell as surrounding residential areas .
This includes , but is not limited to , these frontages and/or areas subject to specific restr ictions
for pub lic houses and dr inking estab lishments and hot f ood tak eaways:
a. 112-196 (Ev en) High Street, Teddington
b.Richmond Riv erside - Thameside , south from Richmond Br idge as f ar as Buccleugh
Gardens
c. 1 - 59 (Odd) and 2-40 (Ev en) York Street, Twickenham
d. 1 - 65 (Odd) and 2-50 (Ev en) London Road, Twickenham
e.148 - 182 (Ev en) 191 - 213 (Odd) Upper Richmond Road West, East Sheen
2. Proposals f or fast food tak eaways will be refused within 400m of a school as set out in P olicy
51 Health and Wellbeing.
18.31 Food and dr ink uses include caf es and
restaur ants, pub lic houses , wine bars ,
drinking estab lishments and hot f ood
takeaways. Evening econom y uses can
include f ood and dr ink uses , night clubs , live
music and/or dance v enues and other
enter tainment activities . Overconcentr ation
of similar uses can ha ve a negativ e effect on
amenity and the gener al en vironment,
including par king, congestion and saf ety,
and/or aff ect the vitality and function of a
centre .The London Plan encour ages
boroughs to consider appropr iate
management str ategies and mitigation
measures .
18.32 The fle xibility introduced b y Go vernment
through Use Class E (commercial, b usiness
and ser vice uses) allo w for man y changes of
use to occur without the need f or planning
permission.  However, some specific uses are
classed as Sui Gener is, including theatres ,
pubs and bars , hot f ood tak eaways, cinemas ,
live music v enues, and nightclubs which willrequire planning per mission f or ne w uses or
to change to another use . In addition,
changes of use to Class E will need to be
assessed f or the r ange of potential uses
within that class .Food and dr ink uses include
cafes and restaur ants, pub lic houses , wine
bars, drinking estab lishments and hot f ood
takeaways. Evening econom y uses can
include f ood and dr ink uses , night clubs , live
music and/or dance v enues and other
enter tainment activities . Overconcentr ation
of similar uses can ha ve a negativ e effect on
amenity and the gener al en vironment,
including par king, congestion and saf ety,
and/or aff ect the vitality and function of a
centre .The London Plan encour ages
boroughs to consider appropr iate
management str ategies and mitigation
measures .
18.33 During the CO VID-19 pandemic , the
Government also introduced tempor ary
measures to boost high streets and
hospitality , which included fle xibility to
19818  Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemicencour age use of outdoor spaces , provision
of outdoor mar kets and use of outdoor pub lic
spaces , the pro vision of mo veable str uctures
within the cur tilage of a pub , café, restaur ant,
or histor ic visitor attr action. The Go vernment
is consider ing making some tempor ary
freedoms per manent.
18.34 Where necessar y and justified, the Council
will use conditions and/or planning ob ligations
to limit uses consented within Class E in order
to achie ve the objectiv es of this policy , to
manage the impact of f ood and dr ink uses on
amenity and the centre , and to a void the
prolif eration of main to wn centre uses outside
of town centres , in line with the NPPF and
PPG to ensure assessment of impact on the
vitality and viability of to wn centres .
18.35 The London Plan’ s Town Centre Netw ork
recognises Richmond’ s Night-time Econom y
as NT2, an area of regional/sub-regional
significance , with Twickenham and
Teddington classed as of more than local
significance (NT3).  As set out abo ve in P olicy
18 De velopment in Centres the f ocus is on
suppor ting div ersity in our to wn and local
centres , and directing de velopment at an
appropr iate scale in line with the borough’ s
centre hier archy.The place-based str ategies
set out the vision f or each area in the
borough, including the oppor tunities to
diversify the cultur al off er, impro ve the pub lic
realm and positiv ely pro vide “spill-out”  from
restaur ants, cafés and pubs f or al-fresco
dining where it will enhance the vitality and
viability of centres , providing the impacts can
be managed.
Over -concentration of uses and amenity impacts
18.36 The impacts of f ood, dr ink and enter tainment
uses on the surrounding area need to be
carefully managed as such the main location
for food and dr ink and enter tainment uses
will be the main to wn centres . As such, too
many similar uses and concentr ations can
have a negativ e effect on amenity and/or the
vitality and function of centres .These impacts
will also be f elt more strongly within smaller
commercial areas , given their role and
function, as w ell as the concentr ation of uses
in pro ximity .18.37 Such uses can sometimes cause prob lems
to nearb y residents and b usinesses because
of noise , fumes , traffic and other
disturbances , especially at night. The Council
will theref ore seek to control the siz e and
location of such premises , particular ly where
there is residential accommodation adjacent,
close to , or abo ve premises . In addition, these
amenity prob lems are e xagger ated when
groups of these f acilities are located close
together and their cum ulativ e and combined
impact becomes significant.  However, there
are oppor tunities with ne w development to
include measures to manage potential
amenity impacts f or example through natur al
surveillance and inclusiv e access , and
provide an enhanced mix of uses that will
contr ibute to our centres becoming vibr ant
places at diff erent times of the da y.
18.38 The Council’ s Licensing policy ma y also be
taken into account, in par ticular the
Cum ulativ e Impact P olicy. A revised Dr aft
Licencing P olicy 2021-2026 w as consulted
upon in 2021, which proposed there is still
the e vidence to contin ue with the cum ulativ e
impact z ones in Richmond and Twickenham,
for all types of licence .The highest
concentr ations of licensed premises lie within
Richmond and Twickenham commercial
centres , the ne xt most concentr ated area is
then East Sheen. The policy approach also
considers violence with injur y (non-domestic),
assaults and anti-social beha viour repor ted
to the police , along with alcohol-related
ambulance callouts and f or assault, combined
with complaints related to licensed premises
and Trading Standards test purchases .
18.39 Where appropr iate, conditions and legal
agreements will be applied to protect amenity ,
such as conditions to control the hours of
opening, or cr ime pre vention and saf ety
measures .
Agent of Chang e
18.40 Proposals f or late licences will be assessed
under the ‘agent of change’  principle , if a to wn
centre use is in place bef ore a residential
development, as the ‘agent of change’, the
residential de velopment is responsib le for
mitigating against potential impacts of the use
for existing and future occupiers , with regards
199Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic 18to the consider ation of issues such as noise
within the premises , smells , light pollution and
the impact of those going to and from the
facility , such as tr affic, car par king and
anti-social beha viour .
Extensions to e xisting uses
18.41 This policy applies to significant e xtensions
of floorspace as w ell as changes of use
applications , whether an e xtension is
considered significant will depend upon thetotal amount proposed and the propor tionate
increase in floorspace compared to the siz e
of the e xisting unit.
Fast food takea ways
18.42 The Council will refuse ne w fast food
takeaways within 400 metres of the
boundar ies of a pr imary or secondar y school,
as set out in P olicy 51 Health and Wellbeing
and reflecting London Plan P olicy E9. The
map within P olicy ’51 Health and Wellbeing
shows the e xtent of this restr iction (as of
September 2021).
Policy 20.  Local shops and ser vices
Local shops and ser vices
A. The Council will suppor t and protect the role of local centres and local shops and ser vices in meeting
the da y to da y needs of comm unities , as set out in P olicy 1 Living Locally . Activ e frontage uses ,
and par ticular ly retail uses , will be encour aged and protected.
B.Applications f or planning per mission that w ould result in the loss of essential goods and ser vices
will not be per mitted, unless:
1. local residentials w ould still ha ve a reasonab le range and choice of essential goods and ser vices
within a 400m w alking distance;  and
2. The e xisting use is inappropr iate in ter ms of access or amenity and living conditions
3. it has been demonstr ated that there is no demand f or the use through the submission of
satisf actor y mar keting e vidence in accordance with Appendix 2;  and/or
4. the proposed use w ould pro vide a social or comm unity ser vice or function which outw eighs
the loss of the f acility , meeting e vidence of a local need.
C.The pro vision of ne w shopping and ser vices ma y be appropr iate, including as par t of ne w residential
or residential-led de velopment, where the scale of the pro vision is justified and appropr iate to meet
a local need, and it can be demonstr ated through a sequential test that the proposal w ould not har m
the vitality and viability of the borough’ s centre hier archy.
D.Where planning per mission is g ranted, conditions ma y be used in order to control the type of goods
sold or activity per mitted, including b y restr icting to a specific use .
Public houses
E. The Council will resist the loss of pub lic houses . Public houses and bars of histor ic or architectur al
interest and/or comm unity v alue will be protected from demolition and/or change of use , in accordance
with London Plan P olicy HC7.  Before accepting the loss of an y pub lic house the Council requires
satisf actor y evidence of full and proper mar keting nor mally f or at least 2 y ears f or a full r ange of
appropr iate uses (see P olicy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure). The applicant will be e xpected
to under take mar keting in line with the requirements set out in Appendix 2.
20018  Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemicLocal Shops and Ser vices
18.43 Shops and ser vices are especially impor tant
to elder ly or less mobile shoppers , those with
young children, those without cars and are
also useful to all others f or their top-up and
emergency shopping. There is good co verage
across the borough in ter ms of f ood shopping
provision, with most par ts of the borough
within w alking distance (400m) from
designated frontages or par ades , but there
are centres which are par ticular ly impor tant
in meeting local needs .The Council will
suppor t such pro vision to contin ue to pro vide
a vital function f or meeting the da y to da y
needs of surrounding comm unities and help
avoid unnecessar y trips b y car .The
COVID-19 pandemic when nor mal supply
chains w ere stretched and tr avel was limited
further highlighted the impor tance of local
shops and ser vices , and the emphasis on this
Plan is on living locally so that essential
shops and ser vices can be accessed within
a 20 min ute w alk or cycle . Proposals that
would result in the loss of these f acilities will
theref ore be required to demonstr ate that
there is no longer an y demand f or them
through a per iod of rob ust mar keting. Local
Shops and Ser vices
18.44 It is noted that changes of use betw een uses
within Class E of the Use Classes Order do
not require planning per mission, which limits
the scope of this policy’ s application. Where
planning per mission is required the Council
may impose conditions to restr ict fur ther
change of use in the future , for example , to
uses that could compromise the viability and
vitality of the borough’ s centres . Other uses
falling outside of Class E, such as comm unity
halls or a pub or dr inking estab lishment, ma y
also pro vide enhanced amenities f or the local
comm unity, and changes to these uses ma y
be suppor ted, where the scale of the
provision is justified and appropr iate to meet
a local need, and it can be demonstr ated
through a sequential test that the proposalwould not har m the vitality and viability of the
borough’ s centre hier archy, and subject to
appropr iate mitigation of an y negativ e
amenity impacts (e .g. noise disturbance from
a pub or dr inking estab lishment).
Public houses
18.45 Changes to the Use Classes Order mean
public houses are no w a Sui Gener is use .
Public houses pla y an impor tant role and
social function in the local comm unity, and
they add to the local char acter of an area,
and can often be b uildings of histor ical or
architectur al interest.  Man y pubs pro vide a
hub f or social inter action, culture identity ,
heritage and char acter of an area. Theref ore,
the Council will resist the loss of pub lic
houses . In the suppor ting te xt to London Plan
Policy HC7, there is guidance on the broad
range of char acter istics that will be tak en into
account in assessing whether a pub has
heritage , cultur al, economic or social v alue.
The listing of a pub as an Asset of Comm unity
Value will also be a mater ial planning
consider ation.
18.46 When assessing a proposal f or the change
of use from a pub lic house , the Council will
take into account the f ollowing:
whether there is another pub within 400
metres;
whether the use is inappropr iate in ter ms
of access or amenity or living conditions;
and
whether the proposed ne w use w ould
provide a social or comm unity ser vice
or function which outw eighs the loss of
the facility , meeting e vidence of a local
need. The cr iteria of P olicy LP 49 Social
and Comm unity Infr astructure will be
applied when assessing the loss of a
pub.
18.47 Applicants should also ha ve regard to the
Campaign f or Real Ale’ s (CAMRA) Pub lic
House Viability Test.
201Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic 1820218  Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local centres as the y adapt to changes in the
way we shop and respond to the pandemic19 Increasing jobs and helping
business to gr ow and bouncebac k
following the pandemic
Policy 21.  Protecting the Local Econom y (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will seek to retain and attr act in vestment from e xisting and emerging sectors to suppor t
the e xisting b usiness base and create a div erse and enter prising local econom y. New development
proposals will be suppor ted which:
1. Protect e xisting emplo yment floorspace f or office and industr ial use , with a no net loss approach.
Take an emplo yment-led approach to an y rede velopment to meet local economic needs through
intensification of the e xisting emplo yment floorspace .
2. Direct major ne w emplo yment de velopment to the designated K ey Business Areas and Locally
Impor tant Industr ial Land and Business P arks and to the to wn centres , as identified on the
Policies Map . Other emplo yment floorspace of an appropr iate scale ma y be located else where .
3. Any major ne w development should e xplore the oppor tunity to create g round floor industr ial
provision to address local needs , particular ly in to wn centres and other locations with high
accessibility (PT ALs 3-6).
4. Provide a r ange of commercial unit types , that are fle xible and adaptab le to changing needs ,
suitab le for subdivision and configur ation f or ne w economic uses and activities f or a r ange of
occupiers;
5. Ensure there is a supply of aff ordab le workspace that is w ell-designed, fle xible and adaptab le,
to suppor t small and medium siz ed enter prises in the borough, as identified in P olicy 25
Affordab le, flexible and managed w orkspace;  and
6. Strengthen the pathw ays through education and lear ning into jobs and careers f or residents ,
suppor ting emplo yment and tr aining skills to maximise local emplo yment oppor tunities , as
identified in P olicy 50 Education and Training.
19.1 Richmond borough has been relativ ely
resilient to the economic pressures of recent
years ho wever, whilst emplo yment capacity
has impro ved in ter ms of jobs , there ha ve
been significant losses in emplo yment land
and premises despite strong restr aint policies .
The contin ued loss of office stoc k and
industr ial land from the borough at past r ates
is unsustainab le.The policy approach in this
Plan theref ore pro vides stronger protection
against the loss of e xisting office floorspace
and industr ial land, encour ages its rene wal
and moder nisation, and seeks additional
provision, which is vital in ter ms of local
economic and en vironmental sustainability
objectiv es to create and maintain a
sustainab le econom y.This approach is
suppor ted b y the Borough Emplo yment Land
& Premises Needs Assessment Study 2021.19.2 We want to mo ve towards creating a more
self-sustaining borough, where education,
training and job oppor tunities are a vailab le
and all residents ha ve access to those
oppor tunities and other ser vices without the
need to tr avel far, or which are accessib le by
sustainab le forms of tr anspor t.Theref ore, it
is impor tant that emplo yment land is retained
close to residential areas to pro vide a choice
of emplo yment oppor tunities within the
borough no w and in the future .
19.3 The Council is required to plan positiv ely for
emplo yment land b y pro viding suppor t for
existing and ne w emplo yment sectors .This
policy seeks to protect e xisting emplo yment
land within our designated emplo yment areas .
In the borough conte xt it is common f or
emplo yment to be within mix ed use areas ,
because of histor ic development patter ns,
203Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
19resulting in it being dispersed across the
borough in a fr agmented w ay. However, this
does not pro vide justification f or a change of
use, as mitigation can address impacts and
constr aints such as narro w access , which
have been managed b y existing occupiers ,
and theref ore do not pre vent an y future or
contin ued emplo yment use .This is also
suppor ted b y the Agent of Change pr inciple
set out in the London Plan P olicy D13 and
Policy 53 Local En vironmental impacts . In
addition, changes to w ays of w orking,
servicing and deliv ery do mean the w ays
businesses oper ate are changing. The policy
approach is to mak e efficient use of land b y
encour aging emplo yment-led intensification.
Changing w ork styles
19.4 Structur al changes in the w ay offices are
viewed in man y growth sectors as places f or
interaction and collabor ation, r ather than
places to go and w ork at a fix ed desk has
resulted in a r ise in agile w orking pr actices
such as w orking from home , hot desking, and
shared w orkspace models – all of which
enab le the more efficient use of space .This
trend w as par ticular ly pre valent dur ing the
pandemic and ma y contin ue. As such, this
may reduce the e xtent to which ne w jobs
need additional dedicated office floorspace ,
however the long-ter m impacts remain
uncer tain and there is a need to plan f or
economic reco very. In Richmond the
evidence base highlights that the lac k of
sufficient emplo yment floorspace pro vision
is a constr aint on the future emplo yment and
business g rowth in the borough, b ut in
recognition of w ork trends , it is f elt that
significant jobs g rowth could be deliv ered
through the refurbishment and upg rading of
outdated stoc k, to better f acilitate such
working pr actices . A ne w gener ation of
industr ial and w orkshop style pro vision could
also meet future industr ial needs b ut also
work for office uses , and be used fle xibly as
businesses g row and adapt.
19.5 Proposals f or intensification and re-pur posing
of existing emplo yment land should consider
the location and its char acter , and siteproposals should be w ell designed, readily
availab le and adaptab le to meet changing
business needs and should ha ve regard to
operational requirements (including ser vicing)
and mitigate impacts on the tr anspor t netw ork
where necessar y.
New Permitted De velopment Rights
19.6 The Council has recently made a
non-immediate Ar ticle 4 Direction to remo ve
permitted de velopment r ights f or a change of
use from Class E to residential. This co vers
both designated emplo yment locations f or
offices and industr ial land and non-
designated emplo yment land and premises ,
identified f or their contr ibution to the o verall
emplo yment land.  It is the Council’ s intention
to contin ue to enf orce its Ar ticle 4 Direction
to require de velopment in volving the loss of
emplo yment floorspace to go through
planning per mission.
Affordable, Flexible Workspace
19.7 Richmond is an enter prising borough;  with
one fifth of the w orking age population
self-emplo yed and more b usinesses sur viving
three y ears compared to else where in
London.  Overall, the borough has been
relativ ely resilient to the economic pressures
of recent y ears;  however, there are some
economic challenges , particular ly as a result
of limited land a vailability f or emplo yment
purposes , and a shor tage of office space
across the borough leads to increases in
rental v alues and costs f or local b usinesses .
The promotion of fle xible and aff ordab le
workspaces allo ws us to respond to changing
business needs and create rob ust,
future-proof ed places , including successful
town centres and the promotion of local
supply chains and local emplo yment hubs
which suppor t the spatial str ategy and the
living locally concept. The Council will suppor t
provision of small units to accommodate a
variety of local b usinesses and small fir ms at
existing emplo yment locations and to pro vide
the oppor tunity f or residents to set up their
own enter prise, enab ling them to w ork closer
to home .
20419  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemicPolicy 22.  Promoting jobs and our local econom y
A. Proposals f or emplo yment floorspace should suppor t suitab le workspace f or the borough’ s locally
significant and div erse sectors , in accordance with London Plan P olicy E8, including those of
particular impor tance to the borough’ s local econom y:
1. flexible workspace hubs including co-w orking space and ser viced offices in the borough’ s
suburban to wn centre locations;
2. space to accommodate small and micro fir ms, for star t-up, incubation and acceler ator with
corresponding b usiness suppor t;
3. media and creativ e industr ies;
4. scientific research and labor atory space;
5. theatre , tele vision and film studio capacity;
6. river-related and r iver-dependent industr ies;
7. and oppor tunities to de velop the lo w carbon and en vironmental goods and ser vices sector and
suppor t the local circular econom y.
B.Proposals m ust pro vide oppor tunities f or local emplo yment and tr aining, as required b y Policy 50
Education and Training par t B.
C.Proposals f or the pro vision or re-pro vision of economic uses m ust pro vide f or a high standard of
workspace which reflects local economic needs and is of a design that enab les use b y a variety of
different occupiers including:
1. Adequate floor-to-ceiling heights which are sufficient f or the oper ation of the intended use as
well as the pro vision of ser ving requirements such as v entilation, heating, lighting, electr icity
and cab ling;
2. Adequate doorw ay and corr idor widths are pro vided together with clear and fle xible floor plates
with f ew suppor ting columns , to allo w for ease of mo vement and f acilitate the efficient use of
the floorspace;
3. Level thresholds and inclusiv e access throughout the b uilding;
4. Adequate ser vicing and loading f acilities , including access ba ys and ser vice y ards, and goods
lifts for multi-stor y developments , as appropr iate;
5. Adequate f acilities that promote cycle usage , including w orkspace sho wers, changing rooms ,
and loc kers, propor tionate to the scale of the de velopment and quantity of cycle par king required
(see P olicy 48 Vehicular P arking standards , Cycle P arking, Ser vicing and Constr uction Logistics
Management);
6. Natur al light and v entilation. Windo wless and basement economic floorspace will be resisted,
unless consider ations specific to the use pre vent this;
7. Good telecomm unications connectivity , including broadband connections and mobile connectivity
(see P olicy 27 Telecomm unications and digital infr astructure).
D.The design and la yout of the de velopment m ust ensure that the proposed uses can successfully
co-exist with surrounding uses , having regard to the amenity of adjacent occupiers and the oper ational
requirements of e xisting and future b usinesses , ensur ing that an y potential conflicts will be adequately
mitigated.
19.8 The borough is home to nationally impor tant
scientific institutions such as The Ro yal
Botanic Gardens , the National Ph ysical
Labor atory (NPL) and head office of theLabor atory of the Go vernment Chemist
(LGC), as w ell as academic institutions such
as St Mar y's Univ ersity . As such, scientific ,
innovation and research, pro vision of
205Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
19incubator units and labor atories will be
suppor ted as w ell as other uses impor tant to
the local econom y, such as education, spor ts
and leisure , arts, culture , enter tainment,
creativ e, histor ic and r iver related uses that
add to the o verall economic div ersity of the
borough. Various leisure , cultur al and histor ic
sites including Hampton Cour t Palace and
Marb le Hill House , the Riv er Thames and its
tributaries, and Richmond P ark and Bush y
Park offer oppor tunities f or economic spin
offs as w ell as contr ibuting to suppor ting a
high quality and unique en vironment.
19.9 Proposals should capitalise on locational
advantages related to cluster ing, compatibility
with the wider area and the pro vision of
appropr iate infr astructure . Clusters are
impor tant f or local economies and pro vide
diverse emplo yment oppor tunities f or local
residents , and br ing kno wledge , competition
and suppor t to b usinesses . London Plan
Policy E9 encour ages collabor ation betw een
businesses , higher education pro viders and
other rele vant research and inno vation
organisations . Oppor tunities f or tempor ary
meanwhile or pop up uses to suppor t the local
econom y will be suppor ted.The benefits of
meanwhile use also include shor t-term
affordab le accommodation f or SMEs and
individuals , gener ating a shor t-term source
of revenue for the local econom y and can
attract longer-ter m business in vestment.The
borough is home to nationally impor tant
scientific institutions such as The Ro yal
Botanic Gardens , the National Ph ysical
Labor atory (NPL) and head office of the
Labor atory of the Go vernment Chemist
(LGC), as w ell as academic institutions such
as St Mar y's Univ ersity . As such, scientific ,
innovation and research, pro vision of
incubator units and labor atories will be
suppor ted as w ell as other uses impor tant to
the local econom y, such as education, spor ts
and leisure , arts, culture , enter tainment,
creativ e, histor ic and r iver related uses that
add to the o verall economic div ersity of the
borough. Various leisure , cultur al and histor ic
sites including Hampton Cour t Palace and
Marb le Hill House , the Riv er Thames and its
tributaries, and Richmond P ark and Bush yPark offer oppor tunities f or economic spin
offs as w ell as contr ibuting to suppor ting a
high quality and unique en vironment.
19.10 Richmond has a slightly larger share of small
and especially micro fir ms compared to
London as a whole and a g reater n umber of
home w orkers.The Borough accommodates
several large research institutions b ut there
is no complimentar y local off er for smaller
firms oper ating in the same sector .
19.11 Recent e vidence suggests possib le growth
options f or Richmond in the media and
creativ e and scientific research industr ies and
identifies a demand f or creativ e workshops
and small-scale R&D incubator or co-locating
space as gaps in the w orkspace mar ket which
operators w ould be k een to e xplore .These
would benefit from a r ange of unit types , such
as identified in the suppor ting te xt to P olicy
25 Aff ordab le, flexible and managed
workspace .
19.12 The promotion of fle xible workspaces allo ws
us to respond to changing b usiness needs
and create places , including successful to wn
centres and the promotion of local supply
chain and local emplo yment hubs , which suit
the par ticular needs of Richmond which is
dominated b y small b usinesses .
19.13 A sustainab le borough is one that has a large
range of local emplo yment oppor tunities f or
its residents and where all residents ha ve
access to those oppor tunities and other
services without the need to tr avel far, or
which are accessib le by sustainab le forms of
transpor t, as set out in P olicy 1 Living Locally .
Theref ore, it is impor tant that emplo yment
land is retained close to residential areas to
provide a choice of emplo yment oppor tunities
within the borough no w and in the future to
help to maintain Richmond upon Thames as
a borough where both economic and social
wellbeing is high. There ma y be an
oppor tunity to g row the local econom y in
terms of ne w technologies and the g reen
econom y, that will contr ibute to the circular
econom y and mitigating the impacts of
climate change .
20619  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemic19.14 Any proposal that includes ne w economic
floorspace m ust ensure that the design of the
development is suitab le for moder n business
needs and could pro vide space f or a broad
range of potential occupants with minimal
intervention to the f abric of the b uilding. This
can impro ve the quality of b usinesses that
will be attr acted and the jobs that will becreated.  Full fit-out of the premises be yond
shell and core will be encour aged in order to
ensure that ne w development is fit f or
purpose , does not remain v acant f or extended
periods, and pro vides floorspace to meet the
needs of b usinesses without incurr ing
avoidab le dela ys.
Policy 23.  Offices
Retention of offices
A. There is a presumption against the loss of office floorspace in all par ts of the borough.  Proposals
which result in a net loss of office floorspace will be refused.  Any rede velopment proposals are
required to contr ibute to a net increase in office floorspace . Any refurbishment of e xisting office
floorspace should impro ve the quality , flexibility and adaptability of office space of diff erent siz es
(for micro , small, medium-siz ed and larger enter prises) as set out in London Plan P olicy E1.
New offices
B.The Council will suppor t appropr iate ne w office de velopment b y the f ollowing means:
1. Major ne w office de velopment should be directed within the fiv e town centres
2. Smaller scale office de velopment should be in suitab le locations , particular ly within the
designated K ey Business Areas as identified on the P olicies Map;
3. Design of office floorspace should enab le flexible occupation and moder n methods of w orking
such as co-w orking space , with appropr iate ser vicing and deliv ery; and 
4. The Council will require the pro vision of aff ordab le workspace within all major de velopments
with o ver 1,000sqm of emplo yment floorspace proposed (g ross) in accordance with P olicy 25
Affordab le, flexible and managed w orkspace .
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
The e xisting K ey Office Areas will be renamed as K ey Business Areas and retained on the P olicies Map .
The f ollowing updates will be made:
- 38-42 Hampton Road will be remo ved as there is no e xisting office use .
19.15 The Borough Emplo yment Land & Premises
Needs Assessment Study 2021 identifies f or
the forecast per iod as 2019-39 a shor tfall of
over 100,000 sqm of office floorspace , and
the Local Plan should seek to accommodate
an additional minim um of 130 jobs per ann um
and a minim um quantum of 40,000 sqm
recognising that this will be challenging and
aspir ational, whilst ac knowledging the GLA‘s higher g rowth forecasts . Exper ian has
attributed this to lo w population g rowth in
Richmond, out-comm uting and w orkplace
wages and concludes aside from constr aints
on labour supply , the lac k of land and
proper ty has constr ained job creation in the
past and so this poor perf ormance is reflected
in future f orecasts .
207Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
1919.16 London Plan P olicy E1 suppor ts div erse office
markets in outer London and increases in the
current stoc k of offices in locations such as
existing b usiness par ks and to wn centre
locations with locally-or iented pro vision to
meet local needs . It also goes on to state that
existing viab le office floorspace capacity in
locations outside these areas should be
retained.
19.17 Given the need f or office floorspace identified
within the borough Emplo yment Land &
Premises Needs Assessment 2021, the policy
approach to protecting e xisting office stoc k
will apply where planning per mission is
required f or a change of use , or to e xtensions
and ne w development.  London Plan P olicy
E1 suppor ts div erse office mar kets in outer
London and increases in the current stoc k of
offices in locations such as e xisting b usiness
parks and to wn centre locations with
locally-or iented pro vision to meet local needs .
It also goes on to state that e xisting viab le
office floorspace capacity in locations outside
these areas should be retained.
19.18 The Council will apply the abo ve policy to
consider the loss of office use , for
applications seeking a change of use or
redevelopment that requires planning
permission (such as to Class F or Class C),
if a b uilding has been in an office use (as
evidenced in the Town Centre Land Use
Survey, business r ates or other a vailab le
evidence).
19.19 Where a proposal in volves a change of use
not suppor ted b y policy , the Council will
require satisf actor y mar keting e vidence . An
application is e xpected to set out wh y it is not
suitab le for contin ued commercial, b usiness
or ser vice uses , and the site should be
marketed both f or its e xisting office use and
alternativ e emplo yment gener ating uses
including as fle xible, star t-up or co-w orking
space . Prices should be based on the local
office mar ket and on the e xisting quality of
the accommodation.  A full and proper
marketing e xercise can be submitted in
accordance with the mar keting requirements
in Appendix 2.  Such e vidence will be a
mater ial consider ation, ho wever pro vision of
marketing in itself does not justify an
exception to policy .Article 4 Directions
19.20 Offices are no w within Use Class E, r ather
than the f ormer B1(a), to meet go vernment
objectiv es of increasing fle xibility f or a wider
range of uses . It is recognised that this could
potentially compromise the ability of the
Council to protect e xisting office space in line
with this policy , as w ell as with the
requirements of par agraphs 80 and 81 of the
NPPF . Changes of use within Class E are
not considered to be de velopment and
theref ore do not require planning per mission.
19.21 The fle xibility of Class E should impro ve the
prospects of finding an alter nativ e
emplo yment gener ating use when commercial
units become v acant. Where necessar y and
justified, the Council will use conditions and/or
planning ob ligations to limit uses consented
within Classes E to (g)(i) or (g)(ii) in order to
achie ve the objectiv es of this policy and in
line with the NPPF and accompan ying PPG
to suppor t economic g rowth and to mitigate
the impacts of de velopment giv en the r ange
of uses that need to be fully assessed.
19.22 In March 2021 go vernment pub lished
legislation in England to introduce a ne w and
much broader per mitted de velopment r ight
(PDR), Class MA which came into eff ect on
1 August 2021 f or the change of use of
proper ties in the Commercial, Business and
Service use class (Class E) to residential,
subject to a r ange of conditions and
limitations . Under the tr ansitional
arrangements , where there are e xisting
Article 4 Directions relating to office to
residential PDR (Class O), these will remain
effective until 31 J uly 2022.
19.23 Until 31 J uly 2022, 36 locations in the
borough contin ue to benefit from e xisting
Article 4 Directions that remo ve the PDR to
change use from office to residential. They
will not be aff ected b y the ne w PDR until the
provision of a tr ansitional per iod ha ve lapsed
at the end of J uly 2022. The e xisting Ar ticle
4 Directions include the K ey Business Areas
and the main fiv e town centres of Richmond,
Twickenham, Teddington, Whitton and East
Sheen.
20819  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemic19.24 A non – immediate Ar ticle 4 Direction w as
made on 30 J uly 2021 to protect 67 locations
within the borough, subject to appro val by the
Secretar y of State , which will come into f orce
on 31 J uly 2022. The Ar ticle 4 Direction is
limited to those offices that mak e the most
valuab le contr ibution to the emplo yment
floorspace needs of the borough and, which
have been designated as K ey Business
Areas .
19.25 It is the Council’ s intention to contin ue to
enforce its Ar ticle 4 Direction to require
development in volving the loss of office
floorspace in K ey Business Areas to go
through planning per mission. This approach
accords with London Plan P olicy E1 par t F,
which suppor ts Article 4 Directions f or viab le
strategic and local office clusters such as in
town centres and other viab le business
locations .
19.26 The K ey Business Areas are set out belo w:
19.27 Hampton:
Kings way Business P ark, Hampton
Castle Business Village , Station Road
and Mount Me ws, High Street, Hampton
19.28 Hampton Wick:
High Street and Lo wer Teddington
Road, Hampton Wick
19.29 Hampton Hill:
Hampton Hill Business P ark, Hampton
Hill
Northern par t of High Street, Hampton
Hill
19.30 Teddington:
Teddington centre and Waldeg rave
Road
National Ph ysical Labor atory,
Teddington
127-133 High Street, and 1 & 2A
Cambr idge Road, Teddington
180 High Street, Teddington
43-67 Broad Street, Teddington
90-120 Church Road, Teddington19.31 Twickenham:
Twickenham centre (par t)
Bridge House , Twickenham
Hampton Road, Twickenham
5-11 Br iar Road, Twickenham
West Twickenham, south of Riv er Cr ane
St George's Industr ial Estate ,
Twickenham
19.32 East Twickenham and St Margarets:
417-435 Richmond Road, East
Twickenham
St George's House , 76 Cro wn Road, St
Margarets
Old Lodge Place , St Margarets
19.33 Richmond:
Richmond centre
Petersham Road, Richmond
Brook House and Sandal House ,
Richmond
Sheen Road, Richmond
72-84 Lo wer Mor tlake Road, Richmond
Falstaff House and St George's House ,
Bardolph Road, Richmond
London House , 243-253 Lo wer Mor tlake
Road, Richmond
19.34 Kew:
The National Archiv es, Ruskin A venue,
Kew
Blake Me ws, Station A venue, Kew
19.35 East Sheen and Mor tlake:
Sheen Lane (par t), Upper Richmond
Road West (par t), East Sheen
Mortlake High Street, Mor tlake
Tideway Yard and The Old P ower
Station, Mor tlake
19.36 Barnes:
Prospect Studios , Bar nes High Street,
Barnes
42-46 Glentham Road, Bar nes
19.37 Additional office floorspace pro vision remains
a priority in our to wn centres .The changes
to the Use Classes Order increase fle xibility
209Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
19for offices to f orm par t of the r ange of uses
within to wn centres , and additional office
space will be suppor ted, including through
the repur posing of e xisting commercial
floorspace , across the centre hier archy as
they are the f ocus of commercial activity .With
the CO VID-19 pandemic and economic
recovery, it can be e xpected that there will
be a contin ued need f or local
offices/w orkspace . Companies ma y choose
to ha ve more local and smaller offices , closer
to where people liv e, to reduce comm utes -
a multi-site solution, promoting more resilient
workplaces .
19.38 Richmond to wn is the borough’ s main office
market and the borough Emplo yment Land
& Premises Needs Assessment 2021
recommends it is the pr ime location, with bothdemand and viability , to focus and pr ioritise
additional office g rowth. London Plan P olicy
SD7 requires boroughs to assess the need
for main to wn centre uses , taking into account
capacity and f orecast future need. The
London Plan’ s town centre netw ork also
identifies Richmond as a centre with
speculativ e/mix ed-use office potential,
Twickenham with mix ed-use office potential,
and f or Teddington and East Sheen to protect
small office capacity where there is demand
for existing office functions , gener ally within
smaller units .This ma y result in pr ioritising
the borough’ s town centres as agile
workspace locations and help with high street
revitalisation, as set out in the section
‘Shaping and suppor ting our to wn and local
centres as the y adapt to changes in the w ay
we shop and respond to the pandemic’.
Policy 24.  Industrial land
Retention of industrial space
A. There is a presumption against loss of industr ial land in all par ts of the borough.  Proposals which
result in a net loss of industr ial land will be refused.  Any rede velopment proposals are required to
contr ibute to a net increase in industr ial floorspace . Any refurbishment of e xisting industr ial floorspace
should include tr aditional f ormats along with w orkspace f or light industr ial, through intensification
as set out in London Plan P olicy E7 par t A.
B.The Council will require the pro vision of aff ordab le light industr ial workspace within all major
developments , over 1,000sqm of emplo yment floorspace proposed (g ross), in accordance with
Policy 25 Aff ordab le, flexible and managed w orkspace .
New industrial space
C.The Council will suppor t appropr iate ne w industr ial space b y the f ollowing means:
1. Major ne w development proposals f or industr ial space should be directed to wards the identified
Locally Impor tant Industr ial Land and Business P arks as identified on the P olicies Map;
2. It can be demonstr ated that ne w proposals w ould not adv ersely impact on the contin ued
operation of other estab lished emplo yment uses within that site or on neighbor ing sites;
3. New industr ial space is fle xible and adaptab le for diff erent types of activities and suitab le to
meet the requirements of local b usinesses;  and
4. Extensions to e xisting emplo yment uses are of an appropr iate scale in k eeping with the
surrounding area, role and function.
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
The e xisting Locally Impor tant Industr ial Land and Business P arks will be retained on the P olicies Map .
21019  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemic19.39 Industr ial land is defined as land used f or
industr ial and w arehouse uses (E (g) (iii), B2
and B8) within Richmond borough.  Land
which does not f all within these use classes
but is considered to contr ibute to the reser voir
of industr ial land in the borough, f or example
uses which suppor t, contr ibute to , or could
be dr awn upon to meet the demand f or
industr ial land, will also be protected in line
with the policy .
19.40 The Council has designated Locally Impor tant
Industr ial Land and Business P arks in
accordance with the requirements of London
Plan P olicy E7 to identify Locally significant
Industr ial Sites (LSIS) which are recognised
for their impor tance locally in pro viding job
oppor tunities and meeting local b usiness
needs . In the borough these are of par ticular
impor tance f or warehousing, distr ibution,
storage and other industr ial emplo yment as
well as locally impor tant creativ e industr ies
and other k ey emplo yment f acilities :
Kempton Gate Business P ark, Oldfield
Road, Hampton
Kings way Business P ark, Oldfield Road,
Hampton
St Clare Business P ark, Holly Road,
Hampton
74 Oldfield Road, Hampton
50-56 Waldeg rave Road, Teddington
National Ph ysical Labor atory and LGC
Ltd, Hampton Road, Teddington
Teddington Business P ark, Station
Road, Teddington
West Twickenham cluster (including
Gregg’ s Bak ery and surroundings),
Twickenham
Heathlands Industr ial Estate ,
Twickenham
St George's Industr ial Estate , The
Green, Twickenham
Mere way Road Industr ial Estate ,
Twickenham
Swan Island Industr ial Estate ,
Strawberr y Vale, Twickenham
Electroline House and surrounds ,
Twickenham
St Margarets Business Centre ,
Winchester Road, St Margarets
Twickenham Film Studios , St Margarets
Market Road, Richmond
Sandycombe Centre , Sandycombe
Road, K ew
Marlborough Trading Estate , Mor tlake
Road, K ew
Mill F arm Business P ark, Whitton
Big Yellow Self Stor age, Lower Mor tlake
Road, Richmond
Big Yellow Self Stor age, Lower
Richmond Road, Richmond
Currie Easy Self Stor age, Mar ket Road,
Richmond
19.41 The Emplo yment Land & Premises Needs
Assessment 2021 identifies a minim um (net
additional) requirement f or 60,000sqm, or
15ha of industr ial land f or the f orecast per iod
2019-39 and notes that v acancy r ates are
now 0.5%, w ell belo w the London a verage
for industr ial land, which is cr itical f or the
borough as this means w e do not ha ve
availab le capacity f or future industr ial
demand.
19.42 Richmond has contin ued to lose industr ial
stock – with the Valuation Office Agency
(VOA) recording a total stoc k of 163,000 sqm
in 2015 f alling to 156,000 in 2020. The
Borough is increasingly reliant on industr ial
and logistics space outside the Borough to
service its population, which will ha ve a
negativ e impact on tr affic and associated
congestion and air quality , and does not
accord with the concept set out in P olicy 1
Living Locally and a thr iving local econom y
which minimises tr avel.The GLA Job g rowth
projections 2016, estimated the requirement
for 0.5ha per ann um of industr ial land, to
accommodate 100 industr ial jobs per ann um,
over the per iod 2016 to 2041, which identifies
the need f or 60,000 sqm net additional space
for industr ial uses .
19.43 The policy approach to protecting e xisting
industr ial stoc k will apply where planning
permission is required f or a change of use ,
or to e xtensions and ne w development.
19.44 Where a proposal in volves a change of use
not suppor ted b y policy , the Council will
require satisf actor y mar keting e vidence . An
application is e xpected to set out wh y it is not
suitab le for contin ued commercial, b usiness
211Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
19or ser vice uses , and the site should be
marketed both f or its e xisting industr ial use
and alter nativ e emplo yment gener ating uses
including as fle xible, star t-up or co-w orking
space . Prices should be based on the local
industr ial mar ket and on the e xisting quality
of the accommodation.  A full and proper
marketing e xercise can be submitted in
accordance with the mar keting requirements
in Appendix 2.  Such e vidence will be a
mater ial consider ation, ho wever pro vision of
marketing in itself does not justify an
exception to policy .
Light industrial w orkspaces
19.45 The Council will protect emplo yment uses
within the identified k ey industr ial land
locations and across the borough as it is
impor tant to retain a div erse r ange of diff erent
types and siz es of industr ial spaces across
the borough.  Land in industr ial use including
local ser vice tr ades such as b uilders’  yards
or car repair gar ages pro vide useful ser vices
to residents and other b usinesses in the
borough as w ell as a source of local
emplo yment oppor tunities . Small fir ms such
as these and star t-up b usinesses require
cheaper accommodation and small incubator
units b ut often find it difficult to acquire
suitab le aff ordab le premises as the higher
value of land f or other uses creates pressure
for rede velopment f or higher quality and
priced accommodation.  A truly eff ective
approach to aff ordab le workspace deliv ery
will need to consider all of the f actors
affecting aff ordability of space (not just rent)
to ensure that a r ange of spaces are a vailable
and aff ordab le to target b usinesses .
19.46 The e vidence sets out the need to deliv er a
net increase in industr ial floorspace with
ground floor pr iority to more tr aditional
formats of space (high ceiling heights and
direct loading) with upper floors used f or
workspace and light industr ial (with goods lift)
specified space with adequate v ehicle
servicing space .While a case could be made
for small-scale enab ling residential to enab leemplo yment-led intensification, there should
not be repro vision in f avour of office
emplo yment space , as economic floorspace
should be directed to meet the identified
economic needs .Where necessar y and
justified, the Council will use conditions and/or
planning ob ligations to limit uses consented
within Classes E to (g)(ii) or (g)(iii) in order to
achie ve the objectiv es of this policy and in
line with the NPPF and accompan ying PPG
to suppor t economic g rowth and to mitigate
the impacts of de velopment giv en the r ange
of uses that need to be fully assessed.
Article 4 Direction
19.47 The f ormer B1(c) use class (light industr ial)
is no w incor porated within the m uch wider
Use Class E, and changes of use within Class
E can occur without the need f or a planning
application.  In March 2021 Go vernment
published legislation in England to introduce
a new and m uch broader per mitted
development r ight (PDR), Class MA which
came into eff ect on 1 A ugust 2021 f or the
change of use of proper ties in the
Commercial, Business and Ser vice use class
(Class E) to residential, subject to a r ange of
conditions and limitations .
19.48 A non – immediate Ar ticle 4 Direction w as
made on 30 J uly 2021 to protect 67 locations
within the borough, subject to appro val by the
Secretar y of State , which will come into f orce
on 31 J uly 2022. The Ar ticle 4 Direction is
limited to those industr ial sites that mak e the
most v aluab le contr ibution to the emplo yment
floorspace needs of the borough and, which
have been designated as Locally Impor tant
Industr ial Land and Business P arks.
19.49 It is the Council’ s intention to contin ue to
enforce its Ar ticle 4 Direction to require
development in volving the loss of light
industr ial floorspace in Locally Impor tant
Industr ial Land and Business P arks to go
through planning per mission. This approach
accords with London Plan P olicy E4 par t G,
which suppor ts Ar ticle 4 Directions to retain
sufficient industr ial and logistics capacity .
21219  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemicPolicy 25.  Affordable, flexible and mana ged w orkspace
A. Existing aff ordab le workspace will be protected. The rede velopment of e xisting aff ordab le, flexible
and managed w orkspace m ust re-pro vide the maxim um viab le quantum of such emplo yment
floorspace in per petuity , at equiv alent rents (taking into account ser vice charges).
B.In accordance with London Plan P olicy E3, the Council will require the pro vision of aff ordab le
workspace through:
1. Suppor ting the pro vision of aff ordab le space as par t of mix ed-use schemes , where f easib le,
in town centres , that can be used f or remote w orking and star t-up space;
2. Secur ing the pro vision of aff ordab le workspace in commercial de velopments that is fle xible,
suitab le for subdivision and configur ation f or ne w uses and activities , including f or occupation
by small or independent commercial enter prises;
3. Secur ing pro vision in per petuity or as appropr iate through the appointment of managed
workspace pro viders where ne w business space is pro vided, b y condition and/or a Planning
Obligation;  and
4. Requir ing the pro vision of aff ordab le workspace within major de velopments with o ver 1000sqm
of emplo yment floorspace proposed (g ross), to be secured through planning ob ligations .
19.50 Richmond has a significant local econom y,
with a high propor tion of small b usinesses
serving local residents and other local
businesses . Provision of aff ordab le, flexible
and managed w orkspace is necessar y to
suppor t small and ne w businesses including
those oper ating on a not-f or-profit basis .The
redevelopment and intensification of the
borough’ s emplo yment sites can off er
oppor tunities f or the pro vision of aff ordab le
workspace as par t of mix ed-use schemes .
Affordable workspace
19.51 London Plan policy E3 defines “affordab le
workspace”  as w orkspace that is pro vided at
rents maintained belo w the mar ket rate for
that space f or a specific social, cultur al, or
economic de velopment pur pose . It can be
provided and/or managed directly b y a
dedicated w orkspace pro vider , a pub lic,
private, char itable or other suppor ting body;
through g rant and management
arrangements;  and/or secured in per petuity
or for a per iod of at least 15 y ears b y planning
or other ag reements .
19.52 It is impor tant to note that the increasing
focus of the Richmond Borough’ s econom y
lies within activities that are set to dr ive
growth of the London econom y such asactivities that cut across creativ e endea vour,
digital technology , softw are, product and
content design and small batch production
and prof essional ser vices . Creativ e industr ies
are an area of specialisation f or the borough’ s
econom y.Within this sector the borough
stands out in a n umber of activities:  softw are
consultancy , architectur al and engineer ing
activities , and adv ertising.  Retail in
specialised stores is also significant as are
publishing activities , reproduction of video
and sound recording and computer media.
19.53 The Borough’ s econom y is char acter ised b y
the large propor tion of micro-b usiness units
both, as a result of b usinesses emplo ying
<10 emplo yees and of the large propor tion
of self-emplo yed residents .The current split
by business siz e across the borough identifies
that most b usinesses f alls within the SMEs
categor y.There are 13,535 b usinesses in
Richmond of which 93.1% emplo y fewer than
10 people .This propor tion of micro
businesses is slightly higher than the London
average of 90.8%, with 14.6% of Richmond’ s
population being self-emplo yed, which is
slightly higher than the London a verage of
11.1%.
213Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
1919.54 The limited a vailability of stoc k in Richmond
has hindered the g rowth aspir ations of the
workspace mar ket.The Emplo yment Land &
Premises Needs Assessment 2021 has f ound
that there are f ew existing pro viders of
workspace in the borough and that these tend
to be clustered around Teddington and
Richmond to wn centres .Within the e xisting
provision, most w orkspaces off er the f ormat
of sub-divided office proper ty and co-w orking
space targeted at prof essional and b usiness
services sectors – these ma y pro vide fle xible
terms and other f eatures that appeal to small
firms b ut are still essentially offices .They are
located in ser viced office b uildings lik e
Spaces Teddington, or within institutional
buildings lik e The Br idge Workspace
operating out of Richmond and Hillcroft Adult
Comm unity College . Although based on
limited data, it w as found that the rent le vels
for co-w orking spaces in the borough w ere
quite high, as can be the case with ser viced
offices , with le vels more equiv alent to
co-w orking mar kets on the fr inge of centr al
London, than those of the outer boroughs .
The result of this ma y be that there is a
segment of users who are pr iced out of this
market in the borough.
19.55 What has been f ound to be missing from the
current stoc k is pro vision f or firms and sectors
that cannot oper ate in the tr aditional office
and co-w orking spaces .This includes a lac k
of aff ordab le, flexible ‘studio w orkroom’  units
and g round floor light industr ial and larger
industr ial units f or creativ es, local mak ers and
film-related industr ies. Demand has been
identified f or a g reater div ersity of w orkspaces
beyond the standard office f ormat to suppor t
a range of sectors across b usiness stages .
19.56 The f ollowing pr iority sectors f or the borough
have been identified in the e vidence:
Suppor t micro b usinesses and small
businesses through the pro vision of
flexible office spaces that can
accommodate small teams (micro-small
businesses), to g row-on premises , and
expand to a sizab le business within
2-3-5 y ears. Appropr iate proper ty
typologies include office units/co-w orking
space and light industr ial
studio/w orkroom space .
Suppor t for the borough’ s creativ e and
media sector , which is a strong sector
in nearb y boroughs , but lac king a supply
of space in this borough.  Emplo yment
space needs to be of v arying siz e,
adaptab le and with a mix of ceiling
heights , offering both g round floor and
upper floors , with some spaces suitab le
for accommodating and ser vicing
production/light industr ial activities .
Appropr iate proper ty typologies include
SME office units/co-w orking space , light
industr ial studio/w orkroom space and
light industr ial units .
Suppor t small scale scientific , inno vation
and research space with a pro vision of
incubator units and labor atories.While
the borough accommodates a n umber
of large univ ersities and research
institutions , there is no complementar y
local off er for smaller fir ms oper ating in
the same sector .The creation of
innovation hubs and R&D incubators
can off er oppor tunities f or co-location.
Flexible and mana ged w orkspace
19.57 The Ma yor of London identifies ‘open
workspaces’  as ha ving aff ordab le rents ,
flexible ter ms and shared f acilities .They allo w
entrepreneurs , creativ es and small
businesses to g row, netw ork and flour ish.
These w orkspaces can be designed and
managed to suppor t SMEs and will v ary
depending on the end occupier or sector b ut
must be desir able and suppor t typologies that
allow for shared f acilities and/or lo w-cost or
managed w orkspaces , ensur ing that the y can
cater f or a r ange of b usiness needs . Often
these include w orkspace with fle xible and/or
low-cost rental ter ms, co-w orking spaces ,
incubator spaces , acceler ator spaces ,
creativ e/artist spaces and mak erspaces .
Shared f acilities could help create
workspaces which are more space efficient
and more viab le as costs can be shared
which will promote the collectiv e and efficient
use of resources .
19.58 Managed w orkspaces off er benefits
gener ated b y the cluster ing of a n umber and
range of b usinesses in one location, as w ell
as the oppor tunity to incor porate suppor t
features that benefit small and ne w
21419  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemicbusinesses . Features of managed
workspaces can v ary depending on the
provider and sector , but can include b usiness
suppor t, netw orking oppor tunities , access to
financial suppor t, shared spaces and f acilities ,
flexible rent and leasing arr angements and
flexible layouts that can be modified as
businesses g row.Where managed
workspace is being proposed, the details will
be secured through a Workspace
Management Plan. The Council will e xpect
that a managed w orkspace pro vider should
be identified at the application stage in order
to ensure that it is deliv erable, and there
should be a long-ter m commitment to
maintaining the managed w orkspace
provision in the de velopment.  If an applicant
proposes to manage the w orkspace
themselv es, they will need to demonstr ate
how this pro vision will meet the requirements
of the policy through the Workspace
Management Plan.
Affordable workspace within major de velopments
19.59 The Council will require the pro vision of
affordab le workspace within major
developments , where o ver 1,000sqm of
emplo yment floorspace is proposed.
Affordab le workspace should constitute at
least 10% of the proposed emplo yment
floorspace within major mix ed-use schemes
and commercial schemes and the w orkspace
must remain aff ordab le for a minim um of 15
years. Affordab le workspace is considered
to ha ve a rent and ser vice charge of less than
80% of compar able local mar ket rates,
however mar ket rates will v ary according toa range of f actors such as location within the
borough, the quality and type of stoc k. As
part of a proposal, there will need to be an
assessment of local e vidence relating to the
specific location of the proposal and its target
market, with a f ocus on rents or charges
which are accessib le for ear ly-stage
businesses , and justifies the discount that is
proposed.
19.60 A Workspace Management Plan will be
required to set out the details of ho w the
affordab le workspace pro vision will meet the
requirements of the policy .This will be
secured through a Section 106 ag reement in
line with the guidance in the Council's
Planning Ob ligations SPD .
Off-site pr ovision of aff ordable workspace
19.61 New affordab le workspace should nor mally
be pro vided on-site .This is to ensure that the
workspace is pro vided in a r ange of locations
across the borough, including those higher
value areas where cer tain occupiers ma y
struggle to find suitab le, affordab le premises .
Only in e xceptional circumstances , where it
can be demonstr ated rob ustly that this is not
appropr iate or f easib le to do so , the Council
will consider whether there are alter nativ e
interventions that achie ve equiv alent or higher
value and impact through an off-site
contr ibution. This ma y be through a financial
contr ibution to wards e xisting and/or ne w
similar f acilities nearb y that is considered to
directly mitigate the impact of the
development and theref ore meet the tests f or
a Section 106 contr ibution.
Policy 26. Visitor econom y
A. The Council will suppor t the sustainab le growth of the visitor econom y for the benefit of the local
area b y:
1. suppor ting proposals which promote and enhance the borough's e xisting tour ist attr actions ,
including the unique , histor ic and cultur al assets that are connected via the Riv er Thames ,
such as The Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew, Ham House and Hampton Cour t Palace;
2. proposals that lead to increased visitors and tour ists need to be of an appropr iate scale f or the
size of the centre and will be assessed against the tr anspor t policies of this Plan;
3. requir ing accommodation and f acilities to be accessib le to all;  either 10% of hotel bedrooms
should be wheelchair accessib le or 15% of ne w bedrooms to be accessib le rooms as set out
in London Plan P olicy E10;
215Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
194. enhancing the en vironment in areas leading to , within and around visitor destinations where
appropr iate;
5. suppor ting the Cultur al Quar ters in Richmond and Twickenham and other e xisting clusters of
cultur al facilities and creativ e industr ies, particular ly in to wn centres , and where ancillar y facilities
are proposed that are open f or pub lic use (such as restaur ants, gyms and conf erence f acilities).
B.In relation to visitor accommodation:
1. proposals which result in the loss of bedspaces will be resisted;
2. proposals which increase the n umber of bedspaces will be suppor ted subject to other Local
Plan policies;
3. proposals will be suppor ted which contr ibute to wards pro viding a r ange of visitor accommodation,
including small independent hotels and bed and breakf ast accommodation, or shor t-term
accommodation with sta ys not e xceeding 90 da ys, subject to other Local Plan policies .
19.62 The Council recognises the v alue of the
visitor econom y both to the local and London
econom y.The CO VID-19 pandemic has
impacted on tr avel, par ticular ly overseas
visitors , and uncer tainty has aff ected the
sector , however in the shor t-term there has
been g rowth in a stronger sta ycation mar ket,
with the Ma yor’s reco very plans including a
‘Let’s Do London’  campaign in 2021. There
could be a fle xible approach to enab le
tempor ary uses in e xceptional circumstances ,
however the protection of the e xisting stoc k
of visitor accommodation is considered vital
given the borough’ s rich visitor and cultur al
infrastructure .The Council’ s vision f or our
arts, libraries, parks and spor t and fitness
services set out in Culture Richmond 2021 –
2031  aims to suppor t the g rowth of culture
and creativity in the borough, while adapting
to be resilient.
19.63 The borough is a popular destination f or
visitors to tr aditional attr actions such as the
histor ic houses and gardens , the Riv er
Thames as w ell as the r ugby-related
attractions and associated f acilities such as
restaur ants and shops . Parts of both
Richmond and Twickenham to wn centres
have existing cultur al areas with clusters of
existing uses , defined as Cultur al Quar ters
in the theme ‘Shaping and suppor ting our
town and local centres’  that can be a f ocus
for impro ving the off er to visitors , bringing
oppor tunities to stim ulate vibr ancy and
viability and promote div ersity , through link ed
trips and pro viding additional pub lic uses (withaccess secured through a legal ag reement)
that f orm a destination as w ell as pro viding
local job oppor tunities .The London Plan sets
out that the div ersity of cultur al infr astructure
in all par ts of London should be conser ved,
enhanced and promoted, in P olicies E10 and
HC5. The Council will e xpect the major
attractions including Twickenham Stadium
and the Stoop (Har lequins) to be de veloped
in accordance with the Site Allocations set
out in this plan.
19.64 The Council will encour age the pro vision of
accommodation to enab le visitors to sta y
longer and spend more . Major ne w hotel
development will be e xpected to be located
within to wn centres in the first instance as in
Policy 18 De velopment in Centres , which also
sets out guidance on the appropr iate location
and scale of hotel de velopment.  London Plan
Policy E1 seeks an additional 58,000
bedrooms of ser viced accommodation b y
2041, with boroughs in outer London
expected to plan proactiv ely for ne w
accommodation and the Londonwide
evidence base reflects boroughs tak e a share
of the London supply projection. Theref ore,
proposals which increase the n umber of
bedspaces will be suppor ted, subject to other
Local Plan policies , where the y contr ibute to
meeting the London Plan target.
19.65 The London Plan also requires visitor
infrastructure to contr ibute to impro ving the
availability of accessib le ser viced
accommodation, as vital to ensure that as
21619  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemicmany visitors as possib le can sta y in London
and e xperience its visitor attr actions and
business off er. London Plan P olicy E10 has
a policy requirement which allo ws de velopers
to select betw een tw o options based on which
best fits the scale of de velopment proposed.
These requirements aim to recognise the
need not only f or standard wheelchair
accessib le rooms , but also rooms suitab le for
people with amb ulant mobility impair ments
or older people who could benefit from
additional access f eatures , as w ell as rooms
suitab le for people who require assistance or
who require a carer .
19.66 In deter mining applications f or hotel
development the Council will be mindful of
the impact of the de velopment on amenity ,
living conditions , parking, ser vicing and
transpor t. It will be tak en into account whether
any ancillar y facilities within the hotel, such
as a gym, are open f or pub lic use .
19.67 The Council will w ork with its par tners to
promote the borough as a tour ist destination.
It is also recognised that major e vents heldwithin the borough attr act very large n umbers
of people , and the Council will contin ue to
work with par tners , including pub lic transpor t
operators and e vent organisers , to promote
sustainab le travel choices and minimise
disruption to residents and local b usinesses
where possib le.
19.68 In addition, proposals will be assessed in the
conte xt of maximising housing deliv ery,
including aff ordab le housing.  In existing
residential areas , there will need to be
consider ation whether a proposal f or visitor
accommodation w ould compromise capacity
to meet the need f or con ventional dw ellings .
As set out under P olicy 14 Loss of Housing,
short-term holida y rented accommodation
can be beneficial in pro viding f or shor t-stays
in sustainab le locations , such as to wn centres
and areas better ser ved by pub lic transpor t,
however using f or more than 90 da ys a y ear
will be resisted where there is a detr imental
impact on the e xisting housing stoc k.
Policy 27. Telecomm unications and digital infrastructure (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will promote the enhanced connectivity of the borough through suppor ting infr astructure
for high speed broadband and telecomm unications including ne xt gener ation technology such as
5G and full fibre broadband connections . New development is e xpected to pro vide f or full fibre and
mobile connectivity in accordance with London Plan P olicy SI 6 par t A.
B.Applications f or telecomm unications de velopment (including f or prior appro val under P art 16 of the
Gener al Permitted De velopment Order , or an y other such future Order) will be considered in
accordance with national policy and guidance and the f ollowing:
1. The applicant will need to submit e vidence to demonstr ate that all options f or shar ing of e xisting
equipment, including with other oper ators , and erecting masts on e xisting tall b uildings or
structures , have been fully e xplored bef ore consider ing the erection of ne w str uctures or
facilities .
2. Visual impacts of telecomm unications proposals should be minimised, including in line with
Policy LP28 Local Char acter and design quality , particular ly on roof tops .
3. The applicant has demonstr ated that the de velopment will oper ate within the Inter national
Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection Guidelines f or pub lic exposure .
19.69 National policy sets out guidance on the
provision of high quality comm unications
infrastructure , which is essential f or
sustainab le economic g rowth. Moder ntelecomm unications systems are an essential
component in toda y's econom y. Digital
technology has the ability to tr ansform ho w
businesses oper ate with fle xible working and
217Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the pandemic
19more w eb comm unication are e xpected to
contin ue their popular ity par ticular ly due to
the increase in home w orking.
19.70 The London Plan P olicy ESI6 sets out that
the Ma yor works with netw ork oper ators and
helps to identify spatial gaps in connectivity .
19.71 High speed broadband technology will also
enhance the pro vision of local comm unity
facilities and ser vices , for example in the
health sector to enab le deliv ery of ne w
models of care and integ rated w orking, and
to suppor t smar t technologies in ter ms of the
collection, analysis and shar ing of data on
the perf ormance of the b uilt and natur al
environment such as w ater and energy
consumption, w aste, air quality .Theref ore,
the Council suppor ts telecomm unications
infrastructure and high speed broadband that
ensures the contin ued economic and social
success of the borough, par ticular ly as
businesses and local comm unities rely on
access to moder n technology .This policy
seeks to ensure that ne w telecomm unications
infrastructure is sited appropr iately and that
the n umber of sites used is minimised where
possib le.
19.72 It is impor tant to k eep the n umber of masts
and sites to a minim um as an
over-concentr ation of equipment and
installations can ha ve har mful impacts on the
borough's unique and distinctiv e char acter .
Theref ore, there is an e xpectation that
existing masts , buildings and other str ucturesare used where ver possib le, which includes
sharing facilities with other oper ators , unless
the need f or a ne w site has been justified and
accepted b y the Council. Where ne w sites or
structures are required, equipment should be
sympathetically designed and camouflaged
where possib le. In addition, the Council
suppor ts the remo val of redundant
telecomm unications infr astructure .
19.73 Applications f or telecomm unications
development (including f or prior appro val
under P art 24 of the Gener al per mitted
Development Order) should ha ve the
necessar y evidence to justify the proposed
development. This includes:
The outcome of consultation with
organisations with an interest in the
proposed de velopment (e .g. if a mast is
to be installed near a school);
For an addition to an e xisting mast or
base station, a statement that
self-cer tifies that the cum ulativ e
exposure of the de velopment will not
exceed Inter national Commission on
Non-Ionising Radiation Protection
guidelines;
For a ne w mast or base station,
evidence the applicant has e xamined
erecting antennas on an e xisting
building, mast or other str ucture and a
statement that self-cer tifies that, when
operational, Inter national Commission
guidelines will be met.
21819  Increasing jobs and helping b usiness to g row and bouncebac k following the
pandemic20 Pr otecting what is special and
impr oving our areas (herita ge and
culture)
Policy 28.  Local c haracter and design quality (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will require all de velopment to be of high architectur al and urban design quality .The
character and her itage of the borough has been identified in the borough-wide char acter isation w ork
under taken as par t of the Urban Design Study 2021. The ‘places’ ’ as identified in the Study’  will
need to be maintained and their char acter enhanced where oppor tunities ar ise. Development
proposals will ha ve to demonstr ate a thorough understanding of the site and ho w it relates to its
existing conte xt, including char acter and appear ance , and tak e oppor tunities to impro ve the quality
and char acter of b uildings , spaces and the local area.
B.To ensure de velopment respects , contr ibutes to and enhances the local en vironment and char acter ,
proposals m ust reflect and demonstr ate the f ollowing pr inciples:
1. Ensure the proposal is compatib le with the local char acter , including the relationship to e xisting
townscape , development patter ns, views, local urban g rain and frontages as w ell as scale ,
height, massing, density , landscaping, propor tions , form, mater ials and detailing;
2. Ensure the de velopment pro vides a high-quality sustainab le design, constr uction and la yout,
including adaptability to climate change whilst responding positiv ely to the local char acter as
identified in the Urban Design Study and Conser vation Area Appr aisals/Statements;
3. Use a design-led approach to optimise the potential of a de velopment site through la yout, siting
and access arr angements , to ensure the de velopment integ rates positiv ely with its surroundings;
4. Ensure the de velopment tak es account of the e xisting urban g rain and de velopment patter ns,
including relationship of heights to widths;
5. Sympathetically upg rading and reusing e xisting b uildings , rather than demolishing and b uilding
new, allo ws a better response to the local char acter whilst also making substantial energy
savings due to the embodied carbon in e xisting b uildings that w ould otherwise be lost through
demolition (see also P olicy 4 Minimising g reenhouse gas emissions and promoting energy
efficiency);
6. Ensure the de velopment responds to and where possib le impro ves existing patter ns of
movement, per meability and street widths that encour age and promote activ e travel and
well-being;
7. Maximise oppor tunities f or urban g reening, and integ rate e xisting and incor porate ne w natur al
features into a m ultifunctional netw ork that suppor ts quality of place and biodiv ersity , which
address climate change and resilience;
8. Ensure pub lic realm is w ell-designed, saf e, accessib le, inclusiv e, attractive, well-connected,
related to the local and histor ic conte xt, and easy to understand, ser vice and maintain (as set
out in London Plan policy D8);
9. Ensure the design, la yout and mater ials respect and respond to the histor ic en vironment and
any rele vant her itage assets;
10. Ensure de velopments achie ve the highest standards of accessib le and inclusiv e design, in
accordance with London Plan P olicy D5, with the aim of pro viding connectivity and per meability
throughout (as such gated de velopments will not be per mitted);
11. Minimise oppor tunities f or crime and antisocial beha viour , based on an understanding of the
locality and site-specific circumstances , utilising pr inciples of natur al sur veillance and or ientation
of buildings as w ell as uses;
219Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1812. Consider the holistic impact on the local suitab le microclimate , including as a result of lighting
features;  and
13. Ensure the de velopment’ s proposed uses are suitab le and compatib le for the proposed location,
providing a mix of uses including local ser vices and f acilities to suppor t daily lif e and enab le
comm unities to ‘live locally’  in accordance with P olicy 1, taking account of an y potential adv erse
impacts of the co-location of uses through the la yout, design and management of the site .
C.All proposals , including e xtensions , alter ations and shopfronts , will be assessed against the policies
contained within an adopted neighbourhood plan where applicab le, and the advice set out in the
Urban Design Study 2021 and the rele vant Village Planning Guidance and other SPDs relating to
character and design.
Shopfr onts
D.The Council will resist the remo val of shopfronts of architectur al or histor ic interest.  Shopfronts ,
including signage and illumination, should complement the propor tions , char acter , mater ials and
detailing, surrounding streetscene and the b uilding of which it f orms par t. Blinds , canopies or shutters ,
where acceptab le in pr inciple , must be appropr iate to the char acter of the shopfront and the conte xt
within which it is located.  Exter nal secur ity grilles and large illuminated f ascias will only be allo wed
in exceptional circumstances . In sensitiv e areas , such as Conser vation Areas and rele vant Char acter
Areas as identified in the Urban Design Study 2021 and the Village Planning Guidance SPDs , rigid
and gloss finish b linds will gener ally be unacceptab le.
Advertisements and hoar dings
E. The Council will e xercise str ict control o ver the design and siting of adv ertisements and hoardings
to ensure the char acter of individual b uildings and streets are not mater ially har med, ha ving regard
to the interests of amenity and pub lic saf ety (including highw ay safety).
Urban Design Stud y 2021
20.1 As par t of the de velopment of the Local Plan,
the Council has carr ied out an Urban Design
Study , which sho ws a g reater understanding
and appreciation of the e xisting char acter of
the diff erent places of the borough. The
Urban Design Study divides the borough into
high-le vel ‘Places’  and lo wer level ‘Char acter
Areas’, each with its o wn distinctiv e char acter ,
evolution and ser ies of neighbourhoods .The
identification of places has been inf ormed b y
a comprehensiv e process in volving the
analysis of e xisting planning designations ,
built form char acter istics and histor ical
evolution of areas .The process has also
been inf ormed b y the e xisting Village
Planning Guidance SPDs .
20.2 The borough-wide char acter isation w ork in
the Urban Design Study considers what
makes one area distinctiv e from another ,
what qualities are significant and cr itical tolocal char acter , and wh y is a par ticular
townscape or landscape impor tant, and to
whom. The char acter isation w ork creates a
background against which ne w development
can be balanced with protecting and
enhancing what mak es Richmond as a
borough so special in line with guidance on
delivering good design through the planning
process in Local Plan P olicy 44.  It is e xpected
that applicants and de velopers f ollow the
guidance and advice set out in the Urban
Design Study 2021 and the Village Planning
Guidance SPDs when consider ing the design-
and char acter-led approach to de velopment.
Village Planning Guidance SPDs and Conser vation
Area Appraisals
20.3 Village Planning Guidance SPDs w ere
developed f or all areas of the borough, (with
the e xception of Ham and P etersham, where
there is an adopted Neighbourhood Plan f or
the area). The SPDs identify the k ey features
22020  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18and char acter istics of the village areas that
are v alued b y local comm unities .Within the
SPDs , each area has been subdivided into
Conser vation Areas and Char acter Areas ,
and f or each area the conte xt, char acter and
local f eatures ha ve been analysed and
assessed.
20.4 The Council has ag reed a tw o year forward
programme f or prioritising re views of the
borough’ s existing Conser vation Area
Appr aisals and de veloping ne w Appr aisals
for those areas that do not y et ha ve an
existing one , which has commenced in 2021.
20.5 The Council has also de veloped a r ange of
other SPDs , including on Design Quality ,
House Extensions and Exter nal Alter ations ,
Small and Medium Housing Sites , Front
Gardens and Shopfronts .These f ocus on
protecting and impro ving the quality of the
local b uilt en vironment and pro vide the
necessar y detail to assess conte xt, local
character and design quality .The Council will
consider producing fur ther supplementar y
planning document(s) or toolkits to inf orm
small site design e xpectations on
residential-led projects , along with updates
to the Design Quality SPD (2006) and Small
and Medium Housing Sites SPD (2006).
Design quality and c haracter
20.6 This policy requires de velopers and
applicants to tak e a sensitiv e approach to the
architectur al design of ne w buildings ,
extensions and modifications to e xisting
buildings , as w ell as landscape proposals .
The Council does not wish to encour age a
particular architectur al style or approach b ut
expects each scheme to be to a high-quality
standard, with v ery high quality e xpected
within Conser vation Areas . Schemes should
be based on a sound understanding of the
site and its conte xt, following the locally
specific guidance set out in the Urban Design
Study 2021, complemented b y the Village
Planning Guidance SPDs .This locally based
approach that is sensitiv e to an area’ s
character can also contr ibute to achie ving the
Council’ s objectiv es relating to climate
change , biodiv ersity and living locally .20.7 Developments should demonstr ate an
appreciation and understanding of v ernacular ,
local char acter and architectur al precedents
in the local area, whilst not pre venting or
discour aging appropr iate inno vation and
design.  Given the b uilt-up nature of the
borough, it is anticipated that most ne w
buildings will be as a result of rede velopment
where compatibility with the e xisting urban
fabric is a k ey consider ation. The pur pose is
to maintain, reinf orce and where possib le
enhance the local char acter and f eatures that
give the area its distinctiv e and clear identity .
Oppor tunities should be tak en to impro ve the
gener al level of design of an area where
appropr iate. New development should respect
existing street and de velopment patter ns.
20.8 Policy D1 of the London Plan addresses the
issue of understanding char acter and conte xt,
noting that an understanding of the char acter
of a place helps to ensure an appropr iate
balance is str uck betw een e xisting f abric and
any proposed change . As change is a
fundamental char acter istic of London,
respecting char acter and accommodating
change should not be seen as m utually
exclusiv e.
Materials and façade design
20.9 The Council will e xpect the use of high-quality
and sustainab le mater ials, urban g reening
and biodiv ersity f eatures as w ell as planting
and landscaping reflecting the local char acter
and distinctiv eness of an area in all schemes
where this contr ibutes positiv ely to the
appear ance and char acter of an area. The
degree of symmetr y, variety, colours as w ell
as the patter n and propor tions of windo ws
and doors , mater iality and their details
together influence the design quality and
character of a b uilding and place .
20.10 The choice of b uilding mater ials should
mitigate the contr ibution to the urban heat
island eff ect through ther mal r adiation as w ell
as release of anthropogenic (w aste) heat,
having regard to P olicy 4 Minimising
Greenhouse gas emissions and promoting
energy efficiency .
221Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Relationship to other b uildings
20.11 The space betw een b uildings should be
respected and de velopment be in har mony
with surrounding b uildings . Elements such
as windo ws, roofs , shopfronts and doors
should relate to one another in such a w ay
as to maintain or complement the propor tions
of the surroundings , particular ly as e xpressed
in the relationship betw een solids and v oids.
Landscape design (including hard and soft
landscaping) and the intended use of an y
open spaces m ust form an integ ral par t of
any proposals . Particular attention needs to
be giv en to the interf ace betw een the pub lic
and pr ivate space and ho w an area will
connect or relate to the wider open space
netw ork.
20.12 Moder n shop and office la youts should be
integ rated with the propor tions of surrounding
development in order to reduce an y potential
visual impact.  Development should be in
scale with the adjoining b uildings and in
propor tion with the a verage street width as
defined b y building frontages which reflect
the urban g rain, as required. Where unif orm
building heights are par t of the char acter of
a street it will not nor mally be appropr iate to
permit abr upt v ariations to the gener al roof
line or ea ves line , while in other areas
irregular b uilding heights ma y be appropr iate.
Public realm
20.13 Developments should ensure the pub lic realm
is well-designed, saf e, accessib le, inclusiv e,
attractive, well-connected, related to the local
and histor ic conte xt, and easy to understand,
service and maintain, as set out in London
Plan policy D8.  Proposals should ensure that
the pub lic realm enhances the amenity and
function of b uildings and the design of
buildings contr ibutes to a vibr ant pub lic realm.
This includes ha ving activ e frontages at
ground floor , with the main access pro vided
along the frontage f acing pr imary streets .
Depending on the de velopment and its
location, pub lic realm and pub lic spaces
should suppor t a wide v ariety of activities and
create places where people w ant to go to ,
meet and socialise . Public realm and pub lic
places directly contr ibute to local identity andcharacter . Applicants should ref er to the
detailed guidance in the Council’ s Pub lic
Space Design Guide .
20.14 For a mix ed-use scheme , it is pref erred that
the g round floor contains commercial or
comm unity uses , having regard to the location
of the site .Where pr acticab le, buildings with
ground floor non-residential use should
supplement the e xisting pub lic realm through
the incor poration of pub lic spaces such as
plazas at their entr ance . In case of tall
buildings located close to the street edge ,
proposals should incor porate measures to
soften their edges and pro vide positiv e pub lic
spaces at their base through the use of
generous w alkways and mature planting.
Access and la yout
20.15 New development, including ne w routes and
access arr angements , should be
appropr iately integ rated with the e xisting
area, street frontage and e xisting local routes .
The applicant will ha ve to demonstr ate ho w
new development relates to the e xisting
public transpor t, pedestr ian and cycle
netw orks and ho w it fosters social inclusion.
Where required, de velopment proposals
should maintain through-access f or ease of
pedestr ian mo vement and per meability .
20.16 Gated de velopments , which pre vent
permeability of sites , will be resisted and
pedestr ian and cycle links through ne w
development m ust be pub licly accessib le at
all times .
Microclimate and lighting
20.17 Consider ation should also be giv en to the
local microclimate created b y buildings .Well
informed design decisions at an ear ly stage ,
such as the or ientation of a b uilding, can
reduce energy consumption through
responding positiv ely to climatic conditions .
The design should a void lighting f eatures that
negativ ely impact on biodiv ersity or
surrounding b uildings (par ticular ly residential),
as well as on night-time vistas and
panor amas .The b uilding f açade design and
glazing should consider the b uilding use at
night and minimise light spill that can
exacerbate light pollution, and should a void
22220  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18any harsh solar glare onto an y pub lic areas
as well as surrounding de velopment. Where
required, shade analysis should be carr ied
out to ensure that the b uilding shado w does
not adv ersely impact solar gain and ther mal
comf ort in k ey pub lic spaces dur ing times of
busy use .
20.18 The lighting of the pub lic realm needs careful
consider ation to ensure it is appropr iate to
address saf ety and secur ity issues , and mak e
night-time activity areas and access routes
welcoming and saf e, while also minimising
light pollution and thereb y impacts on
biodiv ersity , protected species as w ell as
residential amenity .
Co-location and compatibility
20.19 Proposals should demonstr ate that the
proposed uses and activities are suitab le and
compatib le with each other and surrounding
land uses . Providing a mix of uses including
local ser vices and f acilities that suppor t daily
life are impor tant to accord with the P olicy 1
on Living Locally and the 20-min ute
neighbourhood. The Council will giv e
consider ation to the mix of uses proposed
and ho w the y will suppor t and connect with
the local area through the la yout, design and
management of the site . Suitab le uses will
depend on the location and could include a
combination of residential, retail, office ,
leisure and enter tainment uses . It is not
always necessar y to include residential within
a mix ed scheme , and in some circumstances
the inclusion of residential might impact on
the oper ation of other uses .
Shopfr onts and shop signs
20.20 Shopfronts of architectur al or histor ic interest
make an impor tant contr ibution to the
character and appear ance of the borough.
Theref ore, the Council will resist the remo val
of shopfronts of architectur al or histor ic
interest. The design of ne w, and alter ations
to existing, shopfronts is impor tant both to
the appear ance of the individual proper ty and
to the char acter and appear ance of its local
area.  Any proposal will theref ore be assessed
against rele vant guidance in the Urban
Design Study and Village Planning Guidance
SPDs , as w ell as the Shopfronts SPD .20.21 Poorly sited or badly designed shop signs ,
including projecting signs , and illumination
can ha ve a detr imental eff ect on the amenity
(including char acter and appear ance) of an
area;  on the living conditions of residents;  on
biodiv ersity and protected species , and ma y
raise issues of pub lic saf ety. Secur ity shutters
can impact on the visual appear ance of an
area and can create a hostile en vironment.
The Council will w elcome proposals from
groups of shops to add char acter to the street
scene b y the use of har monious high- quality
design, colours and mater ials for their
shopfronts .
Advertisements and hoar dings
20.22 Advertising can enhance the appear ance and
vitality of a street.  However, it can also cause
consider able damage to visual amenity b y
clutter ing the b uilt en vironment and detr acting
from the quality of the area.  Advertisements
(defined under the Town and Countr y
Planning Control of Adv ertisements
Regulations) include not only hoardings , but
also de vices such as b linds and canopies
with letter ing, flags with logos and balloons .
In consider ing proposals f or an adv ertising
hoarding or other adv ertisement, including
blinds and canopies where rele vant, or in
deciding whether to tak e action to remo ve an
existing adv ertisement, the Council will ha ve
regard to the f ollowing cr iteria:
1. hoardings should be of good design and
in scale with their surroundings and be
of a tempor ary nature only;
2. any adv ertisement displa y must not ha ve
an adv erse eff ect upon road tr affic
conditions and pub lic saf ety;
3. advertising displa ys will not be per mitted
where the y would ha ve an adv erse
effect upon:
a Conser vation Area;
listed b uildings or Buildings of
Townscape Mer it;
views from or within open spaces
or along the Thames r iverside and
its tributaries;
predominantly residential areas;
4. high le vel, br ightly illuminated, or
flashing adv ertisements will not nor mally
223Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18be per mitted, especially where the y
might disturb residents .
20.23 As a gener al rule, advertisement displa ys will
be restr icted to shopping, commercial,
industr ial or tr anspor t locations , where the y
comply with the abo ve criteria and do not
cause e xcessiv e visual clutter . It must be
borne in mind that the Council's le vel of
control is limited and that a n umber of
advertisements do not require f ormal consent.20.24 The Council will use its po wers to remo ve
any har mful adv ertisement or hoarding
erected without consent and where
appropr iate and pr actical, to challenge
existing hoardings and adv ertisements that
cause demonstr able har m to amenity or
public saf ety.
Policy 29.  Designated herita ge assets
A. The Council will require de velopment to conser ve and, where possib le, take oppor tunities to mak e
a positiv e contr ibution to , the histor ic en vironment of the borough.  Development proposals lik ely to
adversely aff ect the significance of her itage assets will be assessed against the requirement to seek
to avoid har m and the justification f or the proposal. The significance (including the settings) of the
borough's designated her itage assets , encompassing Conser vation Areas , listed b uildings , Scheduled
Monuments as w ell as the Registered Histor ic Parks and Gardens , will be conser ved and enhanced
by the f ollowing means:
1. Give great w eight to the conser vation of the her itage asset when consider ing the impact of a
proposed de velopment on the significance of the asset.
2. Resist the demolition in whole , or in par t, of listed b uilding.  Consent f or demolition of Gr ade II
listed b uildings will only be g ranted in e xceptional circumstances and f or Gr ade II* and Gr ade
I listed b uildings in wholly e xceptional circumstances f ollowing a thorough assessment of the
justification f or the proposal and the significance of the asset.  Careful and sensitiv e maintenance ,
management and reuse of her itage assets also sa ves embodied carbon and a voids the carbon
dioxide of constr ucting ne w buildings .
3. Resist the change of use of listed b uildings where their significance w ould be har med, par ticular ly
where the current use contr ibutes to the char acter of the surrounding area and to its sense of
place .
4. Require the retention and preser vation of the or iginal str ucture , layout, architectur al features ,
mater ials as w ell as later f eatures of interest within listed b uildings , and resist the remo val or
modification of f eatures that are both inter nally and e xternally of architectur al impor tance or
that contr ibute to the significance of the asset.
5. Demolitions (in whole or in par t), alter ations , extensions and an y other modifications to listed
buildings should be based on an accur ate understanding of the significance of the her itage
asset.
6. Require , where appropr iate, the reinstatement of inter nal and e xternal features of special
architectur al or histor ic significance within listed b uildings , and the remo val of inter nal and
external features that har m the significance of the asset, commensur ate with the e xtent of
proposed de velopment.
7. Require the use of appropr iate mater ials and techniques and strongly encour age an y works
or repairs to a designated her itage asset to be carr ied out in a correct, scholar ly manner b y
appropr iate specialists .
8. Protect and enhance the borough’ s registered Histor ic Parks and Gardens b y ensur ing that
proposals do not ha ve an adv erse eff ect on their significance , including their setting and/or
views to and from the registered landscape .
9. Protect Scheduled Mon uments b y ensur ing proposals do not ha ve an adv erse impact on their
significance .
22420  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18B.Protect Scheduled Mon uments b y ensur ing proposals do not ha ve an adv erse impact on their
significance .
1. in the case of substantial har m or loss to the significance of the her itage asset, it is necessar y
to achie ve substantial pub lic benefits that outw eigh that har m or loss;
2. in the case of less than substantial har m to the significance of the her itage asset, that the pub lic
benefits , including secur ing the optim um viab le use , outw eigh that har m; or
3. the b uilding or par t of the b uilding or str ucture mak es no positiv e contr ibution to the char acter
or distinctiv eness of the area.
C.All proposals in Conser vation Areas are required to preser ve and, where possib le, enhance the
character or the appear ance of the Conser vation Area.
D.Where there is e vidence of intentional damage or deliber ate neglect to a designated her itage asset,
its current condition will not be tak en into account in the decision-making process .
E. Outline planning applications will not be accepted in Conser vation Areas .The Council's Conser vation
Area Statements , and where a vailab le Conser vation Area Studies , and/or Management Plans , will
be used as a basis f or assessing de velopment proposals within, or where it w ould aff ect the setting
of, Conser vation Areas , together with other policy guidance , such as Village Planning Guidance
SPDs .
F.Sympathetic measures to mak e energy and carbon sa vings in histor ic and listed b uildings are
encour aged, b y adopting a ‘whole house approach’  and understanding all the f actors that aff ect
energy use . Any potential damages to the str ucture or her itage v alue, or impacting the setting of ,
histor ic buildings ha ve to be a voided.
20.25 The borough is char acter ised b y primarily low
to medium-r ise residential patter ns, which
has produced v ery attr active townscapes and
is impor tant to the borough’ s distinctiv e
character .
20.26 The borough's e xceptional histor ic
environment is centr al to its char acter . Man y
parts of the borough are co vered b y
Conser vation Areas , including the major ity of
Richmond and Twickenham centres . As at
2021, the borough has 85 designated
Conser vation Areas and each area is
accompanied b y a Conser vation Area
Statement, which e xplains wh y and when it
was designated, including a shor t histor y and
a map sho wing the boundar y.The borough’ s
Conser vation Area Statements and an y other
studies or appr aisals , including the Village
Planning Guidance SPDs , include details of
many of the most impressiv e and impor tant
buildings as w ell as audits of assets within
the pub lic realm, which are of her itage or
aesthetic v alue.The Council has ag reed a
programme f or prioritising re views of the
boroughs e xisting Conser vation Area
Appr aisals and de veloping ne w Appr aisalsfor those areas that do not y et ha ve an
existing one , which has commenced in 2021.
The Urban Design Study 2021 is also
providing a high-le vel char acter assessment
of the borough, albeit not as fine-g rained as
other studies .The borough is char acter ised
by primarily low to medium-r ise residential
patter ns, which has produced v ery attr active
townscapes and is impor tant to the borough’ s
distinctiv e char acter .
20.27 The borough has appro ximately 1,115 listed
buildings , including some w ar memor ials, the
four Scheduled Ancient Mon uments as w ell
as 14 Histor ic Park and Gardens that are on
the Histor ic England Register of Histor ic
Parks and Gardens , all of which mak e a
significant contr ibution to the special
character of the borough. The borough is also
home to the Ro yal Botanic Gardens K ew
World Her itage Site (see 29 of this Plan).
20.28 New developments of an e xceptional design,
which respond to their local and histor ic
conte xt, can mak e a very positiv e contr ibution
to the histor ic en vironment.  It is impor tant to
retain not only the char acter , distinctiv eness
225Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18and setting of designated her itage assets
within a Conser vation Area, b ut also the
interrelationship betw een b uildings , how the y
relate to surrounding spaces and areas as
well as whole or par tial street vie ws, including
into and out of a designated area, par k,
garden or landscape .
20.29 Applications f or de velopment that aff ect
designated her itage assets or their setting
must:
1. Descr ibe the significance of an y her itage
assets aff ected, including an y
contr ibution made b y their setting;  the
extent of the setting will be propor tionate
to the significance of the asset.
Appropr iate e xpertise should be used to
assess the significance of a her itage
asset and its setting.
2. Demonstr ate ho w the de velopment
protects , and where possib le enhances ,
the setting, including vie ws, gaps and
vistas and an y other f eatures , as
identified in the rele vant Conser vation
Area Statement/Study , or in relation to
a listed b uildings , Scheduled Ancient
Monument or Histor ic Park or Garden.
3. Set out ho w par ticular attention has
been paid to scale , propor tions , height,
massing, histor ic building lines , the
patter n of histor ic development, use ,
design, detailing and mater ials.
4. Conser ve and retain or iginal or histor ic
garden or landscape f eatures as w ell as
architectur al features such as windo ws,
doors , chimne y stac ks, walls and gates .
5. Descr ibe ho w the proposal retains the
integ rity and significance of the b uilding
as a whole , the location and hier archy
of rooms , histor ic floor le vels, the
structure of the b uilding including
foundations , fabric as w ell as f eatures
such as or iginal staircases , original roof
structures and other f eatures identified
as being of significance . Demonstr ate
that the proposal is of e xceptional design
that integ rates with and mak es a positiv e
contr ibution to the histor ic environment;
and
6. Take oppor tunities to reinstate missing
features which are considered impor tant
to, or to remo ve additions ormodifications that har m, the significance
of the asset.
20.30 Outline planning applications will not be
accepted within Conser vation Areas because
the char acter , appear ance and distinctiv eness
of those areas can be dependent on the detail
of de velopments .
20.31 Conser vation Area Statements define and
record the f eatures which mak e each
Conser vation Area impor tant. Together with
the Village Planning Guidance SPDs , they
include an analysis of histor ical de velopment,
layout, plot configur ation, b uildings ,
shopfronts , memor ials, other street fur niture ,
walls and boundar ies, open land and civic
space . Conser vation Area Appr aisals and
Management Plans set out proposals f or the
preser vation and enhancement of the
character , appear ance and distinctiv eness of
a Conser vation Area.  Applicants will be
expected to demonstr ate ho w the proposal
complies with the rele vant Conser vation Area
Appr aisals , as w ell as the Village Planning
Guidance SPDs , and an y other rele vant
SPDs/SPGs adopted b y the Council. These
will also be used when assessing proposals
within and/or aff ecting designated her itage
assets .The le vel of detail pro vided should be
propor tionate to the impor tance of the
heritage asset.
20.32 Heritage assets are irreplaceab le and
ill-conceiv ed proposals can cause irre versib le
damage to the char acter and distinctiv eness
of the borough's high-quality to wnscape and
landscape .Theref ore, the par tial or full
demolition of a designated her itage asset, or
its alter ation, will only be considered
acceptab le where full justification has been
provided to demonstr ate that an y har m or
loss has been carefully w eighed up against
wider pub lic benefits that might result from
the proposal.
1. Substantial har m to, or loss of , a Gr ade
II listed b uilding, P ark or Garden should
be exceptional.
2. Substantial har m to or loss of designated
heritage assets of the highest
significance , notab ly Scheduled
Monuments , Grade I and II* listed
building, Gr ade I and II* Registered
22620  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Parks and Gardens should be wholly
exceptional.
3. Insensitiv e alter ations to , or e xtensions
to neighbour ing de velopments of , listed
buildings will not be allo wed.
20.33 Listed b uildings are best used f or their or iginal
purpose and theref ore the Council will resist
the change of use of a listed b uilding where
this w ould har m its significance in relation to
heritage interest and char acter . It is
acknowledged that there ma y be
circumstances where the or iginal use has
become obsolete and there ma y be cases
where a change of use ma y be the only viab le
option to k eep the designated her itage asset
in activ e use . In such instances , the Council
will tak e into account the desir ability of
sustaining and enhancing the significance of
the her itage asset and putting it to a viab le
use consistent with its conser vation. Where
a change of use ma y be appropr iate,
sensitiv e adaptation of a histor ic building can
be possib le, but the on us will be on the
applicant to justify the ne w use and to
demonstr ate ho w the benefits outw eigh the
harm of depar ting from other planning policies
if applicab le. Any proposed de velopment,
additional str uctures or b uildings within the
setting of the designated her itage asset, m ust
only be the minim um necessar y to secure the
asset’ s long-ter m future .The applicant will
also ha ve to demonstr ate that the ne w use
will be compatib le with the f abric, exterior,
interior and setting of the designated her itage
asset, and that it will not detr act from other
evidential, histor ic, aesthetic or comm unal
heritage v alues .
20.34 Histor ic buildings ha ve often sur vived for
many gener ations;  they are inherently
sustainab le ha ving been, in most cases ,
well-constr ucted from high-quality , locally
sourced mater ials.Their embodied energy
(i.e. the energy e xpended and encapsulated
within the f abric of a b uilding in its
constr uction) means that it is logical to retain
and reuse them with sensitiv e and careful
management.  Given the e ver-increasing
challenges presented b y the climate
emergency , there is a need to ensure all our
buildings , whether histor ic or moder n, are
more energy efficient.  Applicants are stronglyencour aged to consider str ategies f or sa ving
energy in histor ic buildings whilst a voiding
any potential damages to the str ucture or
heritage v alue, or impacting the setting of ,
histor ic buildings . Each proposal will be
assessed on a case-b y-case basis , and
depending on the significance of an asset,
different le vels of change ma y be appropr iate
in diff erent types of b uildings . Any strategies
or technologies that don’t har m the b uilding’ s
heritage v alue should be maximised. There
are often simple and ine xpensiv e measures
to reduce energy consumption, such as
reinstating e xisting and missing shutters and
draught-proofing windo ws and doors through
the use of sympathetic secondar y glazing.
Government regulations , research b y Histor ic
England as w ell as Building Regulations all
suggest that substantial energy sa vings can
be achie ved without har ming the her itage
value of a b uilding.  For fur ther inf ormation
and guidance see Histor ic England’ s
guidance on “Energy Efficiency and Histor ic
Buildings:  How to Impro ve Energy Efficiency
2018”  and “Energy Efficiency and Traditional
Homes 2020”.
20.35 It is ac knowledged that some proposals ma y
require residential de velopment to suppor t
the restor ation and reuse of designated
heritage assets;  however, such proposals
must ha ve benefits that outw eigh the
disbenefits of depar ting from other planning
policies .The proposed de velopment m ust be
the minim um necessar y to secure the
designated her itage asset’ s long-ter m future .
20.36 Legislation places upon those who o wn or
manage listed b uildings an ob ligation to
ensure that the y are proper ly maintained.
Where appropr iate, the Council will use its
powers to ensure that this is done , particular ly
if the asset is on the Her itage at Risk register .
Owners are urged to emplo y specialists to
ensure the standard of w orkmanship in
carrying out modifications or additions to
designated histor ic assets is of high quality .
A deter iorated state of an asset as a result
of deliber ate neglect or damage is not tak en
into account when making decisions .Where
the quality of a Conser vation Area has been
eroded, the Council will tak e steps to ensure
227Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18that ne w development and other schemes
such as w orks to the pub lic realm enhancethe histor ic en vironment.
Policy 30.  Non-designated herita ge assets
A. The Council will seek to preser ve, and where possib le enhance , the significance , char acter and
setting of non-designated her itage assets , including Buildings of Townscape Mer it, memor ials,
particular ly war memor ials, locally listed histor ic par ks and gardens and other local histor ic features .
B.There will be a presumption against the demolition of Buildings of Townscape Mer it.
20.37 The borough's e xceptional histor ic
environment is centr al to its char acter . Locally
listed b uildings , i.e. Buildings of Townscape
Merit (BTM), and memor ials (par ticular ly war
memor ials, including those on pr ivate land or
within b uildings), locally listed histor ic par ks
and gardens as w ell as other local histor ic
features such as statues , plaques , horse and
cattle troughs , histor ic bollards , post bo xes
and histor ic telephone bo xes are histor ic
assets w orthy of protection.
20.38 Buildings of Townscape Mer it are b uildings ,
groups of b uildings or str uctures of histor ic
or architectur al interest, which are locally
listed due to their consider able local
impor tance .The Council's adopted SPD on
BTMs sets out the cr iteria that will be tak en
into account when consider ing whether a
building or str ucture should be designated as
BTM. The policy sets out a presumption
against the demolition of BTMs unless
structur al evidence has been submitted b y
the applicant, and independently v erified at
the cost of the applicant.  Should demolition
prove necessar y, a high standard of design
that complements the surrounding area will
be required in an y replacement b uilding.
Locally specific guidance on design and
character is set out in the Conser vation Area
Appr aisals , the Urban Design Study and the
Council's Village Planning Guidance SPDs ,
which applicants are e xpected to f ollow for
any alter ations and e xtensions to e xisting
BTMs , or for an y replacement str uctures .20.39 In addition to the borough’ s 14 Histor ic Park
and Gardens that are on the Histor ic England
Register of Histor ic Parks and Gardens (see
Policy 29 on Designated Her itage Assets),
there are a n umber of histor ic par ks and
gardens that mer it local listing due to their
histor ic interest. The Council will use the
London Gardens Trust In ventor y as a basis
for consider ing locally listing such par ks and
gardens in the borough.
20.40 Applicants will be required to:
1. retain the char acter of Buildings of
Townscape Mer it, war memor ials, locally
listed histor ic par ks and gardens , and
any other non-designated her itage
assets;
2. submit a Her itage Statement to assess
the potential har m to, or loss of , the
significance of the non-designated
heritage asset, including from both direct
and indirect eff ects;
3. descr ibe the significance of the
non-designated her itage asset aff ected,
including an y contr ibution made b y their
setting;  the e xtent of the rele vant setting
will be propor tionate to the significance
of the asset.  Appropr iate e xpertise
should be used to assess a
non-designated her itage asset;  and 4.
retain or restore the str uctures , features
and mater ials of the asset, which
contr ibute to its architectur al integ rity
and histor ic interest.
22820  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policy 31. Views and vistas
A. The Council will protect the quality of the identified vie ws, vistas , gaps and the skyline , all of which
contr ibute significantly to the char acter , distinctiv eness and quality of the local and wider area, b y
the following means:
1. protect the quality of the vie ws and vistas as identified on the P olicies Map , and f or an y proposal
affecting a designated/identified vie w/vista on the P olicies Map demonstr ate this through the
submission of such through computer-gener ated imager y (CGI) and visual impact assessments
as required b y Policy 44 Design process;
2. resist de velopment which interr upts, disr upts or detr acts from str ategic and local vistas , views,
gaps and the skyline;
3. require de velopments whose visual impacts e xtend be yond that of the immediate street to
demonstr ate ho w vie ws are protected or enhanced, and reflect the rele vant char acter area
design guidance in the Urban Design Study;
4. require de velopment to respect the setting of a landmar k, taking care not to create intr usive
elements in its f oreground, middle g round or bac kground;
5. seek impro vements to vie ws, vistas , gaps and the skyline , particular ly where vie ws or vistas
have been obscured;
6. seek impro vements to vie ws within Conser vation Areas , which:
a. are identified in Conser vation Area Statements and Studies and Village Plans;
b.are within, into , and out of Conser vation Areas;
c. are aff ected b y development on sites within the setting of , or adjacent to , Conser vation
Areas and listed b uildings .
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
The e xisting vie ws and vistas identified on the P olicies Map will be retained. The Urban Design Study
and fur ther analysis is identifying additional local vie ws which it is intended will be consulted upon in a
Views and Vistas SPD .These additional vie ws will be proposed f or designation through the prepar ation
of this Plan.
20.41 The Council commissioned
further analysis w ork to re view the borough’ s
views and vistas , alongside the Urban Design
Study .The Urban Design Study 2021 sets
out details of v alued vie ws and vistas ,
including the r ange of prospects , linear vie ws,
and to wnscape vie ws, which are highly
impor tant including in the borough’ s riverside
and open space settings .These are
recognised in each char acter area profile ,
along with the design guidance str ategy f or
each area. The fur ther analysis will pro vide
a baseline assessment of e xisting protectedviews and vistas , additional ne w locally
impor tant vie ws that ha ve been identified, as
well as setting out oppor tunities to impro ve
these .This will f orm the basis f or a View and
Vistas Supplementar y Planning Document to
clear ly identify the protected vie ws and to
provide fur ther guidance f or assessing the
impact of de velopments in these vie w lines .
This SPD will be subject to pub lic consultation
and an y additional local vie ws will then be
proposed f or designation as par t of the
prepar ation of this Local Plan.
229Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1820.42 The quality and char acter of the vie ws and
vistas as sho wn on the P olicies Map will need
to be protected.  In addition, the Council will
explore oppor tunities to create attr active new
views and vistas .
20.43 The presence of a vie w or vista will influence
the design quality , configur ation, height and
site la yout of ne w development or e xtensions
to existing de velopments .Views ma y also
need to be considered where the vie wpoint
is a long w ay from the de velopment, such as
in the case of vie ws from Richmond Hill and
numerous v antage points in Richmond P ark.
Where appropr iate, impro vements , such as
opening up or enhancing vie ws for the benefit
of the gener al pub lic where vie ws ha ve been
obscured b y fencing, b uildings or o vergrown
trees , will be encour aged.
20.44 Applicants will be required to pro vide
visualisations of the impact on vie ws of
proposals from ag reed vie wpoints with
planning applications f or major de velopments ,
as set out in P olicy 44 Design Process .The
use of 3D modelling such as VUCITY is
advocated.
20.45 The Richmond, P etersham and Ham Open
Spaces Act (1902) pre vents de velopment of
the land on and belo w Richmond Hill in order
to protect the unique and distinctiv eforeground vie ws that it pro vides to the w est
and south. This is the only vie w in England
to be protected b y an Act of P arliament.  In
addition, the vie w from King Henr y VIII's
Mound to St P aul's Cathedr al is the subject
of a Direction made b y the Secretar y of State
as par t of str ategic guidance and is one of
eight such str ategic vie ws of St P aul's across
London. The protection and enhancement of
the str ategic vie w from King Henr y's Mound
to St P aul's will be achie ved by consultation
betw een the rele vant planning author ities in
London, including the Greater London
Author ity.The London View Management
Framework SPG will be used when
consider ing applications aff ecting protected
views.
20.46 It is impor tant that the impact of de velopment
on vie ws, including in and around
Conser vation Areas , as w ell as of landmar ks
defining points of to wnscape interest is tak en
into account.  In addition to the str ategic vie w
from King Henr y’s Mount in Richmond P ark
to St P aul’s Cathedr al, the borough also has
specifically recognised vie ws and vistas that
are impor tant to protect.
20.47 The Council will w ork in par tnership with
neighbour ing boroughs where there are
cross-boundar y views and settings so that
these are positiv ely managed.
Policy 32.  Royal Botanic Gar dens,  Kew World Herita ge Site
A. The Council will protect, conser ve, promote and where appropr iate enhance the Ro yal Botanic
Gardens , Kew World Her itage Site , its b uffer zone and its wider setting.  In doing this , the Council
will tak e into consider ation that:
1. The World Her itage Site inscr iption denotes the highest significance to the site as an
internationally impor tant her itage asset.
2. The appreciation of the Outstanding Univ ersal Value of the site , its integ rity, authenticity and
significance , including its setting (and the setting of individual her itage assets within it) should
be protected from an y har m.
3. Appropr iate w eight should be giv en to the Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew World Her itage Site
Management Plan and the Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew Landscape Master Plan.
20.48 The United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultur al Organisation (UNESCO) World
Heritage Committee inscr ibes World Her itageProper ties onto its World Her itage List f or
their Outstanding Univ ersal Value – cultur al
and/or natur al significance which is so
23020  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18exceptional as to tr anscend national
boundar ies and to be of common impor tance
for present and future gener ations of all
humanity .The Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew
was inscr ibed on the UNESCO World
Heritage Site List in 2003, in recognition of
its outstanding and inter nationally significant
universal v alue.
20.49 The outstanding inter national impor tance of
the WHS is a k ey mater ial consider ation to
be tak en into account b y the Council when
deter mining planning applications and listed
building consents .The Inter national Council
on Mon uments and Sites (ICOMOS) method
of Her itage Impact Assessment f or World
Heritage Sites as w ell as the London Planand the Ma yor of London's SPG on London's
World Her itage Sites will be tak en into
account when assessing proposals .The
Council will protect and, where possib le,
enhance the WHS f or the benefit of future
gener ations b y carefully scr utinising
development proposals f or their lik ely eff ect
on the site or its setting where these occur
within:
1. The designated WHS , as sho wn in the
figure belo w ('Core Area');
2. The defined b uffer zone, as sho wn in
the figure belo w ('Buff er Zone');  and
3. The wider and more e xtensiv e setting
of the WHS , including vie ws to and from
the site .
231Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Royal Botanic Gar dens,  Kew
20.50 The Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew World
Heritage Site Management Plan and the
Landscape Master Plan pro vide a fr amework
for guiding the activities that tak e place in the
site in order to ensure that these activities do
not conflict with the need to protect the
qualities , which mak e the Ro yal Botanic
Gardens , Kew such a special and unique
place .
20.51 As par t of the positiv e strategy f or the
conser vation and enjo yment of the histor ic
environment, national policy guidance
requires the consider ation of designated
heritage assets most at r isk through neglect,
deca y or other threats . In this conte xt, theCouncil will w ork closely with its par tners ,
including Histor ic England and the London
Borough of Hounslo w, to ensure that the
Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew WHS , including
its buffer zone, wider setting and vie ws to and
from the site , is giv en the highest significance
as a designated her itage asset, and to
prevent an y further har mful impacts from
development proposals , particular ly as a
result of inappropr iate and unsympathetic tall
buildings , in Brentf ord and Hounslo w's wider
Great West Corr idor.Work will be carr ied out
by consultants commissioned to under take
the Urban Design Study to identify fur ther
locally impor tant vie ws which will
subsequently identified on the P olicies Map .
23220  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policy 33.  Archaeology
A. The Council will seek to protect, enhance and promote its archaeological her itage (both abo ve and
below ground), and will encour age its inter pretation and presentation to the pub lic. It will tak e the
necessar y measures required to saf eguard the archaeological remains f ound, and refuse planning
permission where proposals w ould adv ersely aff ect archaeological remains or their setting. This is
in accordance with London Plan P olicy HC1 Her itage conser vation and g rowth.
B.Desk based assessments and, where necessar y, archaeological field e valuation will be required
before de velopment proposals are deter mined, where de velopment is proposed on sites of
archaeological significance or potential significance .
20.52 Archaeological in vestigations in the borough
to date ha ve revealed e vidence of prehistor ic,
Roman, Saxon, Medie val and post Medie val
archaeology . An archaeological site is a place
(or group of ph ysical sites) in which e vidence
of past activity is preser ved and can include
industr ial sites , mar ine and f oreshore
deposits/str uctures , buildings , machiner y,
roads , artefacts, wartime str uctures and
modest domestic b uildings .The preser vation
of archaeological remains is a mater ial
consider ation when deter mining planning
applications . As set out in national policy
guidance , archaeological remains of national
impor tance should be preser ved in situ. While
it is desir able to treat all remains in this
manner , it is recognised that it is not alw ays
practical to do so .
20.53 However, regardless of their status ,
estab lished procedures of consultation and
evaluation as set out in national policy
guidance and other advice m ust be f ollowed
in prepar ing de velopment proposals .
Prospectiv e applicants should mak e an initial
assessment of the archaeological potential
and significance of a site b y consulting with
the appropr iate specialist bodies , Histor ic
England and the Greater London
Archaeological Advisor y Ser vice (GLAAS).GLAAS is the borough’ s archaeological
advisers and should be consulted with regard
to archaeological matters .
20.54 Archaeological Pr iority Areas (AP As) can be
identified b y local planning author ities under
the Town and Countr y Planning Act 1990 and
the borough's AP As are sho wn on the
Archaeological Constr aints Map .The
borough's AP As ha ve been under re view by
GLAAS as par t of a rolling prog ramme of
reviews across London. This mo ves to a
‘tiered’  system which distinguishes those
areas which are most significant and sensitiv e
to change from those which, although still of
interest, are not quite so vulner able.Tier 1
APAs help to identify where undesignated
archaeological assets of equiv alent
significance to a scheduled mon ument – and
which are subject to the same policies as
designated her itage assets – are kno wn or
likely to be present.  A total of 31
Archaeological Pr iority Areas are
recommended f or Richmond of which 7 are
a Tier 1 AP A, 25 are Tier 2 AP As, and 1 is a
Tier 3 AP A.The repor t by GLAAS is e xpected
to be pub lished in 2021 and the Council will
provide a link to the latest a vailab le AP As
constr aints map .
233Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture) 20
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1823420  Protecting what is special and impro ving our areas (her itage and culture)
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1821 Increasing biodiver sity and the
quality of our green and b lue spaces,
and greening the bor ough
Policy 34.  Green and Blue Infrastructure (Strategic P olicy)
1. Green and b lue infr astructure is a netw ork of m ulti-functional g reen spaces and g reen f eatures ,
green space stepping-stone sites as w ell as r ivers and other w atercourses , ponds , floodplains and
wetlands , which pro vides m ultiple benefits f or people , nature and the econom y, and which pla ys a
significant role in both mitigating and adapting to climate change .
2. To ensure all de velopment proposals protect and appropr iately enhance and restore g reen
infrastructure , the f ollowing will be tak en into account when assessing de velopment proposals:
1. Protect and enhance the borough’ s blue and g reen infr astructure netw orks, in par ticular , but
not e xclusiv ely, the sites designated as Green Belt, Metropolitan Open Land, Local Green
Space , Other Open Land of Townscape Impor tance , other open spaces as w ell as areas
designated f or their biodiv ersity and nature conser vation v alue.
2. Protect and seek impro vements to w alking and cycling routes to and through the g reen
infrastructure netw ork, such as g reen spaces , and where oppor tunities ar ise create such routes ,
thereb y promoting health y lifestyles and activ e travel.
3. Enhance the e xisting b lue and g reen infr astructure netw ork, including open spaces and g reen
corridors , providing habitats f or biodiv ersity to flour ish and e xpand.
4. Protect and enhance biodiv ersity within the g reen and b lue infr astructure netw orks, particular ly
on sites designated f or nature conser vation interest.
5. Increase the pro vision of g reen and b lue infr astructure in and around de velopment sites through
urban g reening and other g reen and b lue infr astructure f eatures , ensur ing the y complement
the surroundings and link into e xisting netw orks.
6. Expect de velopment to incor porate and maintain appropr iate elements of g reen infr astructure
which mak e a positiv e contr ibution to the wider netw ork of open spaces .
7. Enhance accessibility to open spaces as w ell as to the b lue infr astructure netw ork, par ticular ly
to the borough’ s rivers and their banks , for leisure and recreational use , while ensur ing that
the biodiv ersity v alue is protected.
8. Impro ve oppor tunities f or local residents and visitors to e xperience nature and pro vide
educational oppor tunities , both f ormal and inf ormal, within the de velopment, to allo w the pub lic
to embr ace their local en vironment and de velop potential ste wardship beha viours .
9. All de velopment needs to mak e pro vision f or the long-ter m sustainab le maintenance and
management of open space and g reen and b lue infr astructure f eatures on site , including
suppor ting comm unity in volvement in ste wardship of g reen and b lue infr astructure netw orks,
and ensur ing there is space f or growing f ood, including pollination and wildlif e-friendly gardening
.
21.1 This policy is the o verarching str ategic policy
for the theme “Increasing biodiv ersity and the
quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and
greening the borough”  and should be read
alongside other policies in this Plan as w ell
as the London Plan, par ticular ly Policy G1
(Green infr astructure) and P olicy G4 (Openspace), and the Ma yor of London's All London
Green Gr id SPG (including the F rameworks
for the Arcadian Thames , and the Riv er Colne
and Cr ane Area).  Urban g reening entails
more than just f ocusing on ho w the streets ,
buildings and other pub lic spaces look.  Roofs
and w alls co vered in plants , street trees and
235Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21small poc ket par ks in betw een b uildings mak e
our borough an e ven better place to liv e, work
and in vest.These g reen f eatures act as par t
of the borough’ s green infr astructure netw ork
to help clean our air , reduce the r isk of
flooding and k eep the city cool.
21.2 The borough is char acter ised b y extensiv e
areas of open land, designated as Green Belt,
Metropolitan Open Land as w ell as the
borough's r ivers and their corr idors , which
link across borough boundar ies and ha ve a
strategic function in southw est London,
Greater London and be yond. The borough
also benefits from highly significant histor ic
landscapes , including those on the Histor ic
England’ s national Register of P arks and
Gardens , all of which mak e a significant
contr ibution to the borough’ s green
infrastructure netw ork. In addition, there are
many smaller pieces of open land, including
land designated as Other Open Land of
Townscape Impor tance , as w ell as
non-designated land, such as residential
gardens .Theref ore, the g reen spaces and
green and b lue features that contr ibute to and
make up the o verall green infr astructure
netw ork range from borough-wide and
strategic f eatures such as par ks,
watercourses and w oodlands to local f eatures
such as pla ygrounds , spor ts pitches ,i
allotments , pub lic open spaces , trees ,
woodlands , private gardens and other g reen
spaces used f or recreational pur poses .There
are also other f eatures such as highw ay
verges , railway embankments as w ell as
site-specific elements such as g reen roofs
and g reen w alls that are considered to be
part of the wider g reen infr astructure netw ork.
It is impor tant to recognise that the borough's
parks and open spaces pro vide not only
recreational oppor tunities f or those that liv e
and w ork in this borough, b ut also f or local
comm unities and residents in neighbour ing
and other London boroughs , thus pro viding
a green lung f or southw est London.
21.3 As set out in the Local Plan’ s spatial str ategy
(see P olicy 2), housing deliv ery, and the
infrastructure required to suppor t it, is
expected to be met without compromising the
green and b lue infr astructure netw ork; there
is a presumption against the loss of , or
building on, g reenfield sites .The leisure andrecreational pressure on e xisting g reen
infrastructure , including nationally and
internationally designated areas such as
Richmond P ark and Bush y and Home P ark,
is acknowledged, and residential
development is lik ely to e xacerbate this
pressure .There will be challenges in ensur ing
that the Council reaps all the benefits of
having high quality , well maintained open
spaces and g reen infr astructure .The Council
will w ork in par tnership with k ey local
stakeholders and par tners (such as the Ma yor
of London, neighbour ing boroughs , the Ro yal
Parks, major lando wners such as the Cro wn
Estates , the Richmond Biodiv ersity
Partnership , Habitats & Her itage , the Thames
Landscape Str ategy , the Thames Str ategy
and others) to ensure through careful
management w e achie ve our shared aims in
respect of the quantity , quality and positiv e
impact of our g reen assets f or both people
and wildlif e.
21.4 Development which pro vides a g reener
environment can be more sustainab le and
deliver impor tant en vironmental, social, health
and economic benefits .The m ultifunctional
nature of g reen and b lue infr astructure means
it contr ibutes significantly to the v alue of the
local area as a place to liv e, work, do
businesses and visit. With the decline of
biodiv ersity across the globe , it is vitally
impor tant that ne w features do not only off er
a ‘green space’  but pro vide v alue b y forming
part of a larger ecosystem, helping to
maintain biodiv ersity . Green and b lue
infrastructure pla y a significant role in both
mitigating and adapting to climate change ,
with the ability f or green infr astructure to
capture and sequester carbon and pollutants
within the v egetation and soils being perhaps
the most cr ucial.
21.5 Green and b lue infr astructure netw orks and
features that mak e up the o verall netw ork can
also suppor t healthier and more activ e
lifestyles b y pro viding g reen routes f or
walking and cycling, g reen spaces f or
recreation, e xercise and pla y. Pedestr ian and
cycle routes across g reen spaces often f orm
a strategically impor tant par t of the borough’ s
cycling and w alking. These routes enab le
active travel choices b y connecting k ey
destinations in the borough via con venient
23621  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughshortcuts and quiet routes a way from b usy
roads .The corona virus (CO VID-19) pandemic
has highlighted the impor tance of ha ving
access to g reen spaces within w alking
distance of homes . Pedestr ian and cycle
routes through g reen spaces should be
protected and, where ver possib le, provided
to a high standard in accordance with best
practice guidance . During the CO VID-19
pandemic , visits to par ks and other g reen
spaces increased across London.  It is
impor tant to protect and enhance the e xisting
areas of open space in the borough, to
ensure that as the population g rows, there
are good quality g reen spaces f or everyone
to enjo y.
21.6 The borough’ s netw ork of g reen and b lue
infrastructure is cr itically impor tant in helping
to mitigate and adapt to the eff ects of climate
change within the borough, giv en that areas
of open w ater within the borough’ s river
corridors , other w etland habitats and g reen
spaces help to reduce the urban heat island
effect b y promoting urban cooling and
reducing localised air temper atures . Green
space areas also pro vide impor tant stor m
water retention oppor tunities b y minimising
surface w ater r un-off r ates dur ing se vere
rainfall stor m events, and trees within the
borough’ s green and/or wildlif e or ecological
corridors help promote urban cooling. Trees
also pro vide increased shade co ver dur ing
summer heatw aves and reduce le vels of
particulate urban air pollution. They also pla y
a key role in helping to store carbon.  Rising
summer temper atures , pro-longed summer
heatw aves, and flash flooding due to se vere
extreme stor m events are all lik ely to increase
in frequency in London o ver the coming y ears
as a result of climate change .The presence
of a netw ork of g reen spaces ma y reduce the
likelihood of flooding b y allo wing w ater to
permeate through the g round.  Green
infrastructure can also be designed to act as
flood stor age areas , holding large v olumes
of water in tempor ary ponds to protect b uilt
up areas from flooding. The appropr iate
enhancement and protection of the borough’ s
green and b lue infr astructure netw orks is
theref ore considered cr itical in tac kling the
climate emergency .21.7 In order to mak e the borough more resilient
to future climate change pressures and at the
same time deliv er measur able net gains f or
biodiv ersity (see P olicy 39 on Biodiv ersity),
the Council will encour age the creation of
multi-functional g reen space wildlif e or
ecological corr idors within ne w development
site la youts which ha ve a dual function as
natur al green space areas and also areas
which help to mitigate the eff ects of climate
change b y promoting both sustainab le urban
drainage and urban cooling.  For example , by
encour aging the use of on-site natur al green
space linear shaped dr y swale Sustainab le
Urban Dr ainage Systems (SuDS) wildlif e or
ecological corr idors which incor porate areas
of ne w tree planting.
21.8 Education about g reen infr astructure ,
particular ly in urban areas where ecosystem
services are inter twined with human
development, can teach fundamental lessons
about systems thinking, sustainability , and
resilience .Theref ore, developments should
provide both f ormal and inf ormal education
oppor tunities within the site , such as through
signage or inf ormation boards , or on
large-scale de velopments through space f or
walks or outdoor education as w ell as spaces
for growing f ood. This will allo w the pub lic to
embr ace their local en vironment and promote
awareness on the benefits of g reen
infrastructure , growing f ood and the
impor tance of pollination and wildlif e-friendly
plants , thereb y increasing pub lic suppor t,
management, and ste wardship of present
and future g reen infr astructure projects .
21.9 Green infr astructure requires long-ter m
management and maintenance , which should
be considered at the ear liest stages of design
and planning.  Outreach and education is
fundamental to ensur ing and preser ving
long-ter m benefits , particular ly in relation to
biodiv ersity conser vation eff orts. Management
plans need to be fle xible to accommodate
changing needs of g reen infr astructure
features , and management demands are
likely to decrease once g reen infr astructure
features and/or habitats ha ve settled and
estab lished.
237Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21Policy 35.  Green Belt,  Metr opolitan Open Land and Local Green Space
A. The borough’ s Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land will be protected and retained in
predominantly open use . Inappropr iate de velopment will be refused unless ‘very special
circumstances’  can be rob ustly demonstr ated that clear ly outw eigh the har m to the Green Belt or
Metropolitan Open Land.
B.Appropr iate uses within the Green Belt or Metropolitan Open Land include pub lic and pr ivate open
spaces and pla ying fields , outdoor recreation and spor t, biodiv ersity including r ivers and bodies of
water, open comm unity uses including allotments and cemeter ies. Development will be suppor ted
if it is appropr iate and helps secure the objectiv es of impro ving the Green Belt or Metropolitan Open
Land.
C.It will be recognised that there ma y be cases where inappropr iate de velopment, such as small-scale
structures f or essential utility infr astructure , may be acceptab le.
D.Impro vement and enhancement of the openness , char acter and use of the Green Belt and
Metropolitan Open Land will be encour aged where appropr iate. Measures could include impro vements
or enhancements to landscape quality (including visual amenity), biodiv ersity (including deliv ering
biodiv ersity net gain) or accessibility .
E. When consider ing de velopments on sites in pro ximity to Green Belt or Metropolitan Open Land,
any possib le visual impacts on the char acter , local distinctiv eness , and openness of the Green Belt
or Metropolitan Open Land will be tak en into account.
Local Green Space (LGS)
F.Local Green Space , which is demonstr ably special to a local comm unity and which holds a par ticular
local significance , will be protected from inappropr iate de velopment that could cause har m to its
qualities .
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
A. Further to the recommendations in the Green Belt, MOL, LGS and OOL TI Re view (2021), the
following sites will ha ve their MOL designation remo ved.
1. Carpark for Sainsb urys, Uxbr idge Road, Hampton (see Site Allocation 5)
2. Parcel 48 of the Re view: Front Gardens Hampton Cour t Road (East) - The parcel is a v ery
small linear section compr ising front gardens to residential proper ties along Hampton Cour t
Road.
3. Parcel 49 of the Re view: Front Gardens Hampton Cour t Road (W est) - The parcel is a v ery
small linear section compr ising front gardens to residential proper ties along Hampton Cour t
Road.
B.Further to the recommendations in the Green Belt, MOL, LGS and OOL TI Re view (2021), the
following site(s) will be added as LGS:
1. North Sheen Recreation Ground
2. Raleigh Road Recreation Ground
3. Ham Village Green
4. Ham Libr ary Gardens
5. Warren Gardens
6. Pensford Field K ew
23821  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the borough21.10 The fundamental aim of the Green Belt is to
prevent urban spr awl by keeping land
permanently open. The essential
character istics of Green Belts are their
openness and per manence . Metropolitan
Open Land (MOL) is unique to London and
protects str ategically impor tant open spaces
within the b uilt en vironment. This policy
applies equally to Green Belt or Metropolitan
Open Land.  In addition, par agraphs 137 –
151 of the NPPF 2021 and an y future
amendments on Green Belts applies equally
to MOL.
21.11 MOL is open land or w ater, either pub licly or
privately o wned, with or without pub lic
access . MOL, as sho wn on the P olicies Map ,
plays an impor tant str ategic role as par t of
the borough and London’ s multi-functional
green infr astructure netw ork and
impro vements in its o verall quality and
accessibility are encour aged.  Green corr idors,
including f ootpaths and open spaces that the y
link, are impor tant to London’ s green
infrastructure netw ork, pro viding oppor tunities
for recreation and biodiv ersity , and are
theref ore designated as MOL due to their
London-wide str ategic impor tance .
21.12 National and regional policies , including this
policy , apply to the borough's areas
designated as Green Belt(5) as sho wn on the
Policies Map . National guidance sets out the
functions of the Green Belt, its k ey
character istics and acceptab le uses .
21.13 The pur pose of this policy is to saf eguard this
open land and protect and retain it in
predominately open use .There is a
presumption against inappropr iate
development in the Green Belt or MOL, and
inappropr iate de velopment b y definition, is
harmful to the Green Belt or MOL and should
not be appro ved except in v ery special
circumstances . However, the policy also
recognises that there ma y be e xceptionalcases where inappropr iate de velopment could
be acceptab le, such as small scale str uctures
for essential utility infr astructure .Water,
waste w ater treatment and se wage treatment
plants , including an y associated f acilities , are
considered to be essential utility infr astructure
and f acilities . New uses will only be
considered if the y are b y their nature open or
depend upon open uses f or their enjo yment
and if the y conser ve and enhance the open
nature , char acter and biodiv ersity interest of
MOL.
21.14 A review of all the land designated as Green
Belt, MOL, LGS and OOL TI was carr ied out,
providing an up to date , objectiv e and
evidence-based assessment of ho w the
currently protected areas contr ibute to the
purposes / cr iteria set out in the rele vant
national/regional or local policy guidance .The
Green Belt, MOL, LGS and OOL TI Re view
(2021) f ound that the Green Belt in the
borough scored w ell against the cr iteria for
its designation in the NPPF;  theref ore, no
change is proposed to Green Belt boundar ies.
The Re view demonstr ated that ele ven MOL
sites did not score as highly against the
London Plan MOL cr iteria. Out of these
eleven sites , three fulfil an impor tant
ecological pur pose , acting as g reen corr idor
and linking g reen spaces;  due to their v alue
to the borough’ s green infr astructure netw ork,
the MOL designation is retained f or these
sites.The Re view also demonstr ated that a
small n umber of sites ha ve been deliber ately
mismanaged to tr y and reduce their v alue
and pur pose of MOL;  however, this is not a
reason to amend or remo ve their designation.
The Re view identified tw o relativ ely small
linear parcels compr ising front gardens to
residential proper ties along Hampton Cour t
Road;  these are recommended to be
remo ved from MOL.  In addition, the Re view
has identified that one site , i.e. Carpark for
Sainsb urys, Uxbr idge Road, Hampton, scored
weakly against all the cr iteria for MOL
5 The land at Twickenham and Fulw ell golf courses is held under "The Green Belt (London and Home Counties)
Act, 1938.  An Act to mak e pro vision f or the preser vation from industr ial or b uilding de velopment of areas of land
in and around the administr ative county of London." Under this Act o wners are required to request per mission from
the Secretar y of State to b uild on or dispose of this land. This requirement is separ ate from and in addition to an y
requirements f or planning per mission.  Most of this land is protected in the Borough’ s Local Plan and London Plan
by its designation as Metropolitan Open Land under P olicy 35 and P olicy G3 respectiv ely. However, it is not co vered
by any planning policy Green Belt designation in the ter ms descr ibed b y the NPPF , London Plan and Local Plan.
239Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21designation;  the Council proposes to release
this from MOL and allocate f or 100% on-site
affordab le housing (see Site Allocation 5).  In
accordance with the NPPF and London Plan,
any alter ations to the boundar y of MOL
should be under taken through the Local Plan
process , in consultation with the Ma yor and
adjoining boroughs . MOL boundar ies should
only be changed in e xceptional circumstances
when this is fully e videnced and justified,
taking into account the pur poses f or including
land in MOL as set out in the London Plan.
21.15 Where a de velopment proposal aff ects
designated Green Belt or MOL, the applicant
is required to submit an assessment that
compares the f ootpr int and floorspace of
existing str uctures and b uildings with the
footpr int and floorspace of the proposed
development. This will enab le the Council to
make an inf ormed judgement in relation to
the o verall impact on, and potential loss of ,
designated Green Belt or MOL.  Any increase
in either f ootpr int or floorspace within
designated Green Belt or MOL will need to
be fully justified b y the applicant.
21.16 Development that in volves the loss of Green
Belt or MOL in retur n for the creation of ne w
open space else where will not be suppor ted.
However, where a comprehensiv e approach
to rede velopment can be tak en, such as on
major schemes or regener ation proposals
that deliv er significant wider pub lic benefits ,
it ma y be acceptab le to re-distr ibute the
designated open land within the site , provided
that the ne w open area is equiv alent to or
impro ved in ter ms of quantum, quality and
openness .The applicant will need to
demonstr ate this as par t of the justification
that ‘very special circumstances’  may exist.
21.17 Enhancement to the Green Belt or MOL f or
example b y landscaping, remo val or
replacement of inappropr iate f encing and
screening, and reduction of the visual impact
of traffic or car par king as w ell as opening up
views into and out of the Green Belt or MOL
will be encour aged. Where possib le,
oppor tunities to increase the Green Belt's or
MOL ’s potential f or wildlif e should be
maximised.21.18 Local Green Space , identified on the P olicies
Map, is green or open space which has been
demonstr ated to ha ve special qualities and
hold par ticular significance and v alue to the
local comm unity which it ser ves. New areas
of Local Green Space can only be designated
when a plan is being prepared or re viewed.
The Green Belt, MOL, LGS and OOL TI
Review (2021) has assessed and identified
a number of potential sites f or consider ation
as LGS .Whilst some of the assessed sites
may qualify f or LGS designation, where there
is already an e xisting MOL designation, there
would be little to no additional benefit gained
by a LGS designation. The Council is taking
forward those sites which ha ve scored
strongly o verall against the LGS cr iteria set
out in the NPPF , and which do not already
benefit from an MOL designation. The sites
to be designated as Local Green Space are
as follows:
1. North Sheen Recreation Ground
2. Raleigh Road Recreation Ground
3. Ham Village Green
4. Ham Libr ary Gardens
5. Warren Gardens
6. Pensford Field K ew
21.19 In line with the NPPF , managing de velopment
within a Local Green Space should be
consistent with policy f or Green Belt.
Development, which w ould cause har m to
the qualities of the Local Green Space , will
be considered inappropr iate and will only be
acceptab le in v ery special circumstances
where benefits can be demonstr ated to
significantly outw eigh the har m.
21.20 The f ollowing cr iteria are tak en into account
when defining Local Green Space:
1. The site is submitted b y the local
comm unity;
2. There is no current planning per mission
which once implemented w ould
under mine the mer it of a Local Green
Space designation;
3. The site is not land allocated f or
development within the Local Plan;
4. The site is local in char acter and is not
an extensiv e tract of land.
24021  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughPolicy 36.  Other Open Land of Townscape Impor tance (OOL TI)
A. Other open areas that are of to wnscape impor tance will be protected in open use , and enhanced
where possib le.
B.In addition to per mitted de velopment r ights, it will be recognised that there ma y be e xceptional cases
where appropr iate de velopment is acceptab le.The f ollowing cr iteria will be tak en into account when
assessing whether de velopment is appropr iate:
1. It must be link ed to the functional use of the Other Open Land of Townscape Impor tance;  or
2. It can only be a replacement of , or minor e xtension to , existing b uilt facilities;  and
3. It does not har m the char acter or openness of the open land.
C.Impro vement and enhancement of the openness or char acter of other open land and measures to
open up vie ws into and out of designated other open land will be encour aged. Where appropr iate,
the Council will encour age measures to restore its g reen space quality and char acter , and deliv er
appropr iate and positiv e measur able Biodiv ersity Net Gain enhancements .
D.When consider ing de velopments on sites in pro ximity to designated other open land, an y possib le
visual impacts on the char acter and openness of the designated other open land will be tak en into
account.
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
A. Further to the recommendations in the Green Belt, MOL, LGS and OOL TI Re view (2021), the
following site will be added as OOL TI:
Triangle of g rass at Eller man A venue
B.In addition, it is proposed to remo ve a duplication of an OOL TI at the f ollowing site , leaving the
correct designation in place:
 Harlequins Site , Twickenham
21.21 The pur pose of this policy is to saf eguard
open land of local impor tance and ensure that
it is not lost to other uses without good cause .
Areas designated as Other Open Land of
Townscape Impor tance (OOL TI) form an
impor tant par t of the m ulti-functional netw ork
of green infr astructure and the y can include
public and pr ivate spor ts grounds , school
playing fields , cemeter ies, allotments , private
gardens , areas of v egetation such as street
verges and mature trees . New areas f or
OOLTI designation can only be identified
when a plan is being prepared or re viewed.
The e xisting designated areas are sho wn on
the P olicies Map .21.22 A review of all the land designated as Green
Belt, MOL, LGS (see P olicy 35) and OOL TI
was carr ied out, pro viding an up to date ,
objectiv e and e vidence-based assessment
of ho w the currently protected areas
contr ibute to the pur poses / cr iteria set out in
the rele vant national/regional or local policy
guidance .The Green Belt, MOL, LGS and
OOLTI Re view (2021) f ound that most of the
OOLTI sites scored moder ately or strongly
overall, and theref ore no changes to e xisting
OOLTI designations are proposed. The
Council is ho wever taking f orward the
designation of one ne w OOL TI site .
241Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 2121.23 In some par ts of the borough, open areas ,
including larger b locks of bac k gardens , act
as poc kets of g reener y of local r ather than
strategic significance . Man y of these are of
townscape impor tance , contr ibuting to the
local char acter and are v alued b y residents
as open spaces in the b uilt-up area.  Green
oases are par ticular ly impor tant in areas of
higher density de velopment including in the
borough's centres , also f or their impor tance
and v alue to biodiv ersity (see P olicy LP 35
Biodiv ersity and Geodiv ersity).
21.24 OOLTI should be predominantly open or
natur al in char acter .The f ollowing cr iteria are
taken into account when defining OOL TI (note
that the cr iteria are qualitativ e and not all
need to be met):
Contr ibution to the local char acter and/or
street scene , by virtue of its siz e,
position and quality .
Value to local people f or its presence
and openness .
Immediate or longer vie ws into and out
of the site , including from surrounding
proper ties.
Contr ibution to a netw ork of g reen
spaces and g reen infr astructure as set
out in P olicy 34 Green and Blue
Infrastructure .
Value f or biodiv ersity and nature
conser vation and meets one of the
above criteria.
21.25 Where a comprehensiv e approach to
redevelopment can be tak en, such as on
major schemes or regener ation proposals , or
for comm unity and social infr astructure
including educational uses , it ma y be
acceptab le to re-distr ibute the designated
open land within the site , provided that the
new open area is equiv alent or impro ved in
terms of quantum, quality and openness .
21.26 Protecting and opening up vie ws into and out
of designated OOL TI is encour aged because
of the contr ibution the y can mak e to the
distinctiv e char acter of an area and the
benefits to all.
Policy 37.  Pub lic open space , play, spor t and recreation
A. Public Open Space , children's and y oung people's pla y facilities as w ell as f ormal and inf ormal
sports grounds and pla ying fields will be protected, and where possib le enhanced.  Impro vements
of existing f acilities and spaces , including their openness and char acter and their accessibility and
linkages , will be encour aged.
B.New open spaces , play facilities and f ormal and inf ormal land f or spor t and recreation should be
linked to the wider g reen infr astructure netw ork as the y play an impor tant role in creating social
cohesion, encour aging and promoting healthier and more activ e lifestyles . In addition, g reen open
spaces are especially impor tant f or biodiv ersity and the impro vement of wildlif e or ecological corr idors
as well as contr ibute in reducing the lik ely eff ects of climate change . Furthermore , the pro vision of
new open spaces and activ ely encour aging ne w users and visitors to utilise these spaces will
alleviate recreational pressures on sites designated f or biodiv ersity .
Impacts on e xisting and requiring ne w provision
C.The Council will require all major de velopment proposals in the borough to meet the Pub lic Open
Space , play space , and pla ying fields and ancillar y spor t facilities needs ar ising out of the
development b y requir ing the f ollowing:
Public Open Space
1. Applicants should pro vide an analysis of e xisting open space pro vision in line with the Council's
accessibility standards f or travel to open spaces .Where there is inadequate e xisting pro vision
and limited access to such f acilities , pub licly accessib le facilities will be e xpected on-site to
mitigate the impacts of the ne w development on e xisting pro vision.
24221  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the borough2. Major de velopments will be required to pro vide ne w on-site open space in areas of Pub lic Open
Space deficiency , as sho wn in the P olicies Map .This will be required in addition to an y external
amenity space .
3. Major de velopments outside of areas designated as Pub lic Open Space deficient will need to
provide on-site open space where f easib le. Should such pro vision not be f easib le, a pa yment
in lieu will be sought as a planning ob ligation to enab le the pro vision of ne w off-site open space ,
or impro vements to the accessibility or quality of e xisting Pub lic Open Space in the vicinity of
the de velopment.  Planning ob ligations will also be sought to wards management and
maintenance of ne w or impro ved off-site open space .
4. Any new Pub lic Open Space pro vided as a result of ne w development should deliv er
multi-functional benefits , including f or nature conser vation and biodiv ersity v alue as w ell as f or
the health and w ellbeing of future occupants and surrounding local comm unities .
Play space
5. Applicants should pro vide a pla y and child occupancy assessment to deter mine whether the
proposal will lead to an estimated child occupancy of ten children or more , by using the GLA’ s
child yield calculator as advised in the Planning Ob ligations SPD . In addition, an assessment
of existing pla y facilities within the surrounding area will be required. Where the assessment
demonstr ates an estimated child occupancy of ten children or more , the de velopment proposal
should mak e appropr iate and adequate pro vision of dedicated on-site pla y space b y following
the London Plan benchmar k standard of 10sqm per child. The Council will seek to integ rate
new major de velopment within e xisting areas and neighbourhoods .Theref ore, new dedicated
on-site pla y space should be made pub licly accessib le by all.
6. New pla y space should be w ell located within a site , away from sources of pollution;  be of
sustainab le constr uction;  and cater f or a r ange of diff erent ages and abilities .The local
comm unity and par ticular ly local children should be engaged in the design of the pla y space .
Playing fields and spor t facilities:
7. Applicants should assess the need and f easibility f or on-site pro vision of ne w pla ying fields
and ancillar y spor t facilities in line with the borough’ s Pla ying Pitch Str ategy .
8. Where on-site pro vision of pla y space or ne w pla ying fields and ancillar y facilities is not f easib le
or practicab le, the Council will e xpect e xisting surrounding f acilities and spaces to be impro ved
and made more accessib le to the users and occupiers of the ne w development through, f or
example , impro ved walking and cycling links or enhancements of pla y space or e xisting pla ying
fields and associated spor t facilities . Financial contr ibutions will be required to either fund
off-site pro vision, or impro vements and enhancements of e xisting f acilities , including access
arrangements , to mitigate the impacts of ne w development.
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
The Council’ s existing Pub lic Open Space deficiency areas will be updated to reflect more accur ately
the 400m w alking distance r ather than as the cro w flies .
It is anticipated that the Council will utilise the deficiency mapping pro vided b y Greenspace Inf ormation
for Greater London (GiGL).  GiGL de veloped a method of accur ately mapping areas of deficiency based
on actual w alking distances along roads and paths .This in volves locating access points and then using
the Ordnance Sur vey’s Highw ays Netw ork which maps Br itain’s road and path netw ork – from motorw ays
to pedestr ian streets and alle ys – to measure w alking distance .
243Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21GiGL has mapped areas of deficiency to each categor y of Pub lic Open Space , as sho wn belo w:
Regional P arks (400 hectares):  3.2-8 kilometers distance from homes
Metropolitan P arks (60 hectares):  3.2 kilometers distance from homes
District Parks (20 hectares):  1.2 kilometers distance from homes
Local P arks and Open Spaces (2 hectares), Small Open Spaces (under 2 hectares) and P ocket
Parks (under 0.4 hectares):  400 metres distance from homes
The Local Plan’ s focus on ‘living locally’  and the 20-min ute neighbourhood concept w ould suggest that
the Council should use the deficiency mapping f or local par ks, open spaces and poc ket par ks with a
distance of 400 metres from homes as the basis of the ne w Pub lic Open Space deficiency map f or the
borough.
Map 21.1 Regional Areas of Deficienc y in Access to Pub lic Open Space
24421  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughMap 21.2 Metr opolitan Areas of Deficienc y in Access to Pub lic Open Space
Map 21.3 District Areas of Deficienc y in Access to Pub lic Open Space
245Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21Map 21.4 Local/ Small/ P ocket Areas of Deficienc y in Access to Pub lic Open Space
21.27 Existing open space , play space , spor ts and
recreational b uildings and land, including
playing fields , should not be b uilt on unless:
1. an assessment has been under taken
which has clear ly sho wn the f acility ,
open space , buildings or land to be
surplus to requirements;  or
2. the loss resulting from the proposed
development w ould be replaced b y
equiv alent or better pro vision in ter ms
of quantity and quality in a suitab le
location;  or
3. the de velopment is f or alter native spor ts
and recreational pro vision, the benefits
of which clear ly outw eigh the loss of the
current or f ormer use .
21.28 The Council has produced assessments of
need f or open space (including pla y space),
sports and recreation f acilities , including
oppor tunities f or ne w pro vision, as w ell as a
borough-wide Pla ying Pitch Str ategy .These
will be re viewed and updated in 2022. These ,
together with the site-specific open space andplay space needs assessments f or major
developments , will pro vide the star ting point
for assessing an y proposals that could lead
to a loss of , or could impact on, e xisting
facilities .
21.29 Open spaces , play spaces and spor t and
recreation f acilities are impor tant components
of social infr astructure .The Council will not
suppor t gated or seg regated de velopments
and major de velopment proposals should
strike a balance betw een on-site pr ivate
amenity space , semi-pr ivate and pub licly
accessib le pro vision. There is an e xpectation
for pla y spaces to be made pub licly
accessib le, which ma y also assist in
addressing the need f or on-site Pub lic Open
Space pro vision. This will also contr ibute to
creating inclusiv e environments and
developments that integ rate with e xisting
neighbourhoods and local comm unities , thus
foster ing social cohesion.
24621  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the borough21.30 The e xtensiv e pro vision of par ks and open
spaces in the borough, including f ormal and
informal land and f acilities f or spor t and
recreation, close to homes and places of
work, will contr ibute to encour aging healthier
lifestyles as w ell as increased w alking and
cycling with consequential health benefits .
The emphasis is on enab ling people to fit
physical activity into their daily liv es, including
promoting activ e travel as a f orm of tr avel to
and from leisure and fitness activities , as par t
of the approach set out in P olicy 1 Living
Locally . Parks and open spaces are
particular ly impor tant in promoting activity in
young children, thereb y targeting the
increasing childhood obesity le vels in the
borough.  Easy access f or all residents to high
quality Pub lic Open Space , play space and
other land f or formal or inf ormal recreation is
impor tant, par ticular ly within identified areas
of deficiency .
Public Open Space
21.31 The borough benefits from man y open and
green spaces that contr ibute g reatly to its
unique en vironment, distinctiv e char acter and
recreational oppor tunities .This policy seeks
to maintain, and where possib le impro ve, the
quality and pro vision of , Pub lic Open Space
in the borough.  In areas identified as being
deficient in Pub lic Open Space , as sho wn on
the P olicies Map , there is a requirement f or
new major de velopments to pro vide ne w
on-site open space to alle viate the
recreational pressures ar ising from future
occupants and users on e xisting open spaces
while also pro viding ne w space f or nature and
biodiv ersity . Providing ne w open spaces as
part of de velopment w ould mitigate potential
impacts of lik ely increased visitor and user
numbers of e xisting estab lished open spaces
and par ks designated f or biodiv ersity
purposes , such as Richmond P ark or
Wimb ledon Common Special Area of
Conser vation, thereb y retaining their integ rity
as wildlif e sites .
21.32 There is no f ormula for calculating the
provision of on-site Pub lic Open Space .The
aim is to achie ve an appropr iate balance
alongside the pro vision of pr ivate and
semi-pr ivate spaces . Implementing fix ed
standards could under mine the ability toachie ve development proposals that maintain,
and where appropr iate enhance , the
character of an area.  It is the o verall design
and la yout, taking all f actors into account,
including diff erent uses and occupiers , design
quality and inclusiv eness , that will deter mine
the appropr iate balance betw een on-site
private amenity space , semi-pr ivate and
publicly accessib le pro vision.  Regardless of
the type of open space pro vision, it should
be designed with nature conser vation and
biodiv ersity benefits in mind, thereb y
delivering biodiv ersity net gain and
addressing the requirements of P olicy 39 of
this plan.
21.33 While it is ac knowledged that this borough
has a r ange of e xisting pub lic open spaces ,
due to the increased cum ulativ e recreational
pressures from ne w development and
population g rowth, all ne w major de velopment
in areas of Pub lic Open Space deficiency will
be required to pro vide ne w on-site open
space .
21.34 Areas of Pub lic Open Space deficiency , as
identified on the P olicies Map , are currently
derived by applying a 400 metre b uffer area
to designated Pub lic Open Space . As this
buffer has been applied as the cro w flies ,
adjustments to the 400m b uffer area ha ve
been made at the f ollowing locations to reflect
specific circumstances:
Teddington (along Harro wdene
Gardens , Fairfax Road) / Bush y Park:
adjustments ha ve been made at this
location to tak e account of the
combination of reduced accessibility
over the r ailway line , and limited access
points into Bush y Park; and
Feltham/Hounslo w Junction:  the tr iangle
of land has been included in the areas
of Pub lic Open Space deficiency to tak e
into account reduced access due to the
railway lines .
21.35 In 2022, and f or the Regulation 19 v ersion of
this Plan, the Council will seek to update the
existing Pub lic Open Space deficiency areas
as sho wn on the P olicies Map b y utilising
more sophisticated and enhanced GIS
softw are to reflect more accur ately 400m
walking distance .
247Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 2121.36 New major de velopments will lead to
increases in usage and are theref ore highly
likely to put an additional b urden and
pressure on the capacity of the e xisting
provision.  By using the accessibility standards
as set out in the par agraph belo w as w ell as
the designated areas of Pub lic Open Space
deficiency , applicants should pro vide an
analysis of e xisting open space pro vision
relevant to the de velopment site .
21.37 Major de velopments in Pub lic Open Space
deficiency areas will be required to pro vide
new on-site open space . For all other major
developments , where there is inadequate
existing pro vision, or limited access to such
facilities , to ser ve the ne w development,
on-site Pub lic Open Space will be e xpected
in order to mitigate the impacts of the ne w
development on the e xisting pro vision.  In line
with the Council's Open Space Assessment,
the following accessibility standards will be
applied f or assessing tr avel to open space
provision from ne w development sites:
15 min ute w alk time (1200m) - f or Parks
and Gardens
15 min ute w alk time (1200m) - f or
Natur al and Semi-natur al Greenspace
5 min ute w alk time (400m) - f or Amenity
Greenspace (including small local par ks
and open spaces as w ell as poc ket
parks)
21.38 It is ac knowledged that on-site pro vision ma y
not be f easib le or pr acticab le on occasions ,
but this will be assessed on a case-b y-case
basis , taking account of the e xisting open
space pro vision rele vant to the de velopment
site.Where it has been accepted b y the
Council that on-site pro vision cannot be
made , the Council will e xpect e xisting
surrounding open spaces to be impro ved,
and where appropr iate made more accessib le
to the users and occupiers of the ne w
development.  Financial contr ibutions ma y be
required to either fund ne w off-site pro vision,
or impro vements and enhancements of
existing f acilities , including access
arrangements , in order to mitigate the impacts
of ne w development.Play space
21.39 This policy seeks to maintain, and where
possib le impro ve, the children’ s and y oung
people’ s play facilities in the borough.  As set
out in the Council's Open Space Assessment,
the borough is gener ally w ell ser ved with pla y
spaces that are of high quality .
21.40 New development, where the estimated child
occupancy is ten children or more , could lead
to increased usage of , and theref ore place
additional b urdens and str ains on, e xisting
facilities . Consequently , developers f or major
applications will be required to submit a child
occupancy assessment in line with the GLA’ s
child yield calculator as advised in the
Planning Ob ligations SPD .Where the
assessment demonstr ates an estimated child
occupancy of ten children or more , the
development proposal should mak e
appropr iate and adequate pro vision of
dedicated on-site pla y space b y following the
London Plan benchmar k standard of 10sqm
per child.
21.41 In addition, the applicant should pro vide an
assessment of the e xisting pro vision of pla y
space within reasonab le walking distance
from the site . In line with the London Plan,
reasonab le walking distances f or assessing
play space requirements are:
100 metres f or under 5 y ear olds ,
400 metres f or 5-11 y ear olds , and
800 metres f or 12+ age g roup.
21.42 Where the assessment of e xisting pla y
facilities within the surrounding area
demonstr ates sufficient and high quality
provision, on-site pro vision of pla y facilities
may not be necessar y, but this will be
assessed on a case-b y-case basis . Financial
contr ibutions ma y however be required to
either fund ne w off-site pro vision, or
impro vements and enhancements of e xisting
facilities , including access arr angements , to
mitigate the impacts of ne w development.
21.43 Further guidance on the appropr iate le vel of
provision f or pla y and inf ormal recreational
spaces in de velopments is set out in the
24821  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughMayor’s 'Supplementar y Planning Guidance
on Shaping Neighbourhoods:  Play and
Informal Recreation'.
Playing fields,  playing pitc hes and spor t
21.44 This policy seeks to protect all pub lic and
private spor ts grounds including pla ying
fields , playing pitches , recreational areas ,
outdoor s wimming pools , outdoor 'g reen
gyms', cour ts and g reens as w ell as pr ivate
open space in recreational use . Such f acilities
and spaces mak e a significant contr ibution
to the borough's unique char acter , openness
and the wider g reen infr astructure netw ork.
Enhancements and impro vements to e xisting
facilities , including ne w, extended or
enhanced comm unity use , are encour aged.
21.45 Proposals that could aff ect the loss or the
quality of a pla ying field will be assessed
against the borough-wide Pla ying Pitch
Strategy , the cr iteria as set out in the NPPF
as well as the Spor t England P olicy on
planning applications f or de velopment on
playing fields . Early engagement with Spor t
England will be required where a proposal
affects a pla ying field or spor ts pitch.
21.46 The Council will resist the loss of a pla ying
field unless the proposal meets the
exceptional circumstances test as set out in
the Spor t England policy .Where a proposal
involves the loss , or impact on the siz e or
quality of a pla ying pitch, the applicant has
to submit a full assessment demonstr ating
how the rele vant guidance , policies andcriteria ha ve been addressed. There is also
an expectation that o verall, the de velopment
will deliv er an increase and enhancement of
sports facilities , as w ell as , the pro vision of
wider pub lic benefits , including pub lic access ,
and theref ore enab ling and promoting
physical activity and encour aging healthier
lifestyles and habits f or all ages .
21.47 It is recognised that pr ivate spor ts facilities
assist in meeting the wider spor ts needs of
this borough as w ell as other neighbour ing
boroughs . Owners of pr ivate facilities are
encour aged to mak e them a vailable for pub lic
access and use . Comm unity use ag reements
will be sought to secure comm unity access ,
that is accessib le and aff ordab le, particular ly
where this will address impacts ar ising out of
a development.  An ag reement will include
how oppor tunities f or wider comm unity
access will be managed and maintained, as
set out in the suppor ting te xt to P olicy 49
Social and Comm unity Infr astructure .
21.48 Where a proposal in volves the relocation of
a pla ying field, the applicant m ust detail the
exact timing of when the ne w pla ying field will
be relocated to minimise lost pla ying time .
For larger de velopments , it is e xpected that
the pla ying field w ould be constr ucted ear ly
in the de velopment and the phasing of
re-pro vision will be secured in a legal
agreement.
21.49 Indoor spor t facilities are co vered b y Policy
49 ‘Social and Comm unity Infr astructure’.
Policy 38.  Urban Greening
Urban Greening and the Urban Greening F actor
A. All de velopment proposals should integ rate g reen infr astructure and pro vide f or urban g reening.  It
is necessar y to consider g reen infr astructure at an ear ly stage of the design process and incor porate
this as par t of an integ rated design approach.
B.Major de velopments are required to:
1. Conduct an Urban Greening F actor (UGF) assessment in accordance with the methodology
set out in the London Plan;
2. ii. Achie ve an UGF of a minim um of 0.4 f or de velopments that are predominantly residential;
3. iii. Achie ve an UGF of a minim um of 0.3 f or de velopments that are predominantly commercial
249Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21C.All other de velopments are required to include urban g reening elements , although no UGF calculation
has to be submitted.
Applicants will be required to pro vide the f ollowing inf ormation:
1. Appropr iate inf ormation which pro vides sufficient detail on the type(s) of g reen infr astructure
proposed;
2. Justification indicating wh y the type(s) of g reen infr astructure ha ve been proposed f or the
development;
3. The UGF calculation and score (f or major de velopments);  and
4. Appropr iate inf ormation on ho w the urban g reening elements will be maintained and managed
over the lif etime of the de velopment.
D.Any new urban g reening element should f ocus on tac kling the climate emergency and/or help a void
or mitigate the impacts of the proposed de velopment on biodiv ersity b y pro viding locally rele vant
greening that complements the site’ s existing wildlif e value and that will achie ve an o verall gain in
biodiv ersity .
Green r oofs
E. Extensiv e green roofs should be incor porated into de velopments with roof plate areas of 100sqm
or more , where technically f easib le. At least 70% of an y potential roof plate area should be used
as biodiv ersity-based e xtensiv e green roof .
F.Developments proposing the installation of roof le vel solar technologies are required to incor porate
the panels o ver a g reen roof area to f orm a ‘bio-solar roof ’, where the o verarching biodiv ersity and
drainage functions of the g reen roof will not be adv ersely aff ected.  Integ rated solutions are a vailab le
for both ne w build constr uction and retrofit projects , which w ould allo w for the entire roof area to
qualify as a g reen roof , and if a biodiv ersity v egetation finish is elected f or, this can fur ther enhance
the BREEAM credit r ating f or the roof element (see P olicy 6.  Sustainab le constr uction standards)
G. The on us is on an applicant to pro vide e vidence and justification if a g reen roof cannot be f easib ly
incor porated.
H. Developments in volving the e xtension of e xisting b uildings are strongly encour aged to retrofit
extensiv e green roofs on e xisting roof areas where f easib le, in addition to pro viding g reen roofs on
the e xtension where technically f easib le.
I. The use of g reen w alls is also encour aged and suppor ted.
Urban Greening and Urban Greening F actor
21.50 Urban g reening descr ibes the incor poration
of green infr astructure elements into a
development, such as v egetation, trees ,
green roofs , green w alls, hedgero ws and
water f eatures .There can be m ultiple benefits
to including these f eatures in ne w
development including tac kling the climate
emergency b y pro viding carbon stor age,
impro ved biodiv ersity and habitat
enhancements , impro ved ph ysical and mental
wellbeing, access to f ood g rowing and
gardening, impro ved air quality , wateratten uation, impro ved visual amenity and
helping to address the urban heat island
effect.
21.51 London Plan P olicy G5 requires all major
developments to include urban g reening as
a fundamental element of site and b uilding
design. The policy introduces the use of an
Urban Greening F actor (UGF) to e valuate the
quantity and quality of urban g reening
provided b y a de velopment proposal.  It
enab les major de velopments to demonstr ate
how the y have included urban g reening as a
fundamental element of site and b uilding
design in order to meet London Plan P olicy
G5 Urban g reening.  A UGF calculator  has
25021  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughbeen prepared to help applicants calculate
the UGF score of a scheme and present the
relevant inf ormation as par t of their
application.
21.52 The London Borough of Richmond upon
Thames has not y et de veloped its o wn UGF ,
and theref ore the minim um benchmar ks in
this policy ma y be subject to change in the
future (such as through the de velopment of
an Urban Greening or similar SPD , based on
local e vidence and need). The benchmar ks
should be seen as minim um and not the
maxim um required.
21.53 The pro vision of urban g reening can help to
address other London Plan policies . However,
the UGF tool should not be used to
demonstr ate compliance with these policies
as these will also need to be addressed in
their o wn right.
21.54 Given the nature of Richmond borough and
that the major ity of de velopment will come
forward on small sites , it will be impor tant that
these sites also contr ibute to the pro vision of
additional g reen infr astructure in the borough.
Theref ore, planning applications submitted
for small sites will need to incor porate urban
greening on site and/or within the
development. While there are man y ways this
can be done , three e xamples include creating
greener front gardens , using capillar y matting
instead of hard standing f or car par king areas
and increasing the o verall amount of
vegetation on site .
21.55 Further guidance on the UGF is set out in the
London Plan P olicy G5 as w ell as London
SPG on Urban Greening F actor (Consultation
draft, September 2021).
Green r oofs
21.56 Green roofs are an essential sustainab le
design consider ation and can tak e man y
forms in order to maximise their benefits in a
given location. They have man y benefits ,
including the f ollowing:
1. adaptation to climate change and
reduction in urban heat island eff ects
(i.e. aiding cooling);2. mitigation of climate change and carbon
savings (i.e . aiding energy efficiency);
3. enhancement of biodiv ersity and
provision of impor tant refuges f or wildlif e
in urban areas;
4. provision of Sustainab le Dr ainage
Systems (SuDS) to a void rapid r ain
run-off into dr ains and r ivers and
impro ve water quality;
5. provision of g reen space and potentially
accessib le roof space;
6. impro vements to visual appear ance;
7. enhanced roof and sound insulation
proper ties and resilience of the b uilding;
8. enhanced roof lif espan b y protecting
under lying w aterproofing systems;
9. reduction in air and noise pollution;  and
10. growing f ood.
21.57 Green roofs m ust be considered at the
earliest possib le stage of designing a
proposal to ensure their eff ective oper ation.
They must be designed to:
1. imaximise benefits f or biodiv ersity ,
sustainab le urban dr ainage , urban
cooling and urban air quality
enhancements;
2. promote ecological div ersity including
planting based on UK nativ e species
wildflo wers and shr ubs to help suppor t
nativ e wildlif e species , in line with
priorities set out in the Richmond
Biodiv ersity Action Plan;
3. achie ve maxim um biodiv ersity/climate
change benefits b y ensur ing the depth
of substr ate/ soil on g reen roofs is
betw een 80mm to 150mm in depth.
Substr ate depths belo w 80mm will only
be considered acceptab le in v ery
exceptional circumstances where there
is rob ust and credib le evidence in place
to demonstr ate wh y minim um substr ate
depths cannot be deliv ered;
4. deliver measur able net gains f or
biodiv ersity and, where appropr iate,
balance this with the pro vision of
multi-functional roof garden g reen space
areas that ma y be accessib le by
occupiers of the b uilding as w ell as the
local comm unity;
251Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 215. accommodate surf ace w ater stor age
during se vere rainfall stor m events to
help minimise surf ace w ater r un-off;
6. provide f or long-ter m maintenance and
management, including pro visions f or
inspection and monitor ing the quality of
the g reen roof .
21.58 Biodiv ersity-based e xtensiv e green roofs are
the Council’ s clear pr iority in ter ms of g reen
roof pro vision as these will pla y a more
effective role in helping to tac kle the climate
emergency and help suppor t biodiv ersity .The
installation of intensiv e or semi-intensiv e
green roofs to pro vide amenity space will only
be acceptab le where it is clear ly
demonstr ated that this is required to meet
other policy requirements , and where the
primary biodiv ersity , sustainab le drainage
and cooling functions of the g reen roof will
not be adv ersely aff ected.  Dedicated areas
of biodiv ersity-based planting m ust be
maximised on intensiv e or semi-intensiv e
green roofs and amenity space m ust not
cover the major ity of roof space .21.59 Major de velopments are encour aged to
consider tree planting and f ood g rowing
oppor tunities within g reen roof designs where
feasib le.
21.60 High quality designs f or living g reen w alls
incor porating v egetation o ver a b uilding’ s
vertical surf ace should also be considered in
new developments .Vertical surf ace areas of
proposed living g reen w alls should be
included in the UGF calculation b ut not be
added to the site’ s total area.  A green w all’s
efficacy depends on ho w it’s constr ucted,
operated and maintained, and it has to be
ensured the y are sustainab le, through f or
example using drought-resistant and local
plants as w ell as recycled w ater f or drip
irrigation.
21.61 Living g reen w alls as w ells g reen roofs can
help adapting to a changing climate , impro ve
air quality and address biodiv ersity loss . In
addition, a g reener urban en vironment is
critical to impro ving the health and w ellbeing
of local comm unities .
Policy 39.  Biodiver sity and Geodiver sity
A. In accordance with London Plan P olicy G6 (Biodiv ersity and access to nature), the Council will
protect and enhance the borough’ s biodiv ersity and geodiv ersity , in par ticular , but not e xclusiv ely,
the sites designated f or their biodiv ersity and nature conser vation v alue, including the connectivity
betw een habitats and stepping-stone sites that connect wildlif e or ecological corr idors .This will be
achie ved by:
1. protecting biodiv ersity in, and adjacent to , the borough’ s designated sites f or biodiv ersity and
nature conser vation impor tance (including b uffer zones) against inappropr iate de velopment;
this includes sites of inter national or national nature conser vation impor tance , such as Special
Areas of Conser vation (SA Cs), Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) or National Nature
Reser ves (NNRs) as w ell as those of London- and boroughwide impor tance , including Local
Nature Reser ve (LNRs) and Sites of Impor tance f or Nature Conser vation (SINCs);
2. protecting and conser ving pr iority species and habitats that sit outside the nature conser vation
netw ork of designated sites , including protecting other e xisting habitats and f eatures of
biodiv ersity v alue on non-designated sites and promoting oppor tunities f or their enhancement
by using the Richmond Biodiv ersity Action Plan’ s aim and actions;
3. protecting ecological or wildlif e corr idors from de velopment which ma y destro y, impair or har m
the integ rity of the corr idor;
4. requir ing de velopment to deliv er rob ust and measur able net gains f or biodiv ersity b y
incor porating and/or creating ne w habitats or biodiv ersity f eatures , such as e xpansion and
impro vement of habitats , green links or habitat restor ation, incor poration of g reen roofs and
25221  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughwalls, tree planting as w ell as micro-habitat f eatures such as bird and bat br icks and bo xes,
hedgehog gates or wildlif e ponds in line with other policies of this Plan;
5. requir ing the f ollowing de velopment proposals to pro vide at least a minim um of 20% contr ibution
towards deliv ering measur able Biodiv ersity Net Gain (BNG):
a. small-scale householder applications which increase the f ootpr int and/or floorspace of
the e xisting dw elling;
b.all de velopment proposals , including con versions or changes of use , that result in 1
dwelling unit or more;
c. non-residential de velopment proposals which increase the f ootpr int and/or floorspace;
B.Where de velopment w ould impact on species or a habitat, especially where identified in the Richmond
Biodiv ersity Action Plan (BAP) at London or local le vel, or the Biodiv ersity Str ategy f or England,
development proposals shall demonstr ate that the mitigation hier archy has been f ollowed sequentially
in accordance with the pr inciples of:
1. avoid damaging the significant ecological f eatures of the SINC site .
2. minimise the o verall spatial impact and mitigate it b y impro ving the quality or management of
the rest of the site .
3. deliver off-site compensation of better biodiv ersity v alue.
C.In accordance with the adopted London Plan P olicy G6 (Biodiv ersity and access to nature),
development proposals which seek to reduce deficiencies in access to nature and theref ore help
deliver rob ust, credib le and measur able Net Gains f or Biodiv ersity (b y reducing natur al green space
deficiency) will be considered positiv ely b y the local planning author ity.
D.Development proposals which w ould cause har m to a designated site with geodiv ersity v alue will
not be per mitted unless an y damaging impacts can be pre vented b y appropr iate mitigation measures .
Development proposals which w ould aff ect a designated site with geodiv ersity v alue should seek
to retain, restore and enhance the geological interest where possib le.
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
Previous v ersions of Local Plans and their associated P olicies Maps ha ve identified Other Sites of Nature
Impor tance (OSNIs) as those sites which ha ve either been classified as ha ving impor tance f or biodiv ersity
or ha ve the potential to ha ve biodiv ersity .This site ter minology is being updated as par t of this Local
Plan and brought in line with the London Plan;  they will no w be identified as Sites of impor tance f or
Nature Conser vation (SINCs). Those sites with potential f or biodiv ersity , will be kno wn as Candidate
Sites and will be retained on a list held b y the Council until such time as the y either designated as a Site
of Impor tance f or Nature Conser vation or remo ved from the list due to lac k of qualifying cr iteria. At least
every 10 y ears a re view of the Richmond Sites of Impor tance f or Nature Conser vation will be carr ied out
and an y candidate sites on the list will be assessed against the cr iteria for designation, those fulfilling
the cr iteria will be recommended f or designation.
Earlier in 2021, the Council has appointed Salix Ecology to carr y out a comprehensiv e review of sites
designated f or nature conser vation impor tance in the borough. This includes re viewing e xisting
designations as w ell as identifying potential ne w ones to ensure the borough has identified a coherent
ecological netw ork.The Nature Conser vation Re view has been finalised.
253Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21The London Wildlif e Sites Board appro ves the o verall process of SINC re views to ensure compliance
and consistency with the guidance;  any Metropolitan site designations will be subject to appro val by the
London Wildlif e Sites Board. The repor t has been submitted to the London Wildlif e Sites Board f or
appro val as per the London Site of Impor tance f or Nature Conser vation guidance .
As a result of this Re view, all e xisting designated OSNIs will be renamed / relabelled as Sites of Impor tance
for Nature Conser vation (SINCs).  In addition, the Re view has recommended changes f or some sites ,
such as:
New SINCs
Expansion areas to be added to e xisting SINCs
Remo ving areas from an e xisting SINC
Changing the SINC status  (such as upg rades from ‘Local’  to ‘Borough’  impor tance)
Amalgamating e xisting SINCs 
Renaming e xisting SINCs
Further details , including a boroughwide map of the SINC changes , can be f ound in Appendix 4 of this
Plan, and in the Salix Ecology Review of Sites of Impor tance f or Nature Conser vation in Richmond upon
Thames (No vember 2021) , availab le on the Council’ s
website www .richmond.go v.uk/open_land_biodiv ersity_research .
The Re view has also identified Candidate SINC sites throughout the borough, which will be sur veyed in
2022 , at which point a decision will be made whether to include them as SINCs in the ne xt draft (Regulation
19) v ersion of this Local Plan.
A map and list of Candidate SINC sites in the borough can also be f ound in Appendix 4 of this Plan.
21.62 Biodiv ersity is promoted through the
designation of sites and areas (statutor y and
non-statutor y), including links and corr idors ,
that are of nature conser vation and
biodiv ersity v alue.The aim of this policy is to
protect and enhance the biodiv ersity in, and
adjacent to , the borough's designated sites
as well as other non-designated e xisting
habitats and f eatures of biodiv ersity v alue.
The borough's open land and r ivers, including
the Thames and its islands , the Riv er Cr ane,
Beverley Brook, Duk e of Nor thumber land
River, Longf ord Riv er and Whitton Brook,
including the r iver banks , are vital elements
that suppor t the borough's biodiv ersity . It is
impor tant that all these areas , and where
possib le green linkages betw een them, are
protected.
21.63 The Richmond Biodiv ersity Action Plan (BAP)
sets out the Sites of Metropolitan, Borough
and Local Impor tance f or Nature
Conser vation (SINC) in the borough. The
designated SINC sites as w ell as Sites of
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) are clear lyset out in the Richmond P olicies Map . [It
should be noted that the current P olicies Map
refers to SINCs as OSNIs .]
21.64 Sites of Impor tance f or Nature Conser vation
(SINCs) compr ise:
Sites of Metropolitan Impor tance –
strategically-impor tant conser vation sites
for London
Sites of Borough Impor tance – sites
which suppor t habitats or species of
value at the borough le vel
Sites of Local Impor tance – sites which
are impor tant f or the pro vision of access
to nature at the neighbourhood le vel.
21.65 The le vel of w eight giv en to protected sites
should be commensur ate to their impor tance
and the contr ibution that the y mak e to wider
ecological and g reen infr astructure netw orks.
The highest protection should be giv en to
sites with e xisting or proposed inter national
designations , (i.e. Special Areas of
Conser vation, SA Cs; Special Protection
25421  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughAreas , SPAs; Ramsar Sites) and national
designations (Sites of Special Scientific
Interest, SSSIs;  National Nature Reser ves,
NNRs).  Strong protection should be giv en to
sites of metropolitan and borough-wide
impor tance , and commensur ate protection
should be giv en to sites of local impor tance .
21.66 All de velopment, par ticular ly for ne w and
replacement b uildings and e xtensions to
buildings , should utilise oppor tunities to
attract ne w species to a site .This can include
the incor poration of ar tificial nest bo xes and
bricks in b uildings to pro vide nesting and
roosting oppor tunities f or birds , including
species under threat such as s wifts, house
martins, swallows and house sparro ws, and
where appropr iate, bats . Swift br icks
integ rated into ne w buildings are pref erred,
as these are suitab le for multiple bird species .
As outlined in the National Planning Pr actice
Guidance , these relativ ely small f eatures can
achie ve impor tant benefits f or wildlif e.
Applicants will be e xpected to pro vide details
of such f eatures as par t of planning
applications .
21.67 Where de velopment proposals could aff ect
or har m a European Protected Species or its
habitat, the application will be assessed
against the Habitats Regulations , and should
planning per mission be appro ved, then the
developer is required to independently obtain
a licence from Natur al England. Where
ecological sur veys and assessments are
under taken, de velopers should mak e all
ecological data a vailab le to Greenspace
Information f or Greater London (GiGL) – the
capital’ s environmental records centre .
21.68 Biodiv ersity , including the wider ecological
and g reen infr astructure netw orks, play a
crucial role in adapting to the eff ects of
climate change . Biodiv ersity enhances and
enriches the borough's landscapes and
wildlif e and mak es a significant contr ibution
to the distinctiv eness of this unique borough,
providing a sense of place , cultur al her itage ,
tranquillity as w ell as oppor tunities f or
recreation and a healthier lif estyle . In addition,
protecting and enhancing biodiv ersity ,
including the pro vision of ne w habitats and
features , increases the resilience of ourecosystems and helps the ph ysical
environment to change and adapt to diff erent
stresses .
21.69 This policy recognises that biodiv ersity
interest is not just confined to designated
nature conser vation areas . Outside
designated areas , including on pre viously
developed land or bro wnfield land, there is
an ab undance of biodiv ersity f eatures and
habitats , including trees , hedges , wildlif e
gardens , allotments , ponds , green roofs ,
living w alls, nesting and roosting bo xes, swift
and bat bo xes.
21.70 The promotion of nature conser vation should
be treated as integ ral to an y new
development scheme , not as an ‘add-on’.
Layout, design, b uildings , external lighting
and landscaping schemes should tak e
account of e xisting biodiv ersity f eatures and
habitats . New development should include
new or enhanced f eatures and habitats ,
design (such as g reen roofs) and landscaping
(including trees) that promote biodiv ersity ,
including pro vision f or their management.
These f eatures m ust also be protected dur ing
constr uction w orks, and this ma y be subject
to a planning condition as will subsequent
maintenance and monitor ing.
21.71 Sites of Impor tance f or Natur al Conser vation
(SINCs), pr iority habitats and other ecological
features outside of the SINCs netw ork will be
protected.  Developments should achie ve
biodiv ersity net gain, where ver feasib le and
appropr iate. Oppor tunities to enhance
existing habitats and create ne w habitats f or
priority species should be maximised.
Developments within areas of nature
deficiency should include f eatures to enhance
biodiv ersity , particular ly for priority species
and habitats .
21.72 Development will be e xpected to tak e all
oppor tunities to impro ve access to nature -
bringing nature to residents’  doorstep .
Development should aim to create net gains
in biodiv ersity , leaving the natur al
environment in a better state than bef ore.
255Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21Biodiver sity Net Gain
21.73 Biodiv ersity net gain is an approach which
aims to lea ve the natur al en vironment in a
better state than it pre viously w as.The
Council will require de velopment proposals
to maximise biodiv ersity benefits and
ecological connectivity through ensur ing that
biodiv ersity is a k ey consider ation ear ly in the
design process .
21.74 The Council requires de velopments to
incor porate ne w biodiv ersity f eatures and
habitats into the design of b uildings
themselv es as w ell as in appropr iate design
and landscaping schemes of ne w and/or
redevelopments (including surrounding areas
where appropr iate) with the aim to attr act
wildlif e and promote biodiv ersity where
possib le.This is par ticular ly impor tant in
areas with less access to areas of nature
conser vation impor tance .Theref ore,
proposals should seek to include:
1. habitat restor ation, re-creation and
expansion;
2. impro ved links betw een e xisting sites;
3. buffering of e xisting impor tant sites and
features , such as r ailway lines;
4. new biodiv ersity f eatures within
development;  and
5. secur ing management f or long ter m
enhancement.
21.75 The o verall pr iority is to secure the inclusion
of on-site BNG enhancement f eatures .The
baseline f or estab lishing 20% BNG
requirements will be identified
and achie ved by under taking a w alkover
survey (under taken by an accredited
ecologist) of the proposed de velopment site .
 Losses and gains as a result of proposed
development will be calculated using the
national Biodiv ersity Metr ic.
21.76 Whilst this P olicy will be de veloped fur ther as
the go vernment’ s Environment Bill prog resses
through par liament, it is e xpected that
development will need to comply with the
following pr inciples and guidance:
The latest DEFRA metr ic or ag reed
equiv alent should be used to quantify
the baseline and post-de velopmentbiodiv ersity v alue of the de velopment
site and off-site areas proposed f or
habitat creation.
Major ne w developments:
21.77 The Richmond BAP and other rele vant local
strategies set out measures to protect and
enhance the borough’ s biodiv ersity resource
by impro ving the quality of the local
environment through pr actical management,
habitat creation and protection of impor tant
wildlif e sites and connectivity .The
implementation of the Richmond BAP is an
impor tant v ehicle to impro ving the biodiv ersity
of the borough.
21.78 Any schemes f or incor porating ne w
biodiv ersity f eatures or creating ne w habitats
should tak e account of site constr aints (such
as utility infr astructure) and consider the use
of nativ e species .The species suitability and
their adaptability to the lik ely eff ects of climate
change need to be tak en into account.
Guidance on the use of nativ e species and
climate change can be f ound in the rele vant
BAP, the Ma yor of London's Biodiv ersity
Strategy and the London Tree and Woodland
Framework.
21.79 The Council will produce fur ther planning
guidance in the f orm of a SPD on biodiv ersity ,
specifically on biodiv ersity net gain, and set
out for applicants and de velopers ho w
biodiv ersity net gain can be deliv ered on a
variety of sites , ranging from major to
small-scale proposals .
Geodiver sity
21.80 Geodiv ersity is concer ned with the v ariety of
rocks, fossils , miner als, landf orms, soils and
natur al processes , such as w eather ing,
erosion and sedimentation, that under lie and
deter mine the char acter of our natur al
landscape and en vironment.
21.81 Geodiv ersity is also a k ey factor in the
borough's cultur al identity .The geodiv ersity
of an y area is an equally impor tant par t of its
natur al her itage as its biodiv ersity .
Conser vation, sustainab le management,
educational use and inter pretation of
geodiv ersity are thus as impor tant as that of
biodiv ersity or archaeology .
25621  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the borough21.82 National policy requires sites with geological
conser vation interests to be protected.21.83 In line with London Plan P olicy G9, there are
currently no regional or locally impor tant
geological sites identified in Richmond
borough.
Policy 40.  River s and river corridor s
A. The natur al, histor ic and b uilt en vironments of the Borough’ s water courses will be protected.
Development adjacent to the r iver corr idors will be e xpected to contr ibute to impro vements and
enhancements to the r iver en vironment.
Thames P olicy Area
B.Development within the Thames P olicy Area should respect and tak e account of the special char acter
of the reach as set out in the Thames Landscape Str ategy and Thames Str ategy and the Council’ s
Conser vation Area Statements and Studies .
C.Developments alongside and adjacent to the Riv er Thames should ensure that the y estab lish a
relationship with the r iver, maximise the benefits of its setting in ter ms of vie ws and vistas . Buildings
fronting the r iver should incor porate uses that enab le local comm unities and the pub lic to enjo y the
riverside , especially at g round le vel in b uildings fronting the r iver.
Public Access
D.All de velopment proposals alongside or adjacent to the borough's r iver corr idors should:
1. Retain e xisting pub lic access to the r iverside and alongside the r iver; and
2. Enhance e xisting pub lic access to the r iverside where impro vements are f easib le; o
3. Provide ne w pub lic access to the r iverside where possib le, and maintain e xisting points of
access to the f oreshore subject to health and saf ety consider ations . All major de velopment
proposals adjacent to the borough's r ivers are e xpected to pro vide pub lic access to the r iverside .
4. Provide r iparian lif e-saving equipment where required and necessar y.
River Thames pub lic river side walk
E. All de velopment proposals adjoining the Riv er Thames are required to pro vide a pub lic riverside
walk, including f or pedestr ians and cyclists , which will contr ibute to the o verarching aim of pro viding
a contin uous pub licly accessib le riverside w alk. For major de velopments , applicants will be e xpected
to work with adjoining lando wners in case o wnership issues w ould pre vent pub lic access .
River side uses,  including river -dependent and river -related uses
F.The Council will resist the loss of e xisting r iver-dependent and r iver-related uses that contr ibute to
the special char acter of the Riv er Thames , including r iver-related industr y (B2) and locally impor tant
whar ves, boat b uilding sheds and boaty ards and other r iverside f acilities such as slipw ays, doc ks,
jetties , piers and stairs .This will be achie ved by:
1. resisting rede velopment of e xisting r iver-dependent or r iver-related industr ial and b usiness
uses to non-r iver related emplo yment uses or residential uses unless it can be demonstr ated
that no other r iver-dependent or r iver-related use is f easib le or viab le;
2. ensur ing de velopment on sites along the r iver is functionally related to the r iver and includes
river-dependent or r iver-related uses where possib le, including gardens which are designed
to integ rate and enhance the r iver, and be sensitiv e to its ecology;
257Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 213. requir ing an assessment of the eff ect of the proposed de velopment on the oper ation of e xisting
river-dependent uses or r iverside gardens on the site and their associated f acilities on- and
off-site;  or requir ing an assessment of the potential of the site f or river-dependent uses and
facilities if there are none e xisting;
4. ensur ing that an y proposed residential uses , where appropr iate, along the r iver are compatib le
with the oper ation of the estab lished r iver-related and r iver-dependent uses;
5. requir ing setting bac k development from r iver banks and e xisting flood def ences along the
River Thames .
21.84 The borough's r ivers, their banks and
surrounding en vironments contr ibute to the
special and distinctiv e char acter of the
borough. The r ivers are impor tant
components of the wider Green Infr astructure
netw ork and pro vide v aluab le habitats f or
wildlif e including recreational oppor tunities
for local comm unities .
21.85 The Riv er Thames r uns f or 34 km through
the borough and f orms par t of the Blue
Ribbon Netw ork, which is a netw ork of link ed
waterw ays of str ategic impor tance f or
London. This borough is the only one in
London that is intersected b y the Thames ,
theref ore benefiting from one of the longest
river frontages and associated recreational
areas , which giv es the borough a unique and
histor ic landscape char acter .The Riv er
Thames connects a v ariety of landscapes
and to wnscapes , including open stretches of
woodland, par ks and open spaces , wildlif e
habitats , impor tant her itage assets as w ell as
industr ial and urban w aterfronts .
21.86 The borough's Blue Rib bon netw ork does not
only contain the Riv er Thames , but other
impor tant r ivers and w aterbodies , including
the Riv er Cr ane, Duk e of Nor thumber land
River, Longf ord Riv er and Be verley Brook.
These are also identified as g reen g rid areas
in the Ma yor of London’ s All London Green
Grid SPG, highlighting the div ersity of the
borough’ s green and b lue landscapes and
environments .
21.87 The netw ork of link ed w aterw ays across the
borough and be yond are m ultifunctional
assets .They pro vide tr anspor t and recreation
corridors;  green infr astructure;  a ser ies of
diverse and impor tant habitats;  a unique
backdrop f or impor tant her itage assets ,including World Her itage Sites , landscapes ,
views, cultur al and comm unity activities;  as
well as dr ainage , flood and w ater
management and urban cooling functions .
As such, the r ivers pro vide en vironmental,
economic , health and w ellbeing benefits f or
comm unities and contr ibute to the special
and distinctiv e char acter of the borough.
21.88 The Tidal Thames within the London Borough
of Richmond is within the South East Inshore
Marine Plan area.  A plan f or this area has
been prepared b y the Mar ine Management
Organisation and all author isation or
enforcement decisions m ust be made in
accordance with the Mar ine Plan f or an y
planning activity belo w mean high w ater
springs, including sections of a tidal r iver.
21.89 The Riv er Cr ane is an impor tant r iver corr idor,
running f or 30 kilometres from Harro w
through Twickenham and St Margarets to the
Thames at Isle worth, and which has benefited
from significant en vironmental impro vements .
Where appropr iate, developments alongside
and adjacent to the Riv er Cr ane should
contr ibute to the o verarching aim of creating
a metropolitan par k that pro vides a
contin uous , accessib le link betw een
Hounslo w Heath and the Riv er Thames ,
incor porating r iver restor ation w orks along
the lo wer Cr ane, including a long distance
footpath, impro ved access f or surrounding
comm unities and an enhanced wildlif e /
ecological corr idor.This applies in par ticular
to the f ollowing de velopment sites that are
considered to be within the Riv er Cr ane and
the connecting Duk e of Nor thumber land Riv er
corridor: Greggs bak ery, The Stoop ,
Twickenham Stadium, the Depot and
Mere way Day Centre .
25821  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the borough21.90 Setting bac k built de velopment from the
borough's r ivers, including r iverbanks and
existing flood def ences will be encour aged
and suppor ted.This will not only allo w for the
maintenance and future upg rading of the
flood def ences , but pro vide oppor tunities to
enhance biodiv ersity as w ell as increase and
open up pub lic access alongside and to the
river.The Council, in conjunction with the
Environment Agency , will require a b uffer
zone of 8 metres on the borough's r ivers
(including the fluvial Thames) and 16 metres
for the tidal Thames .
Thames P olicy Area
21.91 Development proposals within the Thames
Policy Area, where appropr iate, should
ensure that their use and design estab lish a
positiv e relationship with the r iver. Account
should be tak en of the special and v aried
characters of the Riv er Thames as set out in
detail in the Thames Landscape Str ategy
(from Hampton to K ew) and the Thames
Strategy (from K ew to Chelsea) as w ell as
the Council's Conser vation Area Appr aisals .
21.92 Developments alongside and adjacent to the
River Thames should:
protect, and where appropr iate enhance ,
the individuality and char acter of the
reach;
estab lish a relationship with the r iver and
address the r iver as a frontage;
open up vie ws and vistas to allo w the
public to appreciate the r iverside setting;
protect and, where oppor tunities ar ise,
enhance e xisting access points ,
including r iver-dependent str uctures
such as br idges , jetties , piers and
slipw ays;
allow for pub lic access f or pedestr ians
and cyclists , and where appropr iate
boats , to enab le local comm unities to
gain access to the r iver and enjo y the
riverside;
ensure appropr iate land uses enab le the
public to enjo y the r iverside setting,
especially at g round le vel in b uildings
fronting the r iver where possib le.Public access
21.93 There is pub lic access to m uch of the
riverbank in the borough either b y towpath or
riverside open spaces . New developments
adjacent to and alongside the borough's r ivers
should pro vide pub lic access to the r iver,
riverside and the f oreshore where f easib le
and appropr iate. Existing pub lic access to the
borough's r ivers should be retained and
oppor tunities should be tak en to impro ve and
enhance access arr angements , including
creating inclusiv e access , where possib le.
21.94 There are par ts of the borough where pub lic
access to the r ivers, including the Riv er
Thames , is limited, such as from Kingston
Bridge to Twickenham. There is a
long-standing str ategy and aim to pro vide a
contin uous pub lic riverside w alk along both
sides of the Riv er Thames .The Council has
secured the oppor tunity to pro vide
consider able sections of pub lic riverside w alk
by requir ing a pub lic path to be pro vided
where ver a de velopment adjoins the Riv er
Thames .Theref ore, all de velopments
adjacent to the Riv er Thames are required to
contr ibute to the pub lic riverside w alk along
the Riv er Thames , even if there is currently
no pub lic access to the route on either side
of the de velopment site .The Council e xpects
developers , particular ly on major
development sites , to w ork with adjoining
lando wners where land o wnership issues ma y
prevent the aim of achie ving pub lic access;
this is to ensure the r iver and the r iverside
can be enjo yed by the wider pub lic and local
comm unity.
21.95 The r iver corr idors , including their associated
parks and open spaces , provide impor tant
oppor tunities f or recreation and health y
lifestyles .Theref ore, all major de velopment
proposals adjacent to the borough's r ivers
should pro vide through-site links to the
riverside to enab le the pub lic access to the
riverside en vironment.
21.96 Public access to , and alongside , the r ivers,
for pedestr ians, cyclists and boats where
appropr iate, will be secured through Planning
Obligations .
259Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21River side uses,  including river -dependent and
river -related uses
21.97 River-dependent uses are those whose
primary pur pose is dependent on the r iver for
siting and function. They are defined as an
activity which can only be conducted on, in,
over or adjacent to the r iver because the
activity requires direct access to the r iver and
which in volves, as an integ ral par t of the
activity , the use of the w ater. River-dependent
structures which ma y in e xceptional
circumstances be per mitted to encroach into
the river and its f oreshore include tunnels ,
bridges , jetties , piers , and slipw ays.
21.98 River-dependent f acilities , such as boaty ards
and sheds , pub lic and pr ivate whar ves,
slipw ays, wet and dr y doc ks and cr anes , as
well as piers , pontoons , jetties and stairs are
essential f or the sur vival of the r iver related
industr y and to suppor t the contin ued activ e
use of the r iver.Theref ore, they will be
protected so that the y are not lost to other
uses .The Council suppor ts in pr inciple the
safeguarding of the sites identified in The
Mayor’s Assessment of Boaty ard F acilities
on the Riv er Thames (2007) and the netw ork
of Saf eguarded Whar ves.
21.99 River-related industr ial and b usiness uses ,
especially those suppor ting r iver-dependent
uses in volving the constr uction, repair , sale
and ser vicing of r iver craft, mak e a vital
contr ibution to the contin uation of the histor ic
tradition and function of the Riv er Thames f ortranspor tation, comm unication and recreation
and the y also pla y a role in the local
econom y.This also includes uses and
structures that suppor t water-based
passenger , tour ism and freight tr anspor t as
well as w ater-based spor t and leisure
activities , including visitor and pleasure cr aft
moor ings.There should be a mo ve to
reducing carbon emissions and the
environmental impact, f or example a way from
diesel engines . River-related uses ma y also
include a garden or par k specifically designed
to enhance pub lic appreciation and pub lic
access to the r iver.
21.100 The Council will theref ore protect the e xisting
river-related industr ial and b usiness uses and
ensure the y are not lost to other uses . In
addition to their functional roles , river-related
uses mak e an irreplaceab le contr ibution to
the char acter and contr asts of the individual
reaches through the activity , distinctiv e
building f orms, varied visual interest and
histor ical link the y pro vide.The
redevelopment of e xisting r iver-related
industr ial and b usiness sites to residential
and non r iver-related b usiness uses will not
be per mitted unless it can be demonstr ated
that such uses are not viab le or f easib le.This
must include e vidence of completion of a full
and proper mar keting e xercise of the site at
realistic pr ices both f or river-dependent and
river-related uses o ver a minim um per iod of
two contin uous y ears in accordance with the
approach set out in Appendix 2.
Policy 41.  Moorings and floating structures
A. There is a presumption against ne w proposals f or houseboats , including e xtensions to e xisting
houseboats , and other moor ings or floating str uctures designed f or per manent residential use .
B.Replacement houseboats should not be mater ially larger than e xisting nor har m the char acter of
the river.
C.A new moor ing or other floating str ucture or de velopment of an e xisting moor ing will be suppor ted
if it complies with the f ollowing cr iteria:
1. it does not har m the char acter , openness and vie ws of the r iver, by virtue of its design and
height;
2. the proposed use is r iver-dependent or r iver-related;
3. there is no interf erence with the recreational use of the r iver, riverside and na vigation;  and
4. the proposal is of wider benefit to the comm unity
26021  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the borough21.101 The Riv er Thames is designated Metropolitan
Open Land and theref ore the char acter and
openness of the r iver will be saf eguarded
from inappropr iate uses .Whilst it is
acknowledged that e xisting houseboats ,
moor ings and other floating str uctures are an
estab lished par t of the r iver scene ,
houseboats , by definition, are an
inappropr iate use within Metropolitan Open
Land. They can cause prob lems because of
infrastructure pro vision (such as se wage,
waste, water, secure stor age and w ashing),
provision of access , servicing and car
parking, obstr uction to na vigation and pub lic
access to the r iver, interf erence with the
recreational use of the r iver and its f oreshores
and impacts on the vie ws, local char acter and
amenity of the r iver.Theref ore, new proposals
for houseboats , including e xtensions to
existing houseboats and other moor ings or
floating str uctures designed f or per manent
residential uses will be resisted.21.102 Whilst the Council has limited po wers
regarding the appear ance of boats , planning
permission is required f or ne w moor ings and
change of use of the r iver bank and r iver bed
for per manent moor ing. Permanently moored
vessels and de velopment into w aterw ays
should only be per mitted f or water-related
uses .The Riv er Thames should not be used
as an e xtension of de velopab le land in
London, nor should par ts be a contin uous
line of moored cr aft.
21.103 It should be noted that the Council introduced
a Moor ings Byla w in 2015.  As such, a cr iminal
offence will be committed if an y vessel is
moored f or longer than per mitted without the
written consent of the Council. The
Environment Agency and the P ort of London
Author ity require houseboats to be licensed
and can object to them on na vigational
grounds .The En vironment Agency is also
able to object to houseboats on flood r isk and
biodiv ersity g rounds .
Policy 42. Trees, Woodland and Landscape
A. In accordance with London Plan (2021) P olicy G7 (T rees and w oodlands), the Council will require
the protection of e xisting trees and the pro vision of ne w trees , shrubs, hedgero ws and other
vegetation of landscape significance that complement e xisting, or create ne w, high quality g reen
elements , which deliv er air quality , climate change , amenity and biodiv ersity benefits .
B.To ensure de velopment protects , respects , contr ibutes to and enhances trees and landscapes , the
Council, when assessing de velopment proposals , will:
Trees and Woodlands
1. resist the loss of trees , including aged or v eteran trees , unless the tree is dead, dying or
dangerous;  or the tree is causing significant damage to adjacent str uctures;  or the tree has
little or no amenity v alue and it is not possib le to retain the tree as par t of the de velopment;  or
felling is f or reasons of good arbor icultur al practice;
2. resist de velopment that w ould result in the loss or deter ioration of irreplaceab le habitat such
as ancient w oodland;
3. require that site design or la yout ensures a har monious relationship betw een trees and their
surroundings , and will resist de velopment which will be lik ely to result in pressure to significantly
prune or remo ve trees;
4. require all de velopments to minimise impacts on e xisting trees , hedges , shrubs and other
significant v egetation on site and on adjoining land, and pro vide sufficient space f or the cro wns
and root systems of e xisting and proposed trees and their future g rowth. Developments within
proximity of e xisting trees are required to pro vide protection from an y damage dur ing
development.
261Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 215. require , where pr acticab le, an appropr iate replacement f or an y tree that is f elled;  a financial
contr ibution to the pro vision f or an off-site tree in line with the monetar y value of the e xisting
tree to be f elled will be required in line with the 'Capital Asset Value f or Amenity Trees' (CA VAT);
6. require ne w trees to be of a suitab le species f or the location in ter ms of height and root spread,
taking account of space required f or trees to mature;  the use of nativ e species as w ell as
large-canopied species are encour aged where appropr iate;
7. where appropr iate and rele vant, require the pro vision of large-canopied tree lined streets as
set out in the NPPF;
8. require that trees are adequately protected throughout the course of de velopment, in accordance
with Br itish Standard 5837 (T rees in relation to design, demolition and constr uction –
Recommendations).
C.The Council will use Tree Preser vation Orders (TPOs) or attach planning conditions to protect an y
trees considered to be of v alue to the to wnscape and amenity in order to secure their retention.
Landscape
1. require the retention of impor tant e xisting landscape f eatures where pr acticab le;
2. require landscape design and mater ials to be of high quality and compatib le with the surrounding
landscape and char acter ; and
3. require planting, including ne w trees , shrubs and other significant v egetation where appropr iate,
prioritising the use of appropr iate nativ e tree and shr ub species to help suppor t biodiv ersity
and connect to the wider g reen infr astructure netw ork.
D.The Council will seek long-ter m maintenance and management plans to accompan y tree and
landscaping proposals where appropr iate.
21.104 The ab undance of trees is a g reat asset to
this borough's unique en vironment. Trees as
well as other significant v egetation and
landscape are k ey components of the
borough's ecological and g reen infr astructure
netw ork.They soften the hardness of
buildings and streets , add lif e, colour and
character to the urban landscape and
enhance open spaces and the r iverside .
Trees and other planting, including
contiguous gardens and g reen oases , deliv er
multiple benefits .They pro vide an impor tant
habitat f or wildlif e; help impro ve urban air
quality b y reducing le vels of carbon dio xide
and airbor ne pollutants such as nitrogen
dioxide and har mful par ticulates (such as
PM10's and PM2.5's);  dampen noise from
traffic and congestion;  increase the supply of
oxygen, pro vide shade f or streets , open areas
and par ks as w ell as f or buildings .They play
an impor tant par t in suppor ting biodiv ersity
and will help deliv er net gains f or biodiv ersity
by pro viding wildlif e habitats and help deliv er
net gains f or biodiv ersity b y helping to restore ,strengthen and create landscape-scale g reen
infrastructure netw orks and help estab lish
coherent ecological netw orks (strengthening
wildlif e and ecological corr idors).
21.105 Trees and other landscape f eatures can help
areas to adapt to the eff ects of climate
change , particular ly due to their ability to
capture and store atmospher ic carbon
dioxide, providing a cooling eff ect and
contr ibuting to the reduction of urban heat
islands through shade co ver and regulating
local temper ature e xtremes;  this is impor tant
due to projected future increases in
temper ature as a result of climate change
with more frequent and more pro-longed
summer heatw aves and higher summer
temper atures . In addition, the y can assist in
reducing surf ace w ater r un off r ates and flash
floods dur ing hea vy rainfall events through
absor ption and infiltr ation.
21.106 The London Plan sets out the Ma yor’s
ambition to increase tree canop y in London
by 10% b y 2050. The Council’ s Climate
26221  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughEmergency Str ategy and Action Plan commit
to increasing tree co ver in the borough.
Following an e xtensiv e sur vey of trees across
the borough on highw ays, cemeter ies, parks
and open spaces and proper ty owned b y the
Council, a prog ramme of e xtensiv e planting
is being under taken, including replanting at
sites where trees ha ve been remo ved and
where tree planting could mitigate the eff ects
of climate change .There is fur ther w ork
planned to under take a boroughwide tree
assessment, and oppor tunities f or tree
planting in str ategic locations;  this includes
identifying v eteran and her itage trees that
can be celebr ated through the creation of
educational mater ial and w alks.
21.107 Many trees in the borough are already
protected b y Tree Preser vation Orders
(TPOs) or as a result of their location in
Conser vation Areas .The Council will consider
making fur ther TPOs where trees ha ve been
assessed to be of v alue to the to wnscape
and amenity and which are threatened b y
development.
21.108 Development proposals are required to retain
and protect e xisting trees , and minimise an y
impacts on trees , shrubs and other significant
vegetation, including through the pro vision of
sufficient space f or the cro wns and root
systems of e xisting and proposed trees and
their future g rowth. Developer contr ibutions
towards trees within the pub lic realm ma y be
required where appropr iate (see the Council's
Planning Ob ligations SPD).
21.109 In accordance with the o verarching adopted
London Plan (2021) P olicy G7 (T rees and
woodlands), the planting of trees and ne w
urban w oodlands in str ategic locations within
the borough to help deliv er landscape-scale
green infr astructure enhancements will be
encour aged, pr ioritising the use of nativ e tree
species .Tree planting should be considered
from the design stage of a proposal. The
location of ne w trees should be planned to
complement proposed f eatures , have an
appropr iately siz ed tree pit and soil v olume ,
be bio-secure so that species are protected
from e xposure to ne w pests and diseases ,
and be appropr iate f or the intended use , of
the de velopment. The Council will request
details relating to the planned maintenancefor ne w trees and landscaping on
development sites , to ensure planting
becomes estab lished, par ticular ly within the
first fiv e years, and will suppor t mature
specimens . Planning conditions will also be
used, as appropr iate.
21.110 It is impor tant that species are chosen that
are appropr iate to the scale of their
surroundings and pub lic amenity , and
guidance should be sought from rele vant
experts.The Council encour ages the use of
appropr iate nativ e species where appropr iate.
However, it is ac knowledged that nativ e
species ma y not alw ays be the most suitab le
choice , such as in cer tain histor ic landscapes ,
where there is an e xisting positiv e char acter
of distinctiv e non-nativ e trees .Various
species of tree within the borough are
particular ly vulner able to the eff ects of climate
change:  this w as evidenced in 2018 where a
long, hot summer resulted in high mor tality
rates of trees both nativ e and non-nativ e,
including Ro wan (Sorb us aucupar ia) and the
common horse chestn ut (Aesculus
hippocastan um). There ma y also be other
particular situations where the use of
non-nativ e species ma y be beneficial.  In
addition, the Council encour ages schemes
that include large trees , where appropr iate,
as evidence suggests that the larger the tree ,
the g reater the benefits to addressing the
effects of climate change , impro ving air
quality , amenity and ecosystems .
21.111 An appropr iate replacement f or an y tree that
is felled will be required on-site where
practicab le.Where this is not possib le, the
Council will require a financial contr ibution to
provide an off-site street tree .The Council
will use the methodology set out in 'Capital
Asset Value f or Amenity Trees' (CA VAT) for
calculating the monetar y value and/or
compensation where a tree is f elled or
damaged.
21.112 The ter m 'landscape' is tak en to ref er to the
design of all space betw een b uildings and
includes w alls and boundar ies, paving as w ell
as planting.  It ref ers to both 'soft' as w ell as
'hard' landscape and mater ials.These
consider ations are often vital in creating an
appropr iate setting to ne w developments and
in integ rating ne w development to its
263Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 21surroundings . Landscape design m ust form
an integ ral par t of an y proposal and needs to
be considered in relation to the de velopment
as a whole at the star t of a project.
Landscape design and where appropr iate
tree planting as w ell as other g reen
infrastructure elements such as g reen roofs
and g reen w alls, will also need to contr ibute
to and complement the e xisting char acter of
an area.  Guidance on the retention and
planting of trees in ne w development can be
found in the repor t Residential De velopment
and Trees pub lished b y the Woodland Trust.21.113 The Council plans to pub lish guidance in the
form of a SPD on Trees, which will include
guidance on planting. This is intended to
provide fur ther details on the inf ormation
required at pre-application and application
stage , as w ell as around management,
maintenance and monitor ing.This can also
include updated advice on the use of nativ e
and drought-resistant species in light of
climate change .
Policy 43.  Floodlighting and other e xternal ar tificial lighting
A. Floodlighting, including alter ations and e xtensions , of spor ts pitches , cour ts and histor ic and other
architectur al features will be per mitted unless there is demonstr able har m to char acter , biodiv ersity
or amenity and living conditions .
B.The Council will consider the positiv e benefits to be gained from other ar tificial lighting proposals ,
such as f or saf ety of mo vement, secur ity of proper ty or e xtension of w orking pr actices .
C.The Council will seek to balance the need f or an y such proposal against the impact it ma y have on
the en vironment in ter ms of obtr usive light.
D.The f ollowing cr iteria will be tak en into account when assessing floodlighting:
1. the impacts on local char acter or histor ic integ rity;
2. the impacts on amenity and living conditions;
3. the impacts on biodiv ersity and wildlif e;
4. the benefits and impacts of the pro vision of floodlighting on the wider comm unity;
5. the benefits and eff ects on the use and viability of the f acility;
6. that it meets an identified need as set out within the council's pla ying pitch str ategy .
E. Favourable consider ation will be giv en to the replacement or impro vement of e xisting lighting where
it pro vides impro vements to e xisting adv erse impacts .
21.114 Floodlighting can enab le the full use of
outdoor spor t and leisure f acilities , but
consider ation m ust be giv en to an y
demonstr able har m to  biodiv ersity , amenity
and local char acter .
21.115 Exter nal lighting f or spor ts, secur ity or other
purposes , should be installed so that the
intensity and direction of light does not cause
any  demonstr able har m.
21.116 For a planning application f or outdoor spor ts
lighting to be successful the lighting should
be designed b y a specialist lighting designer ,
lighting  contr actor or man ufacturer who can
use specialist softw are to produce lightingdesigns which demonstr ate the required
performance standards , have minimal impact
on the local en vironment and meet the
planning regulations .The choice of luminaire
with the r ight optical distr ibution at the r ight
mounting height is cr itical to minimising light
spill and obtr usive light eff ects, while
providing the r ight lighting perf ormance f or
playing spor t.
21.117 Factors which will be tak en into account when
assessing proposals f or floodlighting will be:
1. The benefits:  the need f or lighting has
to be demonstr ated b y the applicant.
Issues to consider are:  how man y
26421  Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening
the boroughpeople will use or enjo y the f acility , for
how man y hours a w eek and f or what
purpose;  what w ould be the wider
benefits of the pro vision;  will it aff ect the
viability of the f acility;  will it create fuller
use of the f acility;  will it create spor ts
development and health activities;  will it
create coaching or oppor tunities f or
youth activities;  will it enhance the
appreciation of the histor ic or
architectur al her itage of the borough;
will it enhance secur ity and saf ety; does
it meet an identified need as set out
within the Council's Pla ying Pitch
Strategy;
2. Effect on biodiv ersity:  is it within or
adjacent to an area designated as
impor tant f or biodiv ersity (habitats and
species);  what w ould be the impacts on
species and habitats;
3. Effect on the wider area:  is it within or
adjacent to a designated her itage asset;
is it within the Thames P olicy Area,
Green Belt, Metropolitan Open Land;
would it ha ve a significant adv erse eff ect
on these designations;
4. Effect on amenity and living conditions:
effects and impacts when lit in ter ms of
sky glo w, glare (including the glare
caused b y light bouncing off a surf ace),
light trespass , noise and disturbance
from users;  the appear ance of the
installation when s witched off;5. Energy usage and energy efficiency (the
use of lo w energy lighting will be
expected);
6. Any planned mitigation measures such
as restr iction on lighting le vels and hours
of use .
21.118 It is impor tant that floodlights are designed
to be as unobtr usive as possib le when unlit,
in ter ms of n umber , height, width, design,
colour and siting.  Light pollution should be
minimised to protect biodiv ersity as w ell as
occupiers of proper ties, passers-b y and
vehicle users using best a vailab le lighting
technologies in ter ms of impact and energy
efficiency . Inno vative, smar t lighting
technologies which create a better spread
and f ocus and ha ve less impact on the
environment will be required.  Applicants are
referred to guidance notes pub lished b y the
Institution of Lighting Engineers such as the
Guidance Notes f or the Reduction of
Obtrusive Light as w ell as the guidance
produced b y Spor t England and the Institution
of Lighting Engineers on Ar tificial Spor ts
Lighting.
21.119 If per mission is g ranted, conditions or
Planning Ob ligations ma y be imposed to
restrict the lighting le vels and times of use ,
or to implement other measures to minimise
possib le adv erse eff ects such as post
installation requirements and the need to
maintain correct settings as w ell as
monitor ing, both within the site and on
adjoining land
265Increasing biodiv ersity and the quality of our g reen and b lue spaces , and g reening the
borough 2122 Impr oving design,  delivering
beautiful b uildings and high-quality
places
Policy 44.  Design Pr ocess
Optimising site capacity thr ough the design-led appr oach
A. In order to mak e the most efficient use of land b y optimising site capacity a design-led approach is
required, in accordance with London Plan P olicy D3.  A design-led approach will include an e valuation
of the attr ibutes of a site as w ell as the surrounding conte xt, char acter and capacity f or growth, as
set out in P olicy 25 Local char acter and design quality . Good design will be assessed as par t of the
planning process through use of the f ollowing tools .
Design and Access Statements
B.Design and Access Statements m ust clear ly document the design e volution and r ationale behind
the proposal. They must include an analysis of the site constr aints and wider surrounding conte xt,
oppor tunities and an assessment of ho w the conte xt has influenced the design. Where rele vant
they must demonstr ate the proposal aligns to the Conser vation Area Appr aisals as w ell as the
design guidance f or the rele vant char acter area as specified within the Urban Design Study 2021
and the rele vant Village Planning Guidance SPDs .
Pre-application
C.It is recommended that all planning applications receiv e pre-application advice pr ior to submitting
an application.  Applications f or major de velopment should be inf ormed b y a detailed and gen uine
pre-application process .This process in volves:
1. engagement in a planning perf ormance ag reement (PP A) that sets a fr amework for the Council’ s
consider ation of a proposal;  and
2. engagement with the Richmond Design Re view Panel (RDRP) as set out in the Council’ s RDRP
Terms of Ref erence which details the proposals that m ust be ref erred to the P anel.
D.All major applications m ust demonstr ate a meaningful and consistent engagement with local
comm unities that giv e them real po wer to shape de velopment from the ear ly stages and throughout
the process .
E. Applicants will be required to pro vide 3D digital massing models suitab le for collation b y the planning
team to assess cum ulativ e impact of de velopment where rele vant.This could be in a f orm that
accommodates softw are, such as VU.City.This is required f or Tall Building proposals or those
located within the protected vie ws and vistas as designated in P olicy 31: Views and Vistas and
shown in the P olices Map .
F.The use of design codes is encour aged f or large de velopments especially those that will in volve
constr uction o ver multiple y ears. Design codes will be essential as par t of major de velopment sites
which are subject to outline applications .The codes will need to be prescr iptive in order to specify
the height, scale , design r ationale , and mater iality as w ell as pub lic realm par ameters and align with
the guidance set out in the National Model Design Code .
Planning applications and post-planning
G. Design quality m ust be maintained through to b uilding completion in accordance with London Plan
Policy D4.
26622  Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18H. Ensur ing maxim um detail appropr iate f or the design stage is pro vided to a void the need f or later
design amendments that negativ ely impact quality (such as smok e vents, rainwater goods , grilles,
signage and other items to be affix ed to or alter the ele vations).  For major or comple x schemes a
higher le vel of detail m ust be submitted.
I. Outline applications will not be accepted f or proposals in Conser vation Areas , proposals that could
impact on the setting of Listed Buildings or proposals that include Tall Buildings .The w ording of the
planning per mission, associated conditions and legal ag reements should pro vide clar ity regarding
the quality of design.
22.1 The design-led approach together with the
processes and tools set out in this policy will
help ensure all de velopment deliv ers good
design.
22.2 Nationally , there has been a shift and f ocus
on the centr al role of design to create
beautiful places , as reflected in the National
Planning P olicy F ramework (NPPF) and the
National Design Guide .The London Plan
focuses on a design-led approach to deliv er
beautiful b uildings and high-quality places .
22.3 Through de velopment and change , there is
an oppor tunity to enhance the char acter of
an area to benefit e xisting comm unities and
future residents and visitors . Development in
the borough will need to recognise the unique
circumstances in our borough, which includes
numerous par ks, Conser vation Areas , listed
buildings , well utilised open spaces , and it is
the only London Borough to tr averse both
sides of the Riv er Thames .Theref ore, it is
impor tant de velopment demonstr ates ho w a
character-led approach to an y intensification
has been tak en.
22.4 Policy D3 in the London Plan sets out the
details of the design-led approach f or
development proposals to f ollow, and P olicy
D4 in the London Plan details the process
and actions that will help ensure de velopment
delivers good design b ut to also ensure that
the most efficient use of land is made so that
development on sites is optimised. The
optim um capacity f or a site does not mean
the maxim um capacity . A design-led
approach places an emphasis on ensur ing
that de velopments are sensitiv e to the
existing char acter , which incor porates positiv e
attributes of an area as w ell as being ab le to
help estab lish char acter or remo ve negativ e
attributes (such as unsympathetic b uildingextensions and alter ations that under mine
the consistency and quality of the
townscape).
22.5 The Urban Design Study 2021 pro vides an
analysis of char acter , capacity f or growth and
what elements of design could be impro ved
across the borough, along with specific
design guidance f or each char acter area.  A
Design and Access Statement should set out
the consider ation of design options , using the
principles of the ten char acter istics of
well-designed place as set out in the National
Design Guide;  it should be propor tionate to
the scale and type of de velopment, although
the pr inciples can be applied to larger
schemes as w ell as the detailed design of a
small space .
22.6 It is also impor tant to ensure that design is
maintained throughout the whole process b y
providing the detailed design of a
development ear ly in the planning process
and ensure that is deliv ered.  Often elements
of design or f or example landscaping details
are conditioned b ut constitute the k ey
elements of design, creating a desir able
environment and impro ving the pub lic realm
which are instr umental to the subsequent
quality of a place .Theref ore, detailed
elements such as landscaping should be
provided when seeking planning per mission
to ensure there is per meab le space to
accommodate trees and to ensure the y will
be ab le to reach matur ity and increase
biodiv ersity .This ensures that the design
vision is enacted in its entirety f or a site .
22.7 The London Plan recognises the impor tance
that 3D vir tual reality tools and other
interactive digital models ha ve in helping
understand the options and oppor tunities f or
particular sites . Applicants will theref ore be
267Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places 22
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18required to submit g raphic 3D modelling (as
provided f or example b y VU.City) f or buildings
proposed in the tall b uilding z ones or those
located within protected vie ws and vistas to
visually sho w the proposed de velopment.
22.8 Comm unity engagement is an integ ral par t
of the design process , which includes local
comm unities , by pro viding an oppor tunity to
have a meaningful sa y in ho w their area
develops .This should commence in ear ly
development stages and contin ue throughout
the dur ation of the design and de velopment
process . Engagement should not be a ‘tick
box’ exercise f or minor elements of the
development, b ut should seek to empo wer
comm unities b y working with them to shape
their en vironment and unloc k their kno wledge
of a place . As a result there should be less
opposition to a proposal when planning
permission is sought, as w ell as impro ved
outcomes f or the local comm unity where
adverse impacts can be mitigated and
potential benefits captured, throughout the
process through to the implementation of
development. The approach can be tailored
to the nature of the proposed de velopment
and the issues to be addressed.
22.9 Pre-application discussions are an impor tant
tool f or achie ving the best outcome on a site
and ensur ing that wider place-making
objectiv es are met. The Council promotes the
use of planning perf ormance ag reements
(PPAs) to pro vide a fr amework for handling
a development proposal from pre-application
stage through to decision, including a target
committee date , expectations and prog ramme
of meetings .The approach should be
propor tionate to the nature and scale of a
proposed de velopment and comple xity of the
issues to be addressed.22.10 The Richmond Design Re view Panel (RDRP)
has been set up b y Council with the aim of
raising the standard of design quality in the
borough.  It is an independent
multi-disciplinar y body whose members are
skilled in architecture , planning, landscape
architecture , urban design, engineer ing,
transpor t planning and her itage conser vation.
For each design re view, the P anel is based
on the e xpertise and specialist skills required
for the project(s) being re viewed.The Terms
of Ref erence on the Council’ s website set out
the current thresholds f or types of proposals
trigger ing a design re view, as w ell as details
of the types of re views and f ees.
22.11 Since the pub lication of the National Design
Guide , and the subsequent pub lication of the
National Model Design Code , there has been
increasing emphasis on the use of Design
Codes . Design coding is one tool a vailab le
to local planning author ities, comm unities and
developers to define and deliv er good design
and ensure design quality is upheld
throughout the planning process . Design
Codes are e xpected to f orm a role in the
Government’ s proposed future ref orms of the
plan-making system and should be de veloped
collabor atively with stak eholders and the
comm unity as appropr iate. A design code is
a set of simple , concise , illustr ated design
requirements that are visual and n umer ical
where ver possib le to pro vide specific , detailed
parameters f or the ph ysical de velopment of
a site or area. The borough-wide Urban
Design Study , together with the National
Model Design Guide , is intended to be used
as a basis f or an y future Design Codes .
Design codes will be in addition to design
guides , planning / site br iefs, Conser vation
Area Appr aisals and master plans as w ell as
guidance set out in the NPPF , National
Design Guide , National Model Design Code ,
planning pr actice guidance and London Plan.
Policy 45. Tall and Mid-Rise Building Zones
Definitions
Buildings which are 7 store ys or o ver, or 21 metres or more from the g round le vel to the top of the
building (whiche ver is lo wer) will be considered to be tall b uildings .
26822  Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Buildings which do not tr igger the definition of a tall b uilding set out abo ve, but are 5 store ys or o ver,
or 15 metres or more from the g round le vel to the top of the b uilding (whiche ver is lo wer) will be
considered to be mid-rise b uildings .
A. Proposals f or tall b uildings will only be appropr iate in tall b uilding z ones identified on the P olicies
Map and in Appendix 3, where the de velopment w ould not result in an y adv erse visual, functional,
environmental or cum ulativ e impacts , having regard to all cr iteria set out in the London Plan P olicy
D9.To tak e account of the local conte xt, proposals f or tall b uildings should address the f ollowing
criteria:
Visual Impacts
1. Tall buildings should respect the vie ws and vistas to wards her itage assets across the borough
and in neighbour ing boroughs , including distinctiv e roof line f eatures .
2. The location of tall b uildings should a void substantial visual interr uptions in areas with otherwise
very consistent b uilding and/or roof lines .
3. Tall buildings should respond to the analysis of vie ws and vistas (P olicy 31 Views and Vistas)
towards the site to ensure the f orm and detailing are sympathetic to the wider conte xt.
4. Tall buildings should consider the design of the lo wer, middle and upper par ts of the tall b uilding
and ho w the y work together as w ell as with the surrounding area and mid-r ange and long-r ange
views.
5. Development proposals should be suppor ted with g raphic 3D modelling to assess the individual
and cum ulativ e impact of the proposal on both the e xisting and emerging skyline , and on
day-time and night-time vie ws, in line with P olicy 44 Design process .
6. Development proposals aff ecting the setting and approaches of the K ew World Her itage Site ,
must address all cr iteria set out in P olicy 29 Ro yal Botanic Gardens , Kew World Her itage Site
Spatial Hier archy
7. The massing of tall b uildings should respect the propor tions of their local en vironment, including
the consider ation of the width of adjacent streets as w ell as pub lic open spaces , parks and
watercourses , and should be designed so as not o verwhelm the street and adjacent conte xt.
8. In cases of tall b uildings located close to the street edge , proposals should incor porate measures
to soften their edges and pro vide positiv e pub lic spaces at their base through the use of
generous w alkways and mature planting.
9. Proposals f or Tall Buildings will not be per mitted outside the identified Tall Building Zones (see
Appendix 3)
10. Proposals f or tall b uildings should not e xceed the appropr iate height r ange identified f or each
of the tall b uilding z ones in Appendix 3. The height of tall b uildings will be required to step
down to wards the edges of the z one as indicated on the g radient map unless it can be
demonstr ated that this w ould not be appropr iate in the local conte xt.
Tall and Mid-Rise Building Near the River Thames Fr onta ge
B.Proposals f or tall and mid-r ise b uildings should address the f ollowing cr iteria:
1. The design of Tall buildings and mid-r ise buildings fronting the Riv er Thames m ust respond to
views to wards them as w ell as from them.
2. In areas of larger-scale r iverfront b uildings , consider landw ard facing or ientation and step do wn
appropr iately to pro vide a tr ansition to wards the e xisting char acter and scale .
3. The design of tall b uildings and mid-r ise buildings should maintain the r iver frontage as a pub lic
resource . Developments should be set bac k to ph ysically and visually ensure the Thames P ath
269Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places 22
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18acts and f eels lik e a w elcoming pub lic route without hea vy overlooking from adjacent r iverside
residences . Ground floor uses should seek to activ ate the space as f ar as possib le.
Mid Rise Buildings 
C.Proposals f or ne w mid-r ise buildings or e xtensions to e xisting b uildings which increase their height
to 5 store ys or o ver, will usually only be appropr iate in mid-r ise and tall b uilding z ones identified on
the P olicies Map and in Appendix 3.  Proposals will be required to meet the requirements of P olicy
44 Design process and P olicy 28 Local char acter and design quality and should 
1. be carefully located and designed to step do wn to surrounding e xisting and proposed b uildings;
2. respond positiv ely and protect the setting of e xisting b uildings in the surrounding area, including
heritage assets;
3. respect the scale , width and propor tion of adjacent streets and w atercourses , and local
character , including potential eff ects on k ey char acter istics , valued f eatures and sensitivities
as outlined in the char acter area profiles in Section 3 of the Urban Design Study;
4. deliver a v aried and interesting roofline in response to surrounding architectur al styles , avoiding
long monotonous b locks of de velopment and/or e xcessiv e height.
5. Where proposals are located within identified mid-r ise and tall b uilding z ones , buildings should
not e xceed the appropr iate height identified in Appendix 3.
6. In cases of mid-r ise b uildings located close to the street edge , proposals should incor porate
measures to soften their edges and pro vide positiv e pub lic spaces at their base through the
use of generous w alkways and mature planting.
D.Proposals f or mid-r ise b uildings ma y be per mitted outside the identified mid-r ise and tall b uilding
zones where the y are:
1. located in a to wn centre (Whitton, Teddington, Twickenham, Richmond and East Sheen). The
Char acter Area Design Guidance in the Urban Design Study (2021) should be considered,
where rele vant, to demonstr ate appropr iateness to local conte xt; and/or
2. within tr ansitional areas to tall b uilding z ones;  and/or
3. within or adjacent to areas which include b uildings taller than the pre vailing height or subject
to substantial rede velopment;  and/or
4. a result of land assemb ly which enab les the creation of a comprehensiv e scheme;  and/or
5. close to str ategic roads and good pub lic transpor t accessibility;  and
6. able to meet P art C of this policy 
Proposed Chang es to the P olicies Map
The tall and mid-r ise b uilding z ones will be added to the P olicies Map , and are sho wn at Appendix 3.
22.12 Tall buildings can mak e a cr ucial, positiv e
contr ibution to good urban design as w ell as
providing densities suppor ting scheme
viability , maximising the deliv ery of aff ordab le
housing and optimising the use of land.
Height is only one element of a de velopment
when consider ing its acceptability andwhether it is of good design.  Nevertheless , it
is a significant one in ter ms of increasing the
visibility of a de velopment and its potential
wider impact on an area’ s char acter .
27022  Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1822.13 The te xt bo x abo ve sets out the borough’ s
local definition of a tall b uilding. This definition
has been de veloped in response to the
low-rise b uilding heights , char acter and
sensitivities within the borough. The use of a
single definition of a tall b uilding pro vides an
approach which is simple and easy to
understand f or residents , and which adds
certainty to the implementation of the policy .
22.14 The definition will be applied in the conte xt
of Policy D9 of the London Plan, which states
that local definitions of a tall b uilding should
not be less than 6 store ys or 18 metres
measured from g round to the floor le vel of
the upper most store y (excludes the height of
the upper most store y). For clar ity, buildings
will be considered tall where the y meet the
definitions set out abo ve and P art A of P olicy
D9 of the London Plan.
22.15 Ground le vel is defined as the surf ace of the
ground immediately adjacent to the b uilding
in question and does not include an y
additions laid on top of the g round (such as
decking). Where the site is not flat, the g round
level will be considered as the highest par t
of the surf ace which adjoins the b uilding. The
top of the b uilding does not include f or typical
structures and plant f ound at roof le vel, such
as railings , plant equipment, maintenance
cranes or ele vator shafts . However, the
placement, scale and design of these m ust
follow good pr actice .
22.16 It is recognised that some de velopments will
have differing floor heights , particular ly at the
ground floor .The definition applies to
whiche ver is the lo wer betw een the n umber
of the store ys and the metres abo ve ground
level.Where applications in volve the addition
of store ys on a b uilding that w ould already
be classed as 'tall' or the additional store ys
would cause the b uilding to be considered
'tall' in accordance with the definition abo ve,
an assessment against the cr iteria of this
policy will be carr ied out.
22.17 The Urban Design Study dr aws on
development capacity , existing tall b uildings
and consented tall b uildings mapping to help
inform an o verall str ategy f or potential
development and/or increased height across
the borough. The Study sets out a str ategyfor mid-r ise and tall b uilding de velopment
(see the o verall de velopment str ategy Map 1
in Section 5 of this Plan) and from this
identifies tall and mid-r ise building z ones (see
appendix 3 f or zone details).
22.18 Tall buildings will only be an acceptab le form
of development in tall b uilding z ones identified
on tall b uilding maps in Appendix 3. The
designation of an area as a tall b uilding z one
does not mean the area has capacity to
receiv e tall b uildings within the appropr iate
range across its whole e xtent.  Development
proposals will need to consider the specific
conte xt of the plot, e xisting b uildings
surrounding the plot and an y other
development proposals in the area, including
consented schemes .This designation also
does not preclude other f orms of
development.  Locations identified as tall
building z ones can also accommodate high
density mid-r ise or mansion-b lock style
development r ather than only standalone
high-r ise to wers. Outside tall b uilding z ones ,
there is no presumption in suppor t of tall
buildings .
22.19 The identified tall b uilding z ones seek to str ike
a careful balance betw een maximising the
development potential of k ey areas of g rowth
and protecting the significance of v alued
histor ical assets including listed b uildings and
Conser vation Areas (see P olicy 29 f or the
details of designated her itage assets). The
consented heights and the location of e xisting
tall b uildings which are considered
inappropr iate ha ve not been considered as
a sufficient justification f or the creation of
further tall b uilding z ones .The to wnscape of
our borough is not gener ally appropr iate f or
locating clusters of tall b uildings . As such
cluster ing is discour aged.
22.20 Tall building maps in Appendix 3 identify an
appropr iate tall b uilding height r ange f or each
zone and sho w ho w heights should be
dispersed across the z one. Darker colours
indicate more potential f or height and the light
colours indicate less potential f or height. The
maps mak e it clear that the identified
maxim um appropr iate height does not apply
to the entire z one; buildings will be e xpected
to step do wn to wards the edges of the z one
as indicated on the g radient tall b uildings map
271Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places 22
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18unless it can be demonstr ated that this w ould
not be appropr iate in the local conte xt.The
appropr iate height r anges ha ve been
informed b y a visual impact analysis , taking
into account her itage asset settings , views
and, where rele vant, e xisting guidance on
cluster f ormation and 3D modelling.
Development proposals e xceeding the
appropr iate height will not be suppor ted on
design g rounds .
22.21 Tall buildings m ust be of such a design quality
that it enhances the char acter of the place
within which it is set. The London Plan P olicy
D9 sets out detailed requirements and cr iteria
against which tall b uilding proposals will be
assessed. These include consider ation of the
visual, functional, en vironmental and
cumulativ e impacts of de velopment. The
criteria outlined in the London Plan are
complemented b y detailed cr iteria that
responds to the local conte xt in this Plan. This
policy should be read in conjunction with
other Local Plan policies , including P olicy 28
Local char acter and design quality , which set
the requirements f or deliv ering high quality ,
design-led de velopment across the borough.
A design-led approach should f ollow Policy
44 Design process . Other rele vant
consider ations are pro vided b y Histor ic
England’ s Advice Note 4 on Tall Buildings
2015.
22.22 Richmond has the longest frontage to the
River Thames of all the London boroughs .
While the scale of the r iver presents
oppor tunities f or height, an y tall str ucture will
still ha ve a major influence due to the long
sweeping panor amic vie ws across and along
the banks , which e xtend w ell be yond the
borough and can be prominent and highly
visible from se veral places . Any tall or
mid-r ise alongside the Riv er Thames will
need to ensure that the r iver front will not f eel
private and too hea vily o verlooked or shaded
as detailed in P olicy 40 Riv ers and Riv ers
Corridors . Moreo ver, the b uilding design will
need to consider its role as an impor tant
marker for legibility/identity of the borough
and w ayfinding o wing to its high visibility
along the r iverfront.  In par ticular , riverside
development vie wed from br idges are one of
the w ays that the g reatest n umber of people
experience the borough.  Areas of larger-scaleriverfront b uildings , such as Mor tlake, should
consider their landw ard facing or ientation and
step do wn appropr iately to pro vide a
transition to wards the typical per iod terr aces
and modest housing scale . Mater ials ma y
also tr ansition from the r iver frontage where
views are cher ished, to wards the more
traditional natur al mater ials of housing stoc k
within the borough.
22.23 The abo ve text bo x sets out the borough’ s
definition of a mid-r ise b uilding. This
additional designation pro vides a g reater
degree of control o ver buildings which seem
tall in relation to the propor tions of the
surrounding to wnscape conte xt; yet not
sufficiently tall to be considered a tall b uilding
in line with the London Plan definition. The
major ity of b uildings in the borough are
typically 2-3 store ys, as such mid-r ise
buildings of 5 store ys or more w ould be
substantially taller than their surroundings .
Mid-r ise building maps contained in Appendix
3 sho ws that oppor tunities f or mid-r ise
buildings are gener ally concentr ated within
four diff erent types of areas:
1. transition areas to tall b uilding z ones
2. along str ategic road corr idors;
3. within to wn centres;  and
4. within or adjacent to areas which include
buildings taller than the pre vailing height
or subject to substantial rede velopment
22.24 Mid-r ise buildings will be suppor ted in tall and
mid-r ise building z ones identified in Appendix
3, subject to addressing cr iteria in P art C of
the policy . Similar to tall b uildings , proposals
for mid-r ise b uildings should not e xceed the
identified appropr iate heights f or each
mid-r ise zone.
22.25 Proposals f or mid-r ise b uildings ma y be
considered suitab le outside tall and mid-r ise
building z ones as per P art D of the policy and
subject to addressing cr iteria in P art C of the
policy .The Urban Design Study which
provides the basis of the locations of the tall
and mid-r ise zones is a snapshot in time with
regards to the char acter of the borough and
the sensitivity and probability f or change , as
well as kno wn sites that ma y become
availab le for de velopment.
27222  Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1822.26 Given the histor ic nature of the borough and
presence of protected vie ws, there is
confidence that all potential sites f or tall
buildings ha ve been identified through the
Urban Design Study .There ma y, however,
be fur ther suitab le sites f or mid-r ise buildings
which become a vailab le later in the plan
period which are not currently kno wn. For
example , land assemb ly could enab le the
creation of a larger site which allo ws for a
comprehensiv e scheme with mid-r ise at its
centre while still integ rating w ell with the
locality , with lo wer height at the per ipher y to
avoid imposing negativ ely on the
surroundings . As such, proposals f or mid-r isebuildings ma y be appropr iate outside of the
defined z ones , when a cer tain set of cr iteria
is met (as listed in par t D).
22.27 Applicants will be required to submit technical
suppor ting inf ormation and g raphic 3D
modelling (e .g. enab led b y VU.CITY), as
defined within the LBRuT local v alidation
chec klist f or all tall b uildings applications .
Through the design-led process all proposals
for tall b uildings will need to pro vide a
sufficient le vel of inf ormation to demonstr ate
that potential impacts ha ve been suitab ly
identified and adequately addressed.
Proposals will be resisted where the y would
result in unacceptab le visual, functional,
environmental and cum ulativ e impacts that
cannot be a voided or appropr iately mitigated.
273Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places 22
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Picture 22.1 Tall and Mid-rise Building Zones (with Character Areas)
Policy 46.  Amenity and living conditions
A. All de velopment will be required to protect the amenity and living conditions f or occupants of ne w,
existing, adjoining and neighbour ing proper ties.The Council will:
1. Ensure the design and la yout of b uildings enab les good standards of da ylight and sunlight to
be achie ved in ne w development and in e xisting proper ties aff ected b y new development;
where e xisting da ylight and sunlight conditions are already substandard, the y should be
impro ved where possib le;
2. Ensure balconies do not r aise unacceptab le overlooking or noise or disturbance to nearb y
occupiers;  height massing or siting, including through creating a sense of enclosure;
27422  Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 183. Ensure that proposals are not visually intr usive or ha ve an o verbear ing impact as a result of
their height, massing or siting, including through the sense of enclosure;
4. Ensure there is no har m to the reasonab le enjo yment of the use of b uildings , gardens and
other spaces due to increases in tr affic, servicing, par king, noise , light, disturbance , air pollution,
odours or vibr ation or local micro-climate eff ects.
B.Applicants are e xpected to ha ve regard to the guidance set out within the Council’ s SPDs relating
to design, including Village Planning Guidance , House Extensions and Exter nal Alter ations , and
Small and Medium Housing Sites , as w ell as other Local Plan policies on infill and bac kland
developments and housing mix and standards .
22.28 This policy co vers all de velopment, including
extensions , alter ations and changes of use .
The aim is to protect the living conditions and
amenity of occupants of ne w, existing,
adjoining and neighbour ing b uildings as f ar
as possib le from the unreasonab le impacts
of ne w development.
22.29 The Council will suppor t proposals f or
development that protect the amenity of both
its future occupiers and the occupiers of
adjoining proper ties.The ter m 'proper ty'
encompasses both the b uilding as w ell as its
curtilage .
22.30 New buildings and e xtensions need to tak e
careful account of the amenity and living
conditions of neighbours , with par ticular
regard to natur al light, light pollution, pr ivacy,
noise and disturbance . Adverse impacts on
neighbour ing proper ties and their occupiers ,
including on the most w ell used par t of
residential gardens , can include actual and
perceiv ed loss of light (including to solar
panels), o verlooking, loss of pr ivacy,
alterations to micro-climates , pollution from
noise or light as w ell as b y creating a sense
of enclosure , or through o verpowering,
overbear ing or obtr usive development. This
could be from the ne w development itself or
from associated de velopment and uses such
as ancillar y buildings , parking areas , access
ways, gardens , comm unal open space and
hard and soft landscaping.
22.31 Particular attention needs to be paid to these
matters in order to address pub lic concer ns
in relation to amenity and living conditions
impacts . However, setting fix ed standards
could under mine the Council’ s duty ability to
maintain, and where appropr iate, enhancethe char acter , appear ance and distinctiv eness
of the borough, par ticular ly of Conser vation
Areas . It is the o verall design, taking all
factors into account including the area’ s
character , that will be the deter minant of
whether a proposal pro vides reasonab le
amenity and living conditions .
Daylight,  sunlight and solar glare
22.32 In assessing whether sunlight and da ylight
conditions are good, both inside b uildings and
in gardens and open spaces , the Council will
have regard to the most recent Building
Research Estab lishment guidance , both f or
new development, and f or proper ties aff ected
by new development.  In some circumstances ,
mathematical calculations to assess
daylighting and sunlighting ma y be an
inappropr iate measure , and an on-site
judgement will often be necessar y.
22.33 Solar glare pr incipally occurs when the sun
is low in the sky and dazzles the e ye either
directly or indirectly via a reflected surf ace.
Glare or dazzle can occur when sunlight is
reflected from a glaz ed façade or area of
metal cladding. This can aff ect road users ,
such as pedestr ians, cyclists and dr ivers, and
the occupants of adjoining b uildings .The
potential impact of glare or dazzle will need
to be carefully considered and assessed
where rele vant to ensure there are no
adverse impacts .
Visual intrusion,  priv acy and outlook
22.34 An overbear ing, o verpowering or
over-dominant de velopment can significantly
reduce the quality of living conditions both
inside and outside , in ne w as w ell as e xisting
275Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places 22
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18developments .The deg ree of o verlooking
depends on the distance and the hor izontal
and v ertical angles of vie w.The impact on
the sense of enclosure will often be
dependent on on-site judgement.
22.35 The policy seeks to str ike a balance betw een
how developments are designed to enab le a
sense of comm unity as w ell as off ering
people enough pr ivacy in their homes .Whilst
there will be some impact from an y new
development, the test is one of har m in
relation to the impact on habitab le rooms ,
which includes all separ ate living rooms and
bedrooms , plus kitchens with a floor area of
13sqm or more .The Ma yor’s Good Quality
Homes f or All Londoners SPG (consultation
draft October 2020) states that design
proposals should demonstr ate ho w habitab le
rooms are pro vided with an adequate le vel
of privacy in relation to neighbour ing
proper ties, the street, and other pub lic
spaces .
22.36 For de velopments in Richmond, a minim um
distance guideline of 20 metres betw een
habitab le rooms within e xisting residential
development is usually vie wed as appropr iate
for privacy reasons;  a greater distance ma y
be required f or other reasons , or a lesser
distance ma y be acceptab le in some
circumstances .These n umer ical guidelines
should be assessed on a case b y case basis ,
since pr ivacy is only one of man y factors in
site la yout design;  where the estab lished
patter n of de velopment in the area (la yout
and height) ma y favour lesser distances .The
distance of 20 metres is gener ally accepted
as the distance that will not result in
unreasonab le overlooking. Where pr incipal
windo ws face a w all that contains no windo ws
or those that are occluded (e .g. bathrooms),
separ ation distances can be reduced to 13.5
metres .
22.37 So as not to unnecessar ily restr ict density on
certain sites , where the impact of a b uilding
within the same de velopment ,additionalmeasures can be applied to minimise
overlooking, such as spla ys, angles of
buildings , obscure glazing etc. The inter nal
layout of b uildings can also be coordinated
so that residual o verlooking is only betw een
rooms of the same type and sensitivity (i.e .
living rooms f acing living rooms , and
bedrooms f acing bedrooms).  A Suppor ting
Planning Statement should set out
justification f or a reduction in these distances .
22.38 Privacy of gardens and cour tyards is also
impor tant. However, pub lic spaces and
comm unal amenity areas will benefit from a
degree of o verlooking due to the increased
level of sur veillance it can pro vide.
22.39 Balconies or terr aces on roofs of main
buildings can be visually intr usive and result
in ser ious intr usion into the pr ivacy and quiet
enjoyment of neighbour ing residential
proper ties.
22.40 Outlook is the visual amenity enjo yed by
occupants when looking out of their windo ws
or from their garden;  how pleasant an outlook
is depends on what is being vie wed. Loss of
daylight/sunlight (based on Building Research
Estab lishment guidance), o vershado wing,
loss of outlook to the detr iment of residential
amenity are mater ial planning consider ations;
however, the loss of a pr ivate vie w from a
proper ty is not protected.
22.41 The Council's SPDs , including on
Householder Extensions and Exter nal
Alterations , Residential De velopment
Standards as w ell as on Small and Medium
Housing Sites (and an y future updates to
these SPDs), along with the Urban Design
Study 2021, pro vide fur ther guidance and
illustr ations on ho w to assess
sunlight/da ylight, o vershado wing, visual
intrusion, pr ivacy and space betw een
buildings .
27622  Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18277Impro ving design, deliv ering beautiful b uildings and high-quality places 22
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1823 Reducing the need to tra vel and
impr oving the c hoices f or more
sustainab le tra vel
Policy 47.  Sustainab le tra vel c hoices (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will w ork with others to br ing about saf e, sustainab le, accessib le transpor t solutions to
reduce tr affic congestion, reduce air pollution, including carbon dio xide emissions , impro ve pub lic
health, and impro ve access to ser vices and emplo yment in accordance with the policies set out in
the London Plan, Ma yor’s Transpor t Strategy , and the Council’ s own Activ e Travel Str ategy . Planning
applicants will theref ore be e xpected to:
Location of de velopment
B.Propose major de velopments (see Table 1 for a definition) in areas that either already ha ve a Pub lic
Transpor t Accessibility Le vel of 4-6 or if not mitigate the impact of their de velopment on the e xisting
passenger tr anspor t netw ork in accordance with P ara. 110d of the National Planning P olicy
Framework (NPPF).  Depending on the impact of the de velopment relativ e to the capacity of the b us
and r ail netw ork in its final assessment y ear, this ma y include applicants making financial contr ibutions
to increase capacity and/or impro ve infr astructure on the passenger tr anspor t netw ork.
Active tra vel
C.Ensure that their proposed de velopments pro vide a high-quality w alking and cycling en vironment
both within the cur tilage of the de velopment and in its near vicinity so that occupants can mak e
short jour neys to local to wn centres , services , and w ork, by sustainab le modes of tr avel.This ma y
include pa ying f or and completing off-site w orks on the adopted highw ay under S278 of the Highw ays
Act 1980 to mitigate the impact of their de velopment.  All proposed pedestr ian and cycle impro vement
works m ust ha ve regard to the National Design Guide and Man ual for Streets . All off-site highw ay
works m ust meet technical standards set out b y the Council’ s Traffic and Engineer ing team.
Inclusive mobility
D.Ensure that their de velopment proposals pro vide saf e and suitab le access to and around their
developments f or disab led road users in accordance with guidance set out in Man ual for Streets
and Inclusiv e Mobility .
Assessing the impact of de velopments
E. Demonstr ate that their proposed de velopments do not a ha ve a se vere impact on the oper ation,
safety, or accessibility of the local or str ategic road netw ork. Any impact on the local or str ategic
road netw ork, including the impact of occupants par king v ehicles on the carr iageway, will need to
be mitigated in accordance with par a. 110d of the NPPF .
F.All planning applications f or major de velopments will need to include a full tr anspor t assessment
and tr avel plan which m ust be completed in accordance with Transpor t for London (TfL) guidance .
Applications f or smaller de velopments m ust include a tr anspor t statement and tr avel plan statement,
also completed in accordance with TfL guidance (see Table 23.1).  Applications under a cer tain siz e
will be e xpected to include a chapter about tr anspor t and accessibility in their Design and Access
Statement.
River transpor t
27823  Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18G. Where appropr iate, enab le the Riv er Thames to be used f or passenger and freight tr anspor t as w ell
as ser vicing and constr uction of their de velopment proposals , through the pro vision, impro vement,
or retaining of rele vant infr astructure including whar ves, slipw ays, and piers .
Safeguar ding r outes and facilities
H. Where appropr iate, ensure that their de velopment proposals saf eguard land required f or transpor t
schemes set out in the London Plan and/or the Council’ s Local Implementation Plan.
Taxis and priv ate hire vehic les
I. Where appropr iate, ensure that taxis , minib uses , coaches , and pr ivate hire v ehicles can be saf ely
accommodated. Where the y will use the highw ay to do this , applicants will need to pa y the Council
to implement Traffic Management Orders under the Road Traffic Regulation Act 1984 and/or ma y
need to complete other highw ay works. Applicants should only propose using the e xisting highw ay
for this when no on-site pro vision is possib le.
Transpor t assessment
and full tra vel planTranspor t statement
and tra vel plan
statementCover as par t of design
and access statementLand Use Class (GIA)
800m2 or over 250m2 – 800m2Under 250m2Food retail (E(a))
1,500m2 or over 800m2-1,500m2Under 800m2Non-f ood retail (E(a))
2,500m2 or over 1,000m2-2,500m21,000m2Financial and prof essional
services (E(c i-iii))
600m2 or over 300m2 – 600m2Under 300m2Restaur ants and caf es
(E(b))
600m2 or over 300m2 – 600m2Under 300m2Drinking estab lishments
(Sui Gener is)
500m2 or over 250m2 – 500m2Under 250m2Hot food tak eaway (Sui
Gener is)
2,500m2 or over 1,500m2 – 2,500m2Under1,500m2Business (E (g i-iii)
4,000m2 or over 2,500m2 – 4,000m2Under 2,500m2Gener al industr ial (B2)
5,000m2 or over 3,000m2 – 5,000m2Under 3,000m2Storage and distr ibution
(B8)
50 beds or o ver 30 – 50 beds Under 30 beds Hotels (C1)
50 bedrooms or o ver 30-50 bedrooms Under 30 bedrooms Residential institutions
(Hospitals and Nursing
Homes) (C2)
150 students or o ver 50-150 students Under 50 students Residential institutions
(Residential education)
(C2)
279Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel 23
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Transpor t assessment
and full tra vel planTranspor t statement
and tra vel plan
statementCover as par t of design
and access statementLand Use Class (GIA)
400 residents or more 250 – 400 residents Under 250 residents Residential Institutions
(Institutional Hostels) (C2)
80 dw ellings or more 10-80 dw ellings Under 10 dw ellings Dwelling houses (C3)
1,500m2 or abo ve 500m2 – 1,500m2Under 500m2Non-residential institutions
including higher and
further education (F1)
Seek pre-app advice Seek pre-app advice Seek pre-app advice Primary and secondar y
education (F1)
1,500m2 or abo ve 500-1,500m2Under 500m2Assemb ly and leisure
(F1/F2)
Seek pre-app advice Seek pre-app advice Seek pre-app advice Sui Gener is
Seek pre-app advice Seek pre-app advice Seek pre-app advice Other uses f alling within
Class E
Table 23.1 Transpor t Impact Assessment Thresholds
23.1 The borough is committed to promoting
sustainab le travel, decreasing car use and
impro ving air quality . Ensur ing that w alking,
cycling and pub lic transpor t are the natur al
choice f or trips to and from ne w
developments is vital if these goals are to be
achie ved.The policies on Sustainab le Travel
Choices and P arking in the Local Plan should
be read alongside those in the London Plan
and the Ma yor of London’ s Transpor t
Strategy .
23.2 The Council has a Local Implementation Plan
(LIP 3) adopted in 2019 detailing its vision f or
how the tr anspor t netw ork will be tr ansformed
over the ne xt 20 y ears. It includes a headline
target f or 75% of tr ips to be b y sustainab le
modes (w alking, cycling and pub lic transpor t)
by 2041, from a baseline of 61%. The plan
also includes targets f or expanding the cycle
netw ork, impro ving air quality , reducing road
danger and increasing the use of pub lic
transpor t.
23.3 The Richmond Activ e Travel Str ategy 2020
has been de veloped to pro vide detail on ho w
the Council will suppor t the objectiv es in the
Local Implementation Plan, f ocusing on
walking and cycling. The Local Plan policiesseek to pr ioritise f acilities f or sustainab le
travel modes and promotes a Health y Streets
Approach in de velopments , as set out in
Policy 1 Living Locally and in accordance with
the London Plan policy T2.
Location of de velopment
23.4 Developments that will gener ate a large
volume of tr ips should be f ocused in areas
with high Pub lic Transpor t Accessibility Le vels
(PTALs) to help create the most sustainab le
transpor t environment.  PTAL tak es account
of the accessibility of a location to pub lic
transpor t, in six broad bands , with le vel 6
being the most accessib le.Whilst in gener al
higher PT ALs are achie ved in areas with
good r ail/tube connections , in this borough it
is recognised that b us links also contr ibute
to levels of accessibility . Future impro vements
to accessibility will also be rele vant.These
include planned changes b y Transpor t for
London (TfL), the Council, r ail or b us
companies or impro vements which could be
either pro vided as par t of a ne w development
or funded b y developer contr ibutions .To be
taken into account there will need to be
certainty that future impro vements will be
28023  Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18implemented in time to ser ve the
development and w ould be sustainab le in the
longer-ter m.
23.5 High tr ip gener ating de velopment includes
larger offices , shopping and leisure f acilities
as well as mix ed use and higher density
residential schemes , where a large n umber
of trips are gener ated each da y. As a star ting
point, areas with a PT AL score of 4-6 are
considered to be appropr iate locations f or
high tr ip gener ating de velopment.
23.6 The Council will use a site’ s current PT AL as
a star ting point, b ut also consider the highw ay
capacity , the pro ximity of cycle and w alking
routes as w ell as future impro vements when
evaluating de velopment proposals .
Active tra vel
23.7 The Health y Streets Approach under pins the
Mayor’s Transpor t Strategy and seeks to
encour age more Londoners to use activ e
travel by impro ving the quality and e xperience
of being on our streets .The approach puts
people , and their health, at the hear t of
decision-making, resulting in a healthier and
more inclusiv e city where people choose to
walk, cycle and use pub lic transpor t. Policies
and str ategies are e xpected to f ocus on
creating streets that are pleasant, saf e and
attractive, where noise , air pollution,
accessibility and lac k of seating and shelter
are not barr iers to pre vent people –
particular ly the most vulner able people – from
getting out and about. These objectiv es are
interlinked with this Local Plan’ s priorities
around living locally and minimising
greenhouse gas emissions .
23.8 The Council’ s Activ e Travel Str ategy f ocuses
on more w alking and cycling and pub lic
transpor t use in the borough through the
widespread application of the Health y Streets
Approach. The aim of the Str ategy to increase
the n umber of tr ips in the borough tak en by
walking and cycling, as both standalone tr ips
and as par t of longer tr ips in volving pub lic
transpor t, is suppor ted b y a n umber of
objectiv es to:  suppor t local w alking and
cycling tr ips using the Health y Streets
Approach;  create a high-quality core cycle
netw ork connecting popular destinations;make impro vements to clean-air w alking and
cycling routes a way from roads;  and impro ve
awareness of local w alking, cycling and
running routes .
23.9 Developments should encour age the use of
modes other than the car b y making it as
easy as possib le through pro vision of good
pedestr ian facilities , clear la yout and signage ,
provision of cycling f acilities and impro ving
access to pub lic transpor t interchanges . Civic
spaces and pub lic realm should be accessib le
and inclusiv e. A good w alking en vironment
has been sho wn to be not only beneficial to
an individual’ s health and social lif e, but also
to bring economic benefits to the borough’ s
centres .
23.10 Cycling and w alking contr ibutes significantly
towards creating an attr active and pleasant
environment.  New development should
include all the f acilities needed to encour age
a saf e walking and cycling en vironment from
first occupation.  Cycle par king should be
provided in accordance with the minim um
standards in the London Plan.
23.11 Developments should be integ rated into the
surrounding comm unity and e xisting local
routes and pro vide f or impro vements to
accessibility f or all. There are man y footpaths ,
Public Rights of Way and cycle routes in the
borough that ne w development should not
compromise , and oppor tunities to impro ve
them should be tak en where ver possib le. For
this reason, in line with P olicy 28 on Local
Char acter and Design Quality , gated
developments will not be per mitted.
23.12 The Council promotes the creation of a saf e
netw ork for pedestr ians and cyclists .
Management of other users including speed
restrictions , sufficient widths , seg regation
where appropr iate and w ell designed and
positioned crossing f acilities can reduce
conflict betw een users .Well-designed paths ,
natur al sur veillance , appropr iate le vels of
lighting and other secur ity measures and
good le vels of maintenance can impro ve
actual and perceiv ed secur ity.The Council's
Public Space Design Guide includes advice
with respect to the amenity of the pedestr ian
environment. The London Cycling Design
Standards sets out requirements and advice
281Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel 23
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18for cycle netw ork planning and f or the design
of dedicated cycle infr astructure ,
cycle-fr iendly streets and cycle par king.
23.13 The Council will ensure that there is signage
and w ay mar king of the three str ategic
walking routes identified in the London Plan,
which r un through the borough – the Thames
Path National Trail, the Capital Ring and the
London Loop , and other promoted route , such
as the Riv er Cr ane Walk and Be verley Brook
Walk, which together f orm a netw ork of
leisure routes which most residents can
reach.
23.14 Proposals that impro ve transpor t links within
or betw een the borough and other areas will
be encour aged. This could ref er to ph ysical
proposals and impro vements such as a ne w
bridge or path;  impro ving e xisting links such
as creating a ne w gate into a par k; or
increasing the use of an e xisting link such as
the promotion of a route as a tr avel option.
Reference should be made to the pr iorities
identified in the Local Implementation Plan.
Inclusive mobility
23.15 New development m ust be accessib le and
inclusiv e for a r ange of users , including
disab led people and people with long-ter m
health conditions , by adopting an inclusiv e
design approach. This includes the approach
to par king, a wholistic approach to streets ,
and wider w ay-finding and legibility . For
technical guidance on this subject, applicants
are advised to use Inclusiv e Mobility
(Depar tment f or Transpor t, 2005).  Applicants
should also seek advice from Borough
Engineers on this subject if the y intend to
carry out ne w works on the highw ay.
Assessing the impact of de velopments
23.16 All planning applications will be required to
demonstr ate that their proposed
developments do not a ha ve a se vere impact
on the oper ation, saf ety, or accessibility of
the local or str ategic road netw ork.The
method of assessment required will depend
on the use(s) being proposed and its siz e, in
accordance with the thresholds in Table 1.
The assessment requirements f or some uses
now falling within Class E of the Use ClassesOrder will need to be considered on a
case-b y-case basis if the Class E use has
not specified in Table 1 (‘Other uses f alling
in Class E’). Where necessar y and justified,
the Council will use conditions and/or
planning ob ligations to limit uses consented
within Class E in order to achie ve the
objectiv es of this policy and in line with the
NPPF and accompan ying PPG to assess the
significant impacts from the de velopment on
the tr anspor t netw ork or on highw ay safety,
and to mitigate the impacts of de velopment
given the r ange of uses that need to be fully
assessed.  Matters to be included in Transpor t
Assessments and Transpor t Statements are
set out in the London Plan, the latest
Depar tment f or Transpor t as w ell as
Transpor t for London guidance , and the
Council’ s Local Validation Chec klist and
Transpor t SPD .
23.17 Planning applicants are strongly advised to
seek pre-application planning advice
regarding the par ameters of an y assessment
of the tr anspor t impacts of their de velopment
proposals . For major de velopment proposals ,
they are also advised to seek pre-application
transpor t advice from Transpor t for London
(TfL) Officers as w ell as Borough Officers .
23.18 In instances where the applicant is required
to assess the tr anspor t impacts of their
development as par t of their design and
access statement (see Table 23.1 abo ve)
they will need to include:
1. A descr iption of the de velopment
proposals
2. A descr iption of the local highw ay and
passenger tr anspor t netw ork
3. Trip gener ation details , using TRICS f or
residential de velopments of 10 dw ellings
or more , or for other land uses that are
at or abo ve the threshold at which a
transpor t statement and tr avel plan
statement is required (see Table 1).
4. A vehicular par king stress sur vey if the
required off-street v ehicular par king
standard cannot be met (see P olicy 48)
5. Details of ho w the proposed
development will be ser viced
28223  Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 186. Details of off-street car and cycle par king
(see P olicy 48)
7. Details of ho w an y significant impacts
will be mitigated, including on-street
vehicular par king.
23.19 Developments will be e xpected to contin ue
travel planning after occupation to maximise
travel by sustainab le transpor t, including
personalised tr avel planning.  Existing schools
and large emplo yers will also be encour aged
to produce tr avel plans f or their sites to help
encour age sustainab le travel.
River transpor t
23.20 The Council encour ages the use of the Riv er
Thames f or passenger and freight tr anspor t
through the protection of , and impro vement
to, the rele vant infr astructure including
whar ves and slipw ays. By reducing demand
for other f orms of surf ace tr anspor t,
particular ly on roads , the benefits of lo w
carbon emissions w ater tr anspor t link through
to other k ey aspects of this Plan, such as
reducing tr affic and congestion, impro ving
the local en vironment and quality of lif e.
Together with other policies in this Plan,
including P olicy 34 Green and b lue
infrastructure , Policy 40 on Riv ers and r iver
corridors and P olicy 41 on Moor ings and
floating str uctures , this policy suppor ts the
multi-functional use of the Blue Rib bon
Netw ork.
Safeguar ding r outes and facilities
23.21 To discour age v ehicles ha ving to mak e longer
trips in order to reach refuelling stations , the
Council is seeking to protect e xisting f acilities .
The loss of e xisting b us gar ages will also be
resisted, to saf eguard capacity f or efficient
and sustainab le oper ation of the netw ork,
unless it is demonstr ated that it is
operationally no longer needed or enhanced
repro vision has been made else where in a
convenient and accessib le alter nativ e
location.  Any new facilities should be located
on str ategic or distr ibutor road netw orks to
minimise disr uption and to protect residentialamenity .The pro vision of refuelling f acilities
for alter nativ e types of fuel e .g. electr ic or
hydrogen will also be encour aged.
23.22 The need f or impro ved quality and
connectivity of tr anspor t interchanges to
impro ve mo vement in Outer London w as
identified in both the London Plan and b y the
Outer London Commission.  In the local
conte xt 'transpor t interchanges' ref ers to
anywhere where more than one type of
transpor t mode meets , from tr ain and b us
stations to b us stops .Transpor t schemes are
set out in the Council's Local Implementation
Plan and where appropr iate in the site
allocations of the Local Plan, and/or in
planning br iefs.
23.23 Deliv ery of tr anspor t infrastructure , including
the rele vant proposed tr anspor t schemes as
set out in the London Plan, is cr itical to the
delivery of the str ategic objectiv es of the
Local Plan.  Planning, through the use of
developers' contr ibutions such as through the
use of planning ob ligations (including Section
106 and Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy) is a
key way that the Council can gain the
necessar y resources to assist in the deliv ery
of this vital infr astructure .
Taxis and priv ate hire vehic les
23.24 Taxi ranks should be con veniently located
close to the v enue the y ser ve and accessib le
for all with adequate space f or customers to
queue .Taxi ranks should be w ell-lit and with
good CCTV f acilities . Ranks m ust not
adversely impact on pedestr ian mo vement
or road saf ety.The Council will consider
applications f or offices f or private hire
vehicles against rele vant policies of the plan,
and subject to them not ha ving an adv erse
impact on other types of tr anspor t including
walking and cycling, on-street par king and
highw ay safety or causing disturbance to
residents .Transpor t for London’ s Taxi and
Private Hire Guidance f or De velopers (2018)
should be ref erred to when planning f or taxi
provision.
283Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel 23
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policy 48. Vehicular P arking standar ds, Cyc le Parking,  Servicing and Construction Logistics
Mana gement
A. The Council will require ne w developments to mak e pro vision f or the accommodation of v ehicles
to pro vide f or the needs of the de velopment while minimising the impact of car-based tr avel including
on the oper ation of the road netw ork and local en vironment and ensur ing making the best use of
land.
Vehicular and Cyc le Parking Standar ds
B.Planning applicants will theref ore be e xpected to pro vide off-street v ehicular and cycle par king,
including electr ic vehicle charging points , in accordance with standards set out in P olicies T5 and
T6.1 – T6.5 and Tables 10.2 – 10.6 of the London Plan (2021).
C.Planning applicants need to ha ve regard to the London Cycle Design Standards when proposing
off-street cycle par king f or their de velopments , to deliv er cycle par king that is fit f or pur pose , secure
and w ell-located.
Applications f or Dr opped K erb and Cr osso ver Accesses to allo w Front Gar den/Y ard Parking
D.Front y ard/garden per pendicular par king reduces the quality and saf ety of Richmond’ s footw ays for
pedestr ians and road users with disabilities and reduce on-street v ehicular par king capacity .
Applications f or ne w vehicular crosso ver or dropped k erb accesses will be assessed str ictly in
accordance with the guidance set out in the London Borough of Richmond’ s Transpor t Supplementar y
Planning Document (adopted J uly 2020).
E. Car-Free De velopments
F.Car-free de velopments ma y be appropr iate where:
1. The pub lic transpor t accessibility le vel (PT AL) is 3 or abo ve
2. Off-street disab led vehicular par king can be pro vided in accordance with standards set out as
per par t A abo ve.
3. Cycle par king can be pro vided in accordance with the minim um standards set out in the London
Plan.
4. The de velopment is in a controlled par king z one and the applicant is prepared to enter into a
legal ag reement which e xcludes all occupants from v ehicular par king per mits within this ,
including season tic kets in Council-managed car par ks.
5. In cases where there is no CPZ that occupants can legitimately be e xcluded from or that
operates f or only a small n umber of hours per da y, the applicant can demonstr ate, through a
parking stress sur vey, that their de velopment will not increase on-street v ehicular par king stress
above 85% of total on-street v ehicular par king capacity .
6. Household and commercial refuse and recycling collectors can ser vice the de velopment saf ely
in accordance with the Council’ s Refuse and Recycling Stor age Requirements Supplementar y
Planning Document (2015).
7. It can be demonstr ated that other commercial and emergency ser vice v ehicles can ser vice the
development in accordance with standards set out in Man ual for Streets . (see belo w)
8. The applicant is prepared to consider other f orms of mitigation such as the pro vision of free
membership of a local car club f or occupants , or, in instances of major de velopments , can
provide one or more car club spaces on the site .
The Pr ovision of Vehicular and/or Cyc le Parking Infrastructure on the Highwa y
28423  Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18G. The Council will not encour age the pro vision of disab led v ehicular par king space on the highw ay
to enab le planning applicants to meet the standards f or disab led v ehicular par king set out abo ve.
H. Planning applicants will be e xpected to pro vide all long and shor t stay cycle par king off-street.
Car Club Ba y and Member ship Pr ovision
I. Applicants proposing de velopments of 100 dw ellings or abo ve will be e xpected to pro vide one
off-street car club space per 100 dw ellings , and 1 space per 200 dw ellings thereafter , subject to the
operator consider ing it commercially viab le, and will also be e xpected to fund the cost of membership
of the car club scheme to which the car belongs to all the first occupants of the site f or a minim um
of three y ears.
J.Where applicants propose de velopments with f ewer than 100 dw ellings , planning applicants will be
expected to fund the cost membership of a nearb y car club scheme to all the first occupants of the
site for a minim um of three y ears.This will be secured through an S106 legal ag reement.
Freight and Ser vicing
K. Applicants proposing major de velopments (see Table 1 within P olicy 47 Sustainab le travel choices)
will need to demonstr ate that all ser vicing can tak e place off-street.  If this is not possib le, they ma y,
depending on the n umber of ser vicing tr ips forecast and the potential impact on highw ay safety,
need to pa y for mitigation in the f orm of Traffic Management Orders and/or S278 highw ay works
that will sho w their de velopment will not ha ve a se vere impact on the saf e use of the highw ay by
other road users in accordance with P ara. 110b and d of the NPPF .
L. All de velopments will need to demonstr ate that refuse , recycling, commercial, and emergency
service v ehicles can ser vice their de velopment saf ely in accordance with guidance set out in Man ual
for Streets and the Borough’ s Supplementar y Planning Document Richmond Refuse and Recycling
Storage Requirements .They will need to do this through a deliv ery and ser vicing management plan.
Construction Traffic/Logistics Mana gement
M. Planning applicants proposing major de velopments will be e xpected to submit a constr uction tr affic
management plan with an y planning application. This will need to be completed in accordance with
TfL guidance and the Council’ s guidance .
N. Planning applications proposing de velopments that are belo w the siz e at which a tr anspor t statement
and tr avel plan statement are needed (see Table 1 within P olicy 47 Sustainab le travel choices) will
be dealt with on a case-b y-case basis and ma y be ask ed to pro vide a constr uction management
plan. Where w orks ma y involve significant impact to the highw ay, neighbours , or the wider highw ay
netw ork, a Constr uction Management Plan (CMP) will be required.
23.25 The borough has high le vels of car o wnership
and use within f airly densely de veloped
residential areas with some narro w streets
and man y older houses without off-street
parking. This has led to high le vels of
on-street par king, w orsened in areas where
there is a demand f or comm uter par king. The
approach aims to ensure that sufficient
on-site car par king is pro vided to meet the
needs of the occupiers of the ne w
development, b ut also to ensure that
excessiv e on-street par king demand is not
created which could ha ve an adv erse impacton local highw ay/traffic conditions , street
scene and impacts on making the best use
of land.
Vehicle and c ycle parking standar ds
23.26 This policy co vers the par king standards f or
new developments of all types . Parking m ust
be sensitiv ely located and designed and
suitab ly landscaped to minimise visual
intrusion and disturbance .To maintain
sufficient par king space within ne w
285Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel 23
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18developments , the par king pro vision will be
expected to be legally tied to the de velopment
that it ser ves.
23.27 To mitigate the impact of their proposed
development on the le vel of on-street
vehicular par king stress in their local area,
planning applicants proposing de velopments
located in an area co vered b y a controlled
parking z one (CPZ) , or proposing
developments in areas that might be co vered
by a CPZ in the future pending a re view of
the area and a statutor y consultation process
carried out b y the Council’ s Parking P olicy
team, ma y be ask ed to enter into an S106
legal ag reement which will preclude all
occupants , with the e xception of those
holding b lue badges f or disab led motor ists,
of that de velopment from purchasing
vehicular par king per mits within an y
controlled par king z one (CPZ) or an y
Council-managed car park within the Borough
of Richmond-Upon-Thames .This will depend
on:
1. The siz e of their de velopment (see tab le
1 within P olicy 47 Sustainab le travel
choices)
2. The n umber of off-street v ehicular
parking spaces proposed, including
disab led par king spaces
3. The proposed land uses
4. The le vel of in or out-comm uting b y car
in the local area
5. The le vel of household car o wnership
within the local area
6. The le vel of on-street v ehicular par king
stress in that area (see belo w)
7. The le vel of e xisting tak e-up of CPZ
permits within the par ticular CPZ
23.28 Such restr iction w ould be secured b y
excluding the address from the schedule of
streets in the rele vant road tr affic order that
created or creates the Controlled P arking
Zone in which the proper ty is situated, b y
restricting under section 106 of the Town and
Countr y Planning Act 1990 the disposal of an
interest in rele vant proper ties unless a person
disposing advises the person acquir ing of the
non-a vailability of residents or b usiness
on-street par king per mits and/or throughSection 16 of the Greater London Council
(Gener al Powers) Act 1974 (or an y statute
revoking or re-enacting that Act).
23.29 Depending on the abo ve factors , applicants
may be ask ed to submit an on-street
vehicular par king stress sur vey, completed
in accordance with the Council’ s guidance .
Applicants are strongly advised to seek
pre-application tr anspor t advice regarding the
likelihood of occupants of their de velopment
being e xcluded from an y CPZ or the need f or
a vehicular par king stress sur vey bef ore the y
submit an y planning application.
23.30 Commercial occupants of an y development
will be limited to no more than fiv e controlled
parking z one per mits per b usiness . Applicants
proposing Use Class F or Class E(e) or (f)
and/or sui gener is land uses will be e xcluded
from the CPZ their proposed de velopment is
located within.
Applications f or Dr opped K erb and Cr osso ver
Accesses to allo w Front Gar den/Y ard Parking
23.31 New dropped k erb and v ehicular crosso ver
accesses reduce the quality and saf ety of the
pedestr ian en vironment, par ticular ly for
disab led road users , result in higher road
maintenance costs f or local taxpa yers, and
result in the loss of on-street v ehicular par king
space in a Borough in which household car
ownership le vels are abo ve the a verage f or
London.  Applicants should ref er to the
guidance in the Transpor t SPD .
Car-free de velopments
23.32 Car-free de velopments ma y be acceptab le
where the y meet the cr iteria in par t C of the
policy . Developers should contact the
Council’ s transpor t planners at an ear ly stage
to discuss par king requirements
(transpor tation@r ichmond.go v.uk).
Developers ma y be required to under take
local street par king sur veys to demonstr ate
the capacity of the highw ay to accommodate
additional par king demand.  Development,
particular ly larger de velopment, is commonly
excluded from eligibility f or existing or future
street par king per mits. Applicants might also
be ask ed to mak e a financial contr ibution
towards the re view of on-street par king in the
28623  Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18area in which their proposed de velopment is
located, and/or the design or res-design of a
CPZ which will mitigate the impact of their
development on on-street par king stress .
The Pr ovision of Vehicular and/or Cyc le Parking
Infrastructure on the Highwa y
23.33 Disab led par king spaces are e xpected to be
provided off-street within de velopments .This
is because household car o wnership le vels
in the Borough are abo ve the London a verage
and, as a result, on-street v ehicular par king
space is scarce . Also , these spaces ma y not
be ab le to be reser ved for residents of the
development.
23.34 Cycle par king f acilities on the highw ay cannot
be reser ved especially f or occupants of f or
visitors to an y development and can be used
by any member of the pub lic who wishes to
use them. Theref ore, all shor t and long-sta y
cycle par king is e xpected to be pro vided
off-street where f easib le.
23.35 Where it is not possib le to pro vide off-street
short and long sta y cycle par king in
accordance with the standards set out in par t
A planning applicants will be e xpected to
contr ibute to wards the cost of installing
bicycle hangars on the highw ay where there
is local suppor t for the Traffic Management
Order required to install them. This will be
secured through a S106 legal ag reement.
Car Club Ba y and Member ship Pr ovision
23.36 The Council encour ages the use of car clubs
as an alter nativ e to pr ivate car o wnership .
Car clubs can help reduce le vels of
household car o wnership , the n umber of
journeys tak en by car , and the need f or off
and on-street v ehicular par king space .
23.37 Car club spaces should be pro vided off-street
where possib le. If this is not possib le, the
applicant will be e xpected to pa y for the cost
of a Traffic Management Order and, if
necessar y, S278 highw ay works, to install
any car club ba ys on the highw ay.23.38 Car club v ehicles should also be a vailab le for
use b y members of the pub lic for the required
fee and the oper ator should be accredited b y
CoMoUK or otherwise appro ved by the
Council.
Freight and ser vicing
23.39 The major ity of the borough’ s businesses and
other organisations require regular ser vicing
and deliv eries to their site(s).  However, it
must be recognised that whilst these v ehicles
provide a vital ser vice, they can also be a
cause of congestion, saf ety and
environmental concer ns if not proper ly
managed through a v ariety of mechanisms .
Such premises often neighbour residential
proper ties and a balance needs to be
achie ved betw een enab ling b usinesses to
receiv e the goods and ser vices the y need
and protecting residential amenity . A range
of techniques and f acilities can be used as
tools in minimising an y negativ e impacts from
freight and ser vicing.
23.40 As stated abo ve, planning applicants are
strongly advised to seek pre-application
transpor t advice bef ore submitting their
planning application(s).  Officer advice in
response to this can include advice on
servicing and refuse/recycling collection.
Construction traffic/logistics mana gement
23.41 Applicants should complete and submit a
Constr uction Management Plan using the
Council’ s latest pro-f orma CMP template
here: https://www .richmond.go v.uk/
media/22165/constr uction_management_
plan_guidance_notes .pdf
23.42 Where applications do not require a f ormal
CMP, applicants will be e xpected to pa y for
the cost of an y works on the highw ay that will
be needed to f acilitate saf e constr uction
access and eg ress such as tempor ary traffic
management orders (TTMOs) to close road
space , the suspension of on-street v ehicular
parking ba ys, the installation of ne w vehicular
crosso ver accesses , or the reinf orcement of
existing ones so that the y can accommodate
constr uction v ehicles saf ely.The appropr iate
licences m ust be applied f or prior to
commencement.
287Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel 23
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1823.43 As stated abo ve, planning applicants are
strongly advised to seek pre-application
transpor t advice bef ore submitting their
planning application(s).  Officer advice in
response to this can include advice on
constr uction tr affic management.
23.44 All basement applications require a CMP .
Further guidance is contained in policy 52 on
local en vironmental impacts . If the retainingwalls of an y basement are 3m or less from
the highw ay boundar y, all basement
proposals will, in addition to requir ing
planning per mission, require an appro val in
principle from the London Borough of
Richmond’ s Highw ay Structures Engineer .
This is to protect the str uctur al integ rity of the
highw ay.
28823  Reducing the need to tr avel and impro ving the choices f or more sustainab le travel
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1824 Securing ne w social and
comm unity infrastructure to suppor t
a growing population
Policy 49.  Social and Comm unity Infrastructure (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will w ork with ser vice pro viders and de velopers to ensure the adequate pro vision of
comm unity ser vices and f acilities , especially in areas where there is an identified need or shor tage.
New social and comm unity infrastructure
B.Proposals f or ne w or e xtensions to e xisting social and comm unity infr astructure will be suppor ted
where:
1. it pro vides f or an identified need;
2. is of a high quality and inclusiv e design pro viding access f or all;  and
3. where pr acticab le is pro vided in m ulti-use , flexible and adaptab le buildings or co-located with
other social infr astructure uses which increases pub lic access , and
4. is in accordance with P olicy 1 Living Locally .
Loss of social or comm unity infrastructure
C.Loss of social or comm unity infr astructure will be resisted.  Proposals in volving the loss of such
infrastructure will need to demonstr ate clear ly:
1. that there is no longer an identified comm unity need f or the f acilities or the y no longer meet
the needs of users and cannot be adapted;  or
2. that the e xisting f acilities are being adequately re-pro vided in a diff erent w ay or else where in
a con venient alter nativ e location accessib le to the current comm unity it suppor ts, or that there
are sufficient suitab le alter nativ e facilities in the locality;  and
3. the potential of re-using or rede veloping the e xisting site f or the same or an alter nativ e social
infrastructure use f or which there is a local need has been fully assessed. This should include
evidence of completion of a full and proper mar keting e xercise of the site f or a per iod of at
least 18 months in line with the requirements set out in Appendix 2.
D.Where the Council is satisfied that the abo ve evidence has been pro vided and the change of use
away from social and comm unity infr astructure use has been justified, rede velopment f or other
emplo yment gener ating uses should be considered.
E. Where a scheme proposes 100% gen uinely aff ordab le housing and meets the requirements of
Policy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of mix, ten ure and aff ordability , the proposal will not be
required to satisfy par ts C.3 and D of this policy as abo ve.
Impacts on e xisting social infrastructure
F.Development proposals f or 10 or more residential units should assess the potential impacts on
existing social and comm unity infr astructure in order to demonstr ate to the Council that there is
sufficient capacity within the e xisting infr astructure to accommodate the needs ar ising from the ne w
development.
289Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population 24
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1824.1 Social and comm unity infr astructure f acilities
provide f or the health, w elfare, social,
education, spir itual, recreational, leisure and
cultur al needs of the comm unity.The
provision of adequate comm unity and social
infrastructure is essential to suppor t the
projected population g rowth within the
borough.  Such f acilities are often at the hear t
of local comm unities;  they are impor tant f or
the quality of lif e of residents , in the creation
of more inclusiv e and sustainab le
comm unities and in helping to promote social
interaction and encour aging people to lead
more health y and activ e lives.The CO VID-19
pandemic has highlighted just ho w impor tant
social and comm unity infr astructure is to the
local comm unity. It is impor tant that these
facilities and ser vices contin ue to meet
people's needs at all stages of their liv es and
are accessib le to all.
24.2 This policy co vers an y type of social and
comm unity infr astructure floorspace that is
impor tant to the local comm unity. It
encompasses a wide r ange of ser vices , some
of which are statutor y ser vices such as health
and education and the Council will w ork with
partners to ensure that local comm unities
contin ue to ha ve access to such ser vices .
Others are non-statutor y comm unity ser vices
such as cultur al, pla y, recreation, spor ts and
faith f acilities including those f or voluntar y or
charitable pur poses .The Council considers
it impor tant to protect such uses and f acilities
as the y play a k ey role in maintaining and
foster ing comm unity and social cohesion.
This approach also reflects London Plan
Policy S1.  Some e xamples of social and
comm unity infr astructure include pub lic
services , GP surger ies, nurser ies, comm unity
centres , pub lic halls , arts and cultur al
facilities , policing, fire and amb ulance
services , youth centres , social clubs , indoor
sport and recreation f acilities , libraries,
laundrettes , places of w orship , and pub lic
houses .This is not an e xhaustiv e list and the
Council will deter mine whether an y facility or
service is considered to be a social
infrastructure or comm unity use .The
pre-application process is encour aged and
on specific schemes ma y clar ify which
policies and requirements apply . Schools and
other education f acilities , health and socialcare f acilities as w ell as leisure and recreation
facilities are dealt with in more detail in
separ ate policies within this Plan.
24.3 Infrastructure pro vision and needs ha ve been
identified with the rele vant par tner
organisations and are set out in the Council's
Infrastructure Deliv ery Plan – which is due to
be updated again ear ly in 2022. There is a
need f or nurser y, education and health
provision across the borough.  More specific
requirements f or comm unity f acilities ma y be
identified b y local comm unities , such as a
Neighbourhood Plan. The London Plan also
seeks to conser ve cultur al infr astructure , as
set out in London Plan P olicy E10, and the
GLA ha ve developed a snapshot mapping
the e xisting cultur al infr astructure .The
Council will w ork with par tners including
public and pr ivate infr astructure pro viders and
the comm unity and v oluntar y sector in
ensur ing the pro vision of ser vices .
24.4 It is recognised that in some instances there
may need to be some additional de velopment
to suppor t the cost of retaining or repro viding
existing social infr astructure uses . Such
development ma y be acceptab le pro vided
that the proposal will result in an o verall
impro vement to the e xisting social and
comm unity f acilities and ser vices .
24.5 The CO VID-19 pandemic has had a
widespread impact on ho w ser vices and
suppor t are deliv ered to local people , and
over time the infr astructure needed to deliv er
them ma y change . However in man y areas ,
it has brought a f ocus on ha ving local,
comm unity hubs , as par t of “Living Locally”
and adaptab le spaces br inging oppor tunities
for inter action.  In addition, the Go vernment’ s
changes to the Use Classes aff ect social
infrastructure and comm unity infr astructure .
Class F1 includes lear ning and
non-residential institutions and Class F2 local
comm unity uses including halls and
comm unity spaces , indoor s wimming pools
and areas f or outdoor spor t or recreation,
while Class E (commercial, b usiness and
services) is a wide r ange which includes
gyms , indoor spor t, creches , medical and
health ser vices .While this Plan suppor ts
provision of social and comm unity
infrastructure f or meeting local needs , the
29024  Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18flexibility introduced b y Go vernment through
Use Class E (commercial, b usiness and
service uses) does in pr inciple allo w for
changes of use both to and from other Class
E uses f or some types of social and
comm unity infr astructure , provided there are
no restr ictive conditions on a specific
proper ty.The policy approach to retaining
existing social and comm unity infr astructure
and assessing ne w or impro ved social and
comm unity infr astructure set out abo ve will
apply where planning per mission is required
for a change of use , or to e xtensions and ne w
development. Where necessar y and justified,
the Council will use conditions and/or
planning ob ligations to limit uses consented
within Classes E and F in order to achie ve
the objectiv es of this policy and in line with
the NPPF and accompan ying PPG to ensure
provision of social, recreational and cultur al
facilities and ser vices to meet comm unity
needs and to mitigate the impacts of
development giv en the r ange of uses that
need to be fully assessed.
New social and comm unity infrastructure
24.6 Provision of good quality social and
comm unity infr astructure is cr itical f or social
cohesion and contr ibutes to the creation of
lifetime neighbourhoods , i.e. places where
people are ab le to liv e and w ork in saf e,
health y, suppor tive and inclusiv e
environments with which the y are proud to
identify .The Council will suppor t the pro vision
of ne w or e xtensions to e xisting social
infrastructure where it pro vides f or an
identified need.
24.7 Need is identified on an e vidential basis from
the Council and its par tners str ategies and
plans , including:
1. The Council's Infr astructure Deliv ery
Plan
2. The Council's Joint Str ategic Needs
Assessment (JSNA)
3. The Council's School Place Planning
Strategy and Childcare Sufficiency
Assessment
4. The Council's Cultur al Partnership
Strategy and Culture Richmond
2021-20315. Estates Str ategies produced b y health
bodies , such as the NHS England and
South West London Clinical
Commissioning Group and through
future Integ rated Care Systems
6. Government depar tments’  Estates
Strategies
7. The Metropolitan P olice A uthor ity's
Estates Str ategy
8. Other local e vidence such as comm unity
needs identified as par t of
Neighbourhood Plans .
24.8 Access f or all is impor tant including f or the
young, old and disab led.The appropr iate
level of accessibility to the pub lic will depend
on the nature of the scheme and its
catchment. The types of larger f acilities in
multi-use b uildings that will be visited
regular ly and b y a g reater n umber of people
should be located in the borough's centres
or areas of good pub lic transpor t accessibility .
Smaller f acilities ser ving a more local
catchment should be accessib le by walking
or cycling. The Council will encour age high
quality and sustainab le design of social
infrastructure including measures to impro ve
its actual, and perception of , accessibility .
24.9 Where pr acticab le, social infr astructure and
comm unity f acilities should be pro vided in
multi-use , flexible and adaptab le buildings or
co-located with other social infr astructure
uses which can increase pub lic access and
help to minimise capital or re venue costs to
comm unity g roups . Multi-use means , for
example , that a school uses the school and
playing fields dur ing the school da y, during
term time and the f acilities are a vailab le for
use b y the comm unity outside school hours
i.e. evenings , weekends and dur ing school
holida ys. Comm unity use could be
individuals , spor ts and ar ts clubs , voluntar y
sector g roups or pr ivate g roups , and can
range from inf ormal/occasional bookings
through to planned, prof essional activity .
Multi-use already e xists in man y forms within
the borough. The Council will encour age and
promote the m ulti-use of premises , including
in independent and free schools and other
private or commercial f acilities f or spor ts and
comm unity pur poses , subject to appropr iate
management arr angements and secured
291Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population 24
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18through comm unity use ag reements as par t
of a legal ag reement. The combined impact
of multi-use f acilities needs to be tak en into
account, including shared par king, hours of
use, and the impact these ma y have on the
character and amenity of the area, the living
conditions of local residents , as w ell as
consider ation as to ho w flexible spaces will
be used e .g. sufficient stor age f or diff erent
users and secur ity consider ations .
24.10 The Council’ s Indoor Spor ts Facility Needs
Assessment highlights the need f or ne w
facilities within the borough and will be
updated in 2022. Where possib le and
feasib le, such pro vision should be pro vided
on-site in line with the Council’ s Indoor Spor ts
Facility Needs Assessment.
Loss of social or comm unity infrastructure
24.11 Development pressures and high land v alues
in the borough mean there is pressure to
redevelop sites and it can be difficult to find
new sites f or comm unity use , especially f or
use b y voluntar y groups .The Council will
resist the loss or change of use of e xisting
social or comm unity infr astructure .
Consequently the potential of re-using,
refurbishing or rede veloping e xisting sites f or
contin ued social or comm unity infr astructure
use m ust be assessed in order to preser ve a
sufficient r ange and amount of such
infrastructure across the borough.  As outlined
above, the fle xibility f or change of use within
Class E means that a wide r ange of social
and comm unity infr astructure uses can occur
without the need f or a planning application,
and should impro ve the prospects of finding
an alter nativ e social and comm unity
infrastructure use .
24.12 To assess the loss of social infr astructure ,
the Council will require e vidence to justify the
loss and demonstr ate that it is no longer an
essential local f acility .The applicant m ust
demonstr ate that either-
1. there is no longer a comm unity need f or
the facilities or the y no longer meet the
needs of users and cannot be adapted
in an y way.This should be based on
evidential need and related to the
Council’ s and its par tners str ategies andplans and ma y include e vidence of a
public disposal process .Where the
application relates to the loss of a health
facility , the requirements of P olicy 51
Health and Wellbeing will also need to
be addressed and wr itten ag reement
from the South West London Clinical
Commissioning Group , NHS England,
future Integ rated Care Systems or other
relevant health body m ust be pro vided;
or
2. the e xisting f acilities are being
adequately re-pro vided in a diff erent w ay
or else where in a con venient alter nativ e
location that is accessib le to the current
comm unity it suppor ts, or that there are
sufficient suitab le alter nativ e facilities in
the locality . Any rede velopment proposal
must not lead to or increase an y shor tfall
in pro vision.  Consider ation will be giv en
to whether alter nativ e facilities are
accessib le to all, w ell located and
sustainab le.
3. Alongside either 1 or 2 as set out abo ve,
it is essential that the potential of
re-using or rede veloping the e xisting site
for the same or an alter nativ e social
infrastructure use f or which there is a
local need is assessed. This should
include a full and proper mar keting
exercise ongoing f or a per iod of at least
18 months . As par t of the mar keting
process space should be off ered at a
reasonab le charge f or comm unity
groups / v oluntar y sector organisations
reflecting its e xisting use v alue and
condition.  More detailed inf ormation on
marketing requirements is pro vided in
Appendix 2. Where the site is an e xisting
health f acility , consider ation should first
be giv en to re-using the site f or other
health f acilities and applicants should
contact NHS Proper ty Ser vices to
discuss their needs f or health floorspace
in the area.
24.13 Proposals that could result in the loss of an
existing indoor spor t facility will also be
assessed against the Council’ s Indoor Spor ts
Facility Needs Assessment and the cr iteria
as set out in the NPPF . Early engagement
29224  Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18with Spor t England is encour aged where a
proposal aff ects an e xisting indoor spor t
facility .
24.14 In some cases , change might be ine vitab le,
for example to meet the changing needs of
users or through m ulti-use to mak e contin ued
provision more economically viab le. Any
strategies produced b y third par ties
demonstr ating local need should ha ve been
subject to consultation with appropr iate
bodies to demonstr ate the rob ustness of the
evidence to the Council.  If a pub lic disposal
process has tak en place as par t of an ag reed
programme of social infr astructure repro vision
which confir ms that the disposal of assets is
necessar y to ensure contin ued deliv ery of
social infr astructure and related ser vices , this
will be tak en into account b y the Council
when assessing proposals against the cr iteria
set out in this policy .
24.15 Where the Council is satisfied that the abo ve
evidence has been pro vided and
redevelopment a way from a social or
comm unity infr astructure use or an
educational use ma y be appropr iate,
redevelopment or change of use f or
emplo yment gener ating uses should be
considered.
24.16 In a Borough which has such high land v alues
and an acute need f or aff ordab le housing,
the Council will consider an e xception to par ts
C.3 and D of this policy , where a scheme
proposes the rede velopment or change of
use of the site to 100% gen uinely aff ordab le
housing, and where such is in accordance
with P olicy 11 Aff ordab le Housing in ter ms of
mix, ten ure and aff ordability . Part C.1 or C .2
would still need to be addressed first. This is
to assist in meeting local pr iority needs , in
recognition of the wider comm unity benefits
of deliv ering aff ordab le housing.  If an
economic viability case is put f orward, at the
point of consider ation of a planning
application or through an y subsequent
variation, to justify less than 100% aff ordab le
housing or a diff erent ten ure mix that is not
policy compliant, then this e xception to par ts
C.3 and D w ould not apply .Impacts on e xisting social infrastructure
24.17 Development proposals f or major
developments are lik ely to put an additional
burden on e xisting f acilities , particular ly on
education and health infr astructure .
Theref ore, the potential impact of
development proposals on e xisting social and
comm unity infr astructure m ust be assessed
by the applicant as par t of the planning
application process , suppor ted b y evidence ,
to ensure that there is capacity within the
existing infr astructure . For applications f or 10
or more residential units , this should be
addressed in a Suppor ting Planning
Statement and a Health Impact Assessment,
as required (in accordance with the Local
Validation Chec klist) and/or through an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) f or
projects abo ve the threshold. Where
necessar y, measures will need to be put in
place to mitigate the impacts of de velopment
on existing ser vices .This could include
financial contr ibutions and / or Planning
Obligations (in line with the Council's Planning
Obligations SPD), and / or where appropr iate,
on-site pro vision of comm unity f acilities .
Assets of Comm unity Value
24.18 Comm unity g roups ha ve a right to nominate
buildings or other land as Assets of
Comm unity Value where the y belie ve the y
are of impor tance to their comm unity’ s social
well-being. The Council’ s manages and
displa ys this list on the Council’ s website . If
the asset comes up f or sale , then the
comm unity will be giv en six months to mak e
a bid to b uy it on the open mar ket.The Assets
of Comm unity Value process is helpful in
testing the viability of comm unity uses as the
bidding process will demonstr ate whether
there are w orkable proposals to sustain or
reuse the premises .
24.19 Loss of Assets of Comm unity Value will be
strongly resisted in line with the requirements
and cr iteria set out in this policy .Where
premises ha ve been registered with the
Council as an asset of comm unity v alue
under the Localism Act 2011, this is lik ely to
be a mater ial consider ation in the
deter mination of applications f or the site f or
change of use to non-comm unity related use .
293Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population 24
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Policy 50.  Education and Training (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will w ork with par tners to encour age the pro vision of f acilities and ser vices f or education
and tr aining of all age g roups to help reduce inequalities and suppor t the local econom y, by the
following means:
1. suppor ting the pro vision of f acilities to meet the needs f or primary and secondar y school places
as well as pre-school, childcare and other education and tr aining f acilities;
2. safeguarding land and b uildings in educational use;
3. identifying ne w sites f or educational uses as par t of this Plan;  the Council will w ork with
lando wners and de velopers to secure sites f or pre-schools , primary and secondar y schools
as well as sixth f orms to ensure sufficient spaces can be pro vided f or children aged 2-18;
4. encour aging the potential to maximise e xisting educational sites through e xtensions ,
redevelopment or refurbishment to meet identified educational needs;
5. encour aging fle xible and adaptab le buildings , multi-use and co-location with other social
infrastructure .
B.Early engagement is required with the Council (Achie ving f or Children) where there is a loss or
proposed gain in pre-school, pr imary and secondar y places;  evidence of discussions betw een the
Council (Achie ving f or Children) and pro viders will be required to demonstr ate ho w needs will be
met, and should be submitted with an application.
C.Proposals f or education and childcare f acilities will be considered against the cr iteria set out in
London Plan P olicy S3 Education and childcare f acilities par ts B and C .
D.The Council will promote local emplo yment oppor tunities and tr aining prog rammes in accordance
with London Plan P olicy E11 Skills and oppor tunities f or all, and seek oppor tunities to suppor t local
procurement of goods and ser vices .Where the emplo yment oppor tunities gener ated b y constr uction
as well as the end use of the de velopment create more than 20 (Full Time Equiv alent) jobs , a Local
Emplo yment Ag reement, secured through a Section 106 ag reement, will be required. This will secure
emplo yment, tr aining/skills de velopment oppor tunities f or local people . If it is accepted it is not
possib le to deliv er this through the de velopment, de velopers will be required to mak e a financial
contr ibution to suppor t local emplo yment, education, and skills initiativ es.
24.20 London is one of the w orld’s global centres
for education and the London Borough of
Richmond pla ys a k ey role in fulfilling this
position. The borough is home to an e xcellent
range of schools , including outstanding and
top-perf orming pr imary and secondar y
schools as w ell as higher education
institutions , including St Mar y's Univ ersity .
24.21 The Council tak es a proactiv e, positiv e and
collabor ative approach to meeting school
place requirements .This includes w orking
with par tners , including the Education and
Skills Funding Agency as w ell as educational
providers , to pro vide the quantity and div ersity
of school places needed within the borough,
and childcare . Achie ving f or Children pro vide
the Council’ s children’ s ser vices .24.22 Priority will be giv en to pro viding a high
standard of education f acilities to meet
identified needs in the borough. This policy
applies to all ages and abilities , including
special education needs , and theref ore
includes childcare , primary and secondar y
schools , sixth f orms as w ell as higher and
further education.
24.23 Co-location and m ulti-use of education
facilities with other social infr astructure and
comm unity uses will be encour aged where
practicab le, in line with P olicy 49 Social and
Comm unity Infr astructure . Multi-use and
co-location of f acilities contr ibutes to
optimising the use of land and can increase
the wider comm unity benefits of educational
proposals . It can lead to increased pub lic
29424  Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18access , particular ly of spor ts facilities (indoor
and outdoor) through, f or example , the use
of school pla ying fields b y prof essional spor t
clubs , other schools and comm unity g roups .
The Council will seek to ensure m ulti- /
comm unity use of schools , including pr ivate
schools , through appropr iate measures , such
as Comm unity Use Ag reements .
Meeting educational needs and deliver y of ne w
schools
24.24 Under Section 14 of the Education Act 1996,
the Council has a duty to ensure the pro vision
of sufficient state-funded school places f or all
those residents who w ant them f or their
children.  In accordance with the Academies
Act 2010, an y new non-v oluntar y-aided
school m ust in eff ect be a free school.
(Voluntar y-aided schools are gener ally
religious or f aith schools .)
24.25 The Council’ s ability to meet its statutor y duty
to pro vide the n umber and r ange of school
places has , in recent y ears, become more
challenging as a result of the national
freedoms and fle xibilities which enab le
different pro viders to come into the mar ket
through the free school route .The role of
local author ities has been significantly
reduced as a result.
24.26 Consequently , the Council has to w ork with
a variety of organisations who could, in
theor y, regard themselv es as more
independent than the Council's e xisting
comm unity schools and con verter academies .
In addition, the Council does not kno w until
quite late in the process whether the
Depar tment f or Education will accept a free
school proposal in order that the required
places can be created and if , through the
Education and Skills Funding Agency , they
will then be ab le to find a suitab le site f or the
school. This challenge is compounded b y the
choices made b y parents as to whether to
use pr ivate sector estab lishments as an
alternativ e, and due to the Greenwich
Judgement, places in local schools cannot
be reser ved only f or children resident in the
borough.  As a result of the abo ve factors , the
Council's o verall ability to f orecast demand
and plan f or school places accur ately is
challenging.24.27 Notwithstanding the abo ve challenge , the
School Place Planning Str ategy f or the
borough, which is re viewed regular ly, sets
out the anticipated lik ely demand f or school
places and ho w this will be met o ver the ne xt
ten years. Although there has been significant
progress made in recent times , this has
involved the usage of m uch of the usab le
space on e xisting schools’  sites .The Str ategy
includes the demand f or additional pr imary
places within each of the ten school place
planning areas and when fur ther secondar y
phase places will be required. The potential
medium to longer-ter m implications on the
COVID-19 pandemic in ter ms of bir th rates,
migration, and socioeconomic f actors which
may impact on future demand f or school
places , will be k ept under re view. At this
stage , all land and b uildings in education use
are saf eguarded, such as the f ormer
Strathmore School site in Meadlands Dr ive,
Petersham
24.28 In addition, the Council is required to plan f or
an increase in school places f or children and
young people with special educational needs
and disabilities (SEND). There are o ver 4,000
children and y oung people aged betw een 0
and 25 y ears with SEND living in the borough.
About 1,600 of these ha ve an Education
Health and Care Plan (EHCP), whilst the
remainder ma y be receiving SEND suppor t
at school, additional suppor t in ear ly years or
post-16 education pro vision such as a n urser y
or college , or following a v ocational pathw ay
such as a suppor ted apprenticeship .These
needs are f orecast to g row in the School
Place Planning Str ategy .
24.29 The Council will assist in identifying and,
where appropr iate, allocating sites f or
educational uses to suppor t the pro vision of
sufficient state-funded pr imary and secondar y
school places dur ing the Local Plan per iod.
In this conte xt, the Council w orks closely with
the Education and Skills Funding Agency and
the Depar tment f or Education to identify
possib le sites f or ne w schools and, where
appropr iate, to indicate its suppor t for free
school proposals . Access b y pub lic transpor t
should be a consider ation in reducing tr affic
impacts when identifying locations f or ne w
educational f acilities .
295Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population 24
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1824.30 The Council recognises that the independent
sector mak es a contr ibution to pro viding
education f acilities f or the borough’ s children
and y oung people .The Council is gener ally
suppor tive of proposals which increase the
provision of places within that sector ,
provided the y can e vidence that the y meet
local need.
24.31 Adequately siz ed sites f or ne w schools within
the areas of the borough where additional
places are needed are e xtremely r are.The
following sites are identified f or educational
uses as par t of this Local Plan:
Stag Bre wery, Mor tlake: provision of a
new 6-f orm entr y secondar y school,
including sixth f orm
Barnes Hospital, Bar nes: provision of a
Special Education Needs school
24.32 The Council will w ork with the Education and
Skills Funding Agency , Depar tment f or
Education, lando wners and other par tners to
identify and, where necessar y, allocate sites
for the future pro vision of schools to meet the
needs of local comm unities and enab le the
Council to meet its duty under the Education
Act. Ongoing w ork is taking place to identify
other potential sites f or educational uses in
the borough.
24.33 In addition, the Council is committed to future
working with St Mar y's Univ ersity to address
the g rowth in univ ersity places b y developing
a Master plan in par tnership with the
University .
Early years and c hildcare
24.34 Having sufficient childcare in the borough
means that f amilies are ab le to find childcare
that meets their child’ s lear ning needs and
enab les parents to mak e a real choice about
work and tr aining. This applies to all children
from bir th to age 14, and to children with
disabilities . Some children are entitled to free
childcare , funded b y the go vernment. The
Childcare Act 2006 places a duty on the
Council to ensure that there are enough
childcare places to enab le parents to w ork or
train, and there is also a statutor y duty toensure that there are sufficient funded ear ly
education places f or eligib le two, three and
four y ear-olds within the borough.
24.35 The Council’ s Childcare Sufficiency
Assessment (CSA), which is re viewed
regular ly, uses data about the need f or
childcare and the amount of childcare
availab le, to plan ho w to suppor t the local
childcare econom y.There are pr ivate,
voluntar y, and independent (PVI) pro viders ,
and there are diff erent types of pro vision,
including through the use of childminders .
The CSA pro vides a snapshot, and the
situation can change r apidly .The medium
and longer-ter m impacts of the CO VID-19
pandemic on w orking patter ns, and the
locations where childcare is required, are
being k ept under re view.
24.36 Providers are encour aged to ha ve ear ly
discussions with the Council / Achie ving f or
Children Ear ly Years Pro vision, where
proposals aff ect existing or proposed n urser y
/ pre-school places including funded places
and spaces f or disadv antaged children.
Evidence of such discussions should be
submitted with an application to assist in
estab lishing ho w a proposal meets local
needs and pr iorities, which can respond to
changes within the local mar ket while aiming
to maintain a mix of pro vision to allo w for
choice . New childcare f acilities , or e xtensions
to existing pro vision, should be in an
accessib le location, pro viding saf e, suitab le
and accessib le space including to outdoor
space , taking into account Ofsted
requirements .
24.37 While this Plan suppor ts pro vision of
nurser ies for meeting local needs , the
flexibility introduced b y Go vernment through
Use Class E (commercial, b usiness and
service uses) does in pr inciple allo w for
changes of use both to and from other Class
E uses and n urser ies, provided there are no
restrictive conditions on a specific proper ty.
The policy approach to retaining e xisting
nurser ies and assessing ne w or impro ved
nurser ies set out abo ve will apply where
planning per mission is required f or a change
of use , or to e xtensions and ne w
development. The Go vernment’ s per mitted
development r ights f or a change of use from
29624  Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Class E to residential also allo w for the impact
on the adequate supply of n urser y ser vices ,
which will f ollow the approach set out abo ve.
Where necessar y and justified, the Council
will use conditions and/or planning ob ligations
to limit uses consented within Class E in order
to achie ve the objectiv es of this policy and in
line with the NPPF and accompan ying PPG
to ensure pro vision of required childcare to
meet local needs .
Emplo yment and skills trainings
24.38 The Council will promote local emplo yment
oppor tunities and tr aining prog rammes ,
particular ly where there are oppor tunities
arising from de velopments . Secur ing the skills
to suppor t residents into sustainab le
emplo yment is a k ey priority for the Council
to suppor t the local econom y, to raise the bar
further f or those with higher le vels of skills
than London a verages and mak e sure some
residents with lo wer skills are not missing out
economically . Maximising local labour will
also help reduce the need to tr avel.The
constr uction phase of ne w development
provides oppor tunities f or local emplo yment,
apprenticeships and w ork experience
placements . Commercial de velopments within
the borough also br ing ne w emplo yment,
apprenticeship and w ork-experience
oppor tunities f or local residents dur ing the
end-use phase . Apprenticeships and w ork
experience placements will enab le residents
to de velop an appropr iate skill-set f or existing
and future emplo yment oppor tunities within
the borough. This ma y be par ticular ly
impor tant where the CO VID-19 pandemic has
significantly aff ected specific sectors in the
borough.
24.39 Consequently , on all de velopment proposals
gener ating 20 FTE (Full Time Equiv alent)
jobs or more (this also co vers end use jobs
and those created within one y ear of
completion of the de velopment), the Council
will require Local Emplo yment Ag reements
(LEA), secured through Section 106
agreements , that set out the skills ,
emplo yment and tr aining oppor tunities to be
delivered from the de velopment.  Such an
agreement can mak e use of e xisting
schemes , such as Richmond Work Match,
Way2Work, Constr uction Training Initiativ e,schemes r un by Registered Pro viders and
developers , provided these manage the
development related job oppor tunities .
24.40 The n umber of jobs gener ated b y a
development will v ary depending on its scale ,
as well as the end use being proposed. The
obligation set out in par t B of the policy f or an
LEA betw een the de veloper and the Council
will theref ore apply to
All residential de velopments pro viding
50 units or more;  and
All commercial de velopments consisting
of 400 sqm or more of emplo yment
space .
24.41 The selection of these thresholds is to ensure
that the requirement f or an LEA is applied to
those major de velopments where there is
likely to be scope to pro vide a significant
contr ibution on site to emplo yment and
training oppor tunities in the borough.
Developers are ho wever also encour aged to
enter into an LEA on all de velopment sites
expected to be abo ve 20 FTE, e ven if the y
fall belo w the abo ve size thresholds .
24.42 The details of the LEA will be subject to
negotiation, tailored to site specific
circumstances and propor tionate to the scale
of de velopment proposed, and require
developers to br ing about the necessar y
provision to meet the ob ligations , using
reasonab le endea vours to incor porate in their
relevant contr acts.There should be ear ly
discussions , particular ly on major
developments , with the Council’ s Economic
Development Office (EDO) to ag ree the
terms, and the Planning Ob ligations SPD
(2020) sets out detailed guidance on Local
Emplo yment Ag reements .The deliv ery of the
LEA will be fulfilled through the ag reement of
an Emplo yment and Skills Plan. The Council
will also seek oppor tunities to ensure that
local b usinesses benefit from the constr uction
and end use of de velopments . Developers
will be e xpected to w ork with the Council to
promote and adv ertise tender oppor tunities
and to achie ve the procurement of
constr uction contr acts and goods and
services from companies and organisations
based in the borough.  A de veloper can set
out justification as to wh y it ma y not be
297Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population 24
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18possib le to deliv er an y of the requirements
highlighted, if there are circumstances
specific to the scheme (e .g. specialised
labour requirements from the end user) such
that direct pro vision is not oper ationally
feasib le, or that an alter nativ e means of
delivery would result in a more eff ective
outcome .There should be ear ly engagement
with the Council to discuss the specific
circumstances of the scheme . If thosecircumstances are accepted b y the Council,
then financial contr ibutions to wards local
emplo yment tr aining schemes , job brok erage
services or other b usiness suppor t initiativ es
will be required – related to the a verage cost
to the Council of suppor ting and/or placing
Richmond residents in jobs , training places
and apprenticeships (an update to the
Planning Ob ligations SPD will set out fur ther
details).
29824  Secur ing ne w social and comm unity infr astructure to suppor t a growing population
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1825 Creating saf e, health y and
inclusive comm unities
Policy 51.  Health and Wellbeing (Strategic P olicy)
A. The Council will suppor t development that promotes health y lifestyles and reduces health inequalities ,
and results in a patter n of land uses and f acilities which pro vide:
1. Access to sustainab le modes of tr avel such as saf e cycling routes , safe and attr active walking
routes and easy access to pub lic transpor t to promote activ e travel and reduce car dependency
as well as air pollution, suppor ting the Health y Streets approach as set out in P olicy 1 Living
Locally .
2. Access to g reen infr astructure , including r iver corr idors , local open spaces as w ell as
leisure , recreation and pla y facilities to encour age ph ysical activity , as set out in P olicy 37
Public open space , play, spor t and recreation.
3. Access to local comm unity f acilities , services and shops which encour age oppor tunities f or
social inter action and activ e and health y living in accordance with P olicy 1 Living Locally , as
well as contr ibuting to dementia-fr iendly en vironments .
4. Access to local health y food, f or example , allotments and f ood g rowing spaces including rooftop
gardens , as set out in P olicy 52 Allotments and f ood g rowing spaces .
5. Access to free pub lic toilet f acilities which are open to all residents and visitors in major
developments that are open to the pub lic, and free ‘Changing Places’  toilets where appropr iate
as set out in London Plan P olicy S6 (link ed to the Council's Comm unity Toilet scheme);  and
retain e xisting pub lic toilet f acilities .
6. Access to free dr inking w ater at appropr iate locations in ne w or rede veloped pub lic realm, in
accordance with London Plan P olicy D8.
7. A saf e, inclusiv e development la yout and pub lic realm that considers the needs of all, including
the older population and disab led people , in accordance with London Plan P olicy D5.
8. Activ e Design which encour ages w ellbeing and g reater ph ysical mo vement as par t of everyday
routines .
B.This policy will be deliv ered b y requir ing de velopments to comply with the f ollowing:
1. A Health Impact Assessment m ust be submitted with all major de velopment proposals .
2. An Inclusiv e Design Statement is required as par t of the Design and Access Statement.
3. The Council will refuse proposals f or ne w fast food tak eaways located within 400 metres of
the boundar ies of a pr imary or secondar y school in order to restr ict the a vailability of unhealth y
foods to reflect London Plan P olicy E9.
4. Existing health f acilities will need to be retained where these contin ue to meet, or can be
adapted to meet, residents’  needs .
5. Applications f or ne w or impro ved facilities or loss of health and social care f acilities will be
assessed in line with the cr iteria set out in P olicy 49 Social and Comm unity Infr astructure policy .
Health y Lifestyles
25.1 Health and w ellbeing is a cross-cutting theme ,
which has links with man y other par ts of the
Local Plan.  A health y place is one which
encour ages , suppor ts and promotes health ybeha viours and en vironments and a reduction
in health inequalities f or people of all ages . It
will pro vide the comm unity with oppor tunities
to impro ve their ph ysical and mental health,
and suppor t comm unity engagement and
wellbeing.  It is a place which is inclusiv e and
299Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18promotes social inter action.  It meets the
needs of children and y oung people to g row
and de velop, as w ell as being adaptab le to
the needs of an increasingly elder ly
population and those with dementia and other
sensor y or mobility impair ments .
25.2 The Richmond Health and Care Plan,
developed in par tnership with local people ,
voluntar y comm unity g roups and health and
care par tners in the borough of Richmond,
sets out a vision f or impro ving the health and
wellbeing of local people .This emphasises
the whole lif e course of ‘Star t Well, Liv e Well
and Age Well’, which encompasses residents
of all ages and demog raphics .
25.3 The London Plan sets out that man y
deter minants of health and w ellbeing that can
be shaped b y the planning system, f or
example from tr anspor t and housing through
to air quality and climate change , along with
healthcare pro vision.  It seeks an integ rated
and co-ordinated w ay to impro ving the mental
and ph ysical health of all Londoners .The
London Plan promotes a Health y Streets
Approach to put impro ving health and
reducing health inequalities at the hear t of
public space , which links with activ e travel.
Inclusive Design
25.4 An inclusiv e design approach is intended to
ensure the div erse needs of all are integ rated
into proposals from the outset. This is
essential to ensur ing that the b uilt
environment, both the inter nal and e xternal
parts of b uildings and the spaces in betw een,
are saf e, accessib le, and con venient f or all.
25.5 Public toilets are a vital f acility , and should
be pro vided as par t of major de velopment
that are open to the pub lic, such as shops ,
sport, leisure and health care f acilities ,
transpor t hubs , cultur al and civic b uildings
and large areas of pub lic realm. The
suppor ting te xt to London Plan P olicy S6 sets
out that a r ange of toilet f acilities should be
provided, and that pro vision should be saf e,
well-lit and clean with ongoing management
and cleaning secured at the planning stage .
The pro vision of Changing Places toilets can
open up ne w areas and e xperiences f or
people with prof ound and m ultipleimpair ments , and their companions , remo ving
the barr ier that the lac k of pro vision can
create .
25.6 The suppor ting te xt to London Plan P olicy D8
also sets out that the pro vision of accessib le
free dr inking w ater f ountains helps impro ve
public health, and reduces w aste suppor ting
the use of reusab le water bottles .
Older P eople
25.7 Life expectancy has been increasing o ver
time and there is a national trend to wards an
ageing population. There is a projected
significant increase to 2039 in the o ver-75
population and there are increasing n umbers
of older people living at home with long ter m
physical and mental conditions such as
dementia.  Planning can pla y a role in the
creation of en vironments and a pub lic realm
that are inclusiv e and accessib le for the older
population, including f or those with dementia.
25.8 The Council is committed to creating a
dementia-fr iendly comm unity in the borough,
as set out in the Richmond Joint Dementia
Strategy , to suppor t people with dementia
and their carers . It is recommended that
developers ha ve consider ation to the Ro yal
Town Planning Institute (R TPI) pr actice guide
‘Creating better en vironments f or people living
with dementia  ’ (2020) which pro vides
practical advice on ho w to incor porate
dementia approaches in de velopment
proposals .
25.9 Design of the b uilt en vironment should
specifically consider the needs of the older
population such as more seating oppor tunities
and benches . A high quality , inclusiv e and
accessib le urban en vironment will enab le the
older population to remain independent and
active for longer , thereb y reducing the need
for extensiv e adaptations to b uildings .
25.10 Housing de velopment should consider the
needs of the older population.  Oppor tunities
to enab le older people to do wnsiz e is
recognised in P olicy 13 Housing Mix and
Standards , along with higher standards f or
inclusiv e access , and ne w accommodation
30025  Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18should meet identified local needs as set out
in Policy 12 Housing Needs of Diff erent
Groups .
Young people
25.11 What happens in ear ly life, star ting from
conception, aff ects health and w ellbeing in
later lif e. However, it is often the en vironment
that mak es it difficult f or children and y oung
people to sta y health y. Growing up in a
health y and saf e neighbourhood is a k ey par t
of giving children the best star t in lif e; places
where children can pla y safely and access
green spaces , breathe clean air , be activ e,
and enjo y a health y diet.  Prevention is cr itical
to ensur ing that children and y oung people
can fulfil their potential.
25.12 Planning can pla y a role in addressing
environmental har ms and assets in the places
and spaces where y oung people spend the
most time outside of the home , including the
school, and the local neighbourhood. This
links with the approach to restr icting the
availability of unhealth y foods set out in this
policy . It also links to the wider cross-cutting
themes and the details set out in other
policies in this Plan, f or example there are
oppor tunities to w ork with schools to
encour age modal shift to sustainab le
transpor t and encour age lo w pollution w alking
routes , to pr ioritise activ e travel and promote
the Health y Streets approach.
Health Impact Assessment
25.13 A Health Impact Assessment (HIA) m ust be
submitted with all major applications . A HIA
should assess the health impacts of a
development, identifying mitigation measures
for an y potential negativ e impacts as w ell as
measures f or enhancing an y potential positiv e
impacts .The London Health y Urban
Development Unit (HUDU) ha ve developed
a rapid HIA tool to quic kly assess the impacts
of a de velopment plan or proposal andrecommend measures , this tool should be
used as ear ly as possib le in the planning
process and estab lished at pre-application
stage . As set out in the Planning Ob ligations
SPD, the HUDU guidance and their Planning
Contr ibutions Model should be used to
calculate the capital cost of the additional
health f acilities required to meet the increased
demand which ar ises from ne w
developments .
Takea ways
25.14 Planning can influence the b uilt en vironment
to suppor t health and w ellbeing, this includes
helping to reduce obesity and e xcess w eight
in local comm unities . Obesity is one of the
greatest health challenges f acing London,
and the creation of a health y food
environment is theref ore impor tant, as set out
in the London Plan.  Childhood obesity
amongst school age children is a concer n as
evidence suggests that obese children are
more lik ely to be obese adults and are at an
increased r isk of de veloping fur ther health
difficulties . Access to f ast food tak eaways
can influence the ability of individuals to adopt
health y lifestyles and ha ve the potential to
under mine health y eating initiativ es that ma y
be in place at the school.
25.15 The Council will refuse proposals f or fast food
takeaways located within 400 metres of the
boundar ies of a pr imary or secondar y school.
400m is a 5-10 min ute w alk and it is
suggested that this is the maxim um distance
that students w ould w alk to and bac k from in
their lunch break.  Outside of these 400m
'restr iction' z ones , applications f or fast food
takeaways will be considered in line with
other policies in this plan.
25.16 The f ollowing map sho ws the e xisting schools
within the borough (as of September 2021)
and the associated 400 metre b uffer area,
which are the 'restr iction' z ones f or fast food
takeaways:
301Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Existing sc hools within the bor ough (as of September 2021) and the associated 400 metre b uffer area
Health Infrastructure
25.17 The National Health Ser vice (NHS) is f acing
unprecedented challenges . Integ rated health
and social care are being embedded to reflect
the collabor ation seen through the pandemic.
A key aspect of the approach is re viewing
estate requirements so that the y reflect ne w
clinical and comm unity based reco very and
suppor t approaches , the changes ar ising from
the CO VID-19 pandemic and what ma y be
needed in the future .This includes the
challenge of optimising the rede velopment of
health sites and other infr astructure toimpro ve pro vision and, where appropr iate,
contr ibute more widely to the area health
needs .
25.18 The South West London Clinical
Commissioning Group (CCG) is currently
responsib le for planning, commissioning and
buying health ser vices f or the borough. They
work closely with other pro viders including
for mental health - South West London and
St George’ s Mental Health NHS Trust, and
for comm unity ser vices - Hounslo w and
Richmond Comm unity Healthcare as w ell as .
NHS England in commissioning phar macy
services .
30225  Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1825.19 The NHS is mo ving to Integ rated Care
Systems , it is e xpected an ICS f or south w est
London will come into eff ect in spr ing 2022.
This is seeking to remo ve barr iers that
prevent an integ rated system, it will seek to
remo ve traditional divisions betw een hospitals
and f amily doctors , betw een ph ysical and
mental health, and betw een NHS and council
services . In the past, these divisions ha ve
meant that too man y people e xperienced
disjointed care . It estab lishes ne w
partnerships betw een the organisations that
meet health and care needs across an area,
to coordinate ser vices and to plan in a w ay
that impro ves population health and reduces
inequalities betw een diff erent g roups . It builds
on the NHS Long Term Plan and contin ues
to suppor t the plan’ s triple aim:  Better Health
for Ev eryone; Better Care f or All P atients;  and
Sustainability of local and national NHS
system.  Place Leaders on behalf of the NHS
will w ork with par tners such as the local
author ity and v oluntar y sector in an inclusiv e,
transparent and collabor ative way.
25.20 A Richmond Health and Care Estates
Strategy has been prepared dur ing 2021.
Overall this is to suppor t new models of care
and integ rated w orking, de veloping fle xible
spaces and optimising use of the estate .With
a broader model of health and social care
working in a m ultidisciplinar y way, and there
may be a future f ocus around health and
social care comm unity hubs to br ing ser vices
to local areas . Flexible spaces could be used
for social prescr ibing, including f or comm unity
and v oluntar y groups , as a w ay that GPs ,
nurses and other pr imary care prof essionals
can ref er patients to local, non-clinical
services to address health concer ns and
impro ve a patient’ s overall wellbeing, while
reducing demands on pr imary (e.g. GPs) and
secondar y (e.g. hospital and comm unity) care. Digitisation will also be k ey, and could br ing
efficiencies f or example to access advice or
for records stor age, provided the digital
infrastructure suppor ts these w ays of w orking
in the health sector .
25.21 There is pressure on health f acilities in the
borough with currently some shor tfall in GP
floorspace in par ts of the borough.  Existing
health f acilities should be protected and the
provision of ne w or impro ved facilities
appropr iate to local needs is encour aged.
Applications f or ne w or loss of health and
social care f acilities will be considered in line
with the cr iteria of P olicy 49 Social and
Comm unity Infr astructure and par agraph
24.12 sets out that wr itten ag reement of the
relevant health body m ust be pro vided to
assess the loss of an y existing health
facilities .
25.22 While this Plan suppor ts health and social
care pro vision f or meeting local needs , the
flexibility introduced b y Go vernment through
Use Class E (commercial, b usiness and
service uses) does in pr inciple allo w for
changes of use both to and from other Class
E uses and medical / health ser vices ,
provided there are no restr ictive conditions
on a specific proper ty.The policy approach
to retaining e xisting health f acilities and
assessing ne w or impro ved health and social
care f acilities set out abo ve will apply where
planning per mission is required f or a change
of use , or to e xtensions and ne w
development. Where necessar y and justified,
the Council will use conditions and/or
planning ob ligations to limit uses consented
within Class E in order to achie ve the
objectiv es of this policy and in line with the
NPPF and accompan ying PPG to ensure
provision of required health infr astructure to
meet local needs .
Policy 52.  Allotments and f ood gr owing spaces
A. The Council will protect e xisting allotments and suppor t other potential spaces that could be used
for commercial f ood production or f or comm unity gardening, where possib le.
B.The v alue of the allotment space in visual, ecological, biodiv ersity and histor ical ter ms will also be
taken into account where there is de velopment pressure on the land.  In the highly unlik ely event of
allotments becoming sur plus to requirements , other open space uses will be considered first,
303Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18particular ly where the e xisting allotment is in an area identified as deficient in Pub lic Open Space
Provision.
25.23 Allotments are an impor tant component of
open space and off er a div erse r ange of
benefits f or people , comm unities and
environments to b uild healthier comm unities
and promote health y living. They pro vide
recreational v alue, suppor t biodiv ersity and
landscape quality , contr ibute to ph ysical and
mental w ellbeing, pro vide the possibility to
grow fresh produce and contr ibute to wards
a health y lifestyle that is activ e, sustainab le
and socially inclusiv e.
25.24 There are currently 24 allotment sites in the
borough that are managed b y the Council,
nine of which are designated as statutor y
allotments . All apar t from three sites are on
Council o wned land and the remainder are
on Cro wn land. There are also tw o private
sites in the borough.  Statutor y allotments
have legal protection and these sites cannot
be sold or used f or other pur poses without
the consent of the Secretar y of State .
Allotments are an open comm unity use and
are appropr iate within Metropolitan Open
Land.  Most of the non-statutor y allotments
are designated as other open land
designations such as Green Belt,
Metropolitan Open Land and Other Open
Land of Townscape Impor tance and as such
are protected from inappropr iate
development.
25.25 Allotments address individual and social
well-being, b y offering ph ysical activity and
outdoor e xercise , a sense of pr ide and
achie vement and the production of good
value and n utritional fr uit and v egetab les.However, they have a wider role as the y form
a par t of the open space resource of the
borough and can be a f ocus of educational
interest and pub lic engagement,
neighbour liness and social solidar ity.
Allotment sites also mak e a contr ibution to
the impor tant areas of biodiv ersity and
sustainability . It is w orth noting that f amily
members and fr iends often join in with
activities on the allotments or share in its
produce .The v alue is theref ore not confined
to the individual plot holders b ut spreads
outw ards in a r ipple eff ect, representing an
impor tant oppor tunity f or comm unity
interaction.
25.26 The Borough’ s Open Space Assessment
(2015, due to be updated in 2022) identified
an unmet demand f or allotments and
theref ore the e xisting o verall area of
allotments should be retained.  However, it is
unlikely that the Council w ould acquire
completely ne w sites to meet this fluctuating
demand, and the Council’ s Allotment Str ategy
identified that it is not necessar y to consider
the e xpansion onto ne w sites be yond e xisting
site boundar ies.
25.27 Where appropr iate, the pro vision of ne w
allotments or other f ood g rowing space ,
alongside the pro vision of other pr ivate,
semi-pr ivate and pub lic open spaces , will be
suppor ted if oppor tunities ar ise as par t of ne w
developments .This could include the
innovative small-scale use of roofs , walls and
balconies , especially where e xternal space
is limited.
Policy 53.  Local En vironmental impacts
A. The Council will seek to ensure that local en vironmental impacts of all de velopment proposals do
not lead to detr imental eff ects on the health, saf ety and the amenity of e xisting and ne w users or
occupiers of the de velopment site , or the surrounding land. These potential impacts can include ,
but are not limited to , air pollution, noise and vibr ation, light pollution, odours and fumes , solar glare
and solar dazzle as w ell as land contamination.
B.Developers should f ollow an y guidance pro vided b y the Council on local en vironmental impacts
and pollution as w ell as on noise gener ating and noise sensitiv e development. Where necessar y,
30425  Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18the Council will set planning conditions to reduce local en vironmental impacts on adjacent land uses
to acceptab le levels.
C.In accordance with London Plan P olicy D13 Agent of Change , the Council will apply the Agent of
Change pr inciple , which places the responsibility f or mitigating impacts from e xisting noise and
other n uisance-gener ating activities or uses fir mly on the proposed ne w noise-sensitiv e development.
Air Quality
D.The Council promotes good air quality design and ne w technologies . All de velopments m ust comply
with the ne w London Plan 2021 P olicy SI1 Impro ving Air Quality .
E. Major de velopments and large-scale de velopment subject to an En vironmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) are required to achie ve “Air Quality P ositiv e”.
F.All de velopments m ust be at least “Air Quality Neutr al”. Proposals that w ould mater ially increase
exceedances of local air pollutants will be resisted unless the de velopment mitigates this impact
through ph ysical measures and/or financial contr ibutions to implement proposals in Richmond’ s
Local Air Quality Management Plan.
G. To consider the impact of introducing ne w developments in areas already subject to poor air quality ,
the following will be required:
1. an air quality impact assessment, including where necessar y modelled data;  this also applies
to change of use to residential at street le vel;
2. mitigation measures to reduce the de velopment's impact upon air quality , including the type
of equipment installed, ther mal insulation and ducting abatement technology;
3. measures to protect the occupiers of ne w developments from e xisting sources;
4. strict mitigation f or de velopments to be used b y sensitiv e receptors such as schools , hospitals
and care homes in areas of e xisting poor air quality;  this also applies to proposals close to
developments used b y sensitiv e receptors;
5. mitigation measures to reduce the impact of tr anspor t from the de velopment upon air quality ,
including suppor t for activ e travel, electr ic vehicles and car club membership .
H. The Council will require financial contr ibutions to wards off-site air quality measures where a proposed
development is not air quality neutr al, or mitigation measures do not reduce the impact upon poor
air quality . Specific guidance f or air quality in ne w developments is set out in the Council’ s Air Quality
SPD (2020).
Noise and Vibration
I. The Council encour ages good acoustic design to ensure occupiers of ne w and e xisting noise
sensitiv e buildings are protected. The f ollowing will be required, where necessar y:
1. a noise assessment of an y new plant and equipment and its impact upon both receptors and
the gener al bac kground noise le vels;
2. mitigation measures where noise needs to be controlled and managed;
3. time limits and restr ictions f or activities where noise cannot be sufficiently mitigated;
4. promotion of good acoustic design and use of ne w technologies;
5. measures to protect the occupiers of ne w developments from e xisting sources .
J.Specific guidance f or where noise and and/or vibr ation will be an impor tant consider ation is set out
in De velopment Control f or Noise Gener ating and Noise Sensitiv e Development SPD (2018).
Light P ollution
305Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18K. The Council will seek to ensure that ar tificial lighting in ne w developments does not lead to
unacceptab le impacts b y requir ing the f ollowing, where necessar y:
1. an assessment of an y new lighting and its impact upon an y receptors;
2. mitigation measures , including the type and positioning of light sources;
3. promotion of good lighting design and use of ne w technologies .
Odour s and Fume Contr ol
L. The Council will seek to ensure that an y potential impacts relating to odour and fumes from
commercial activities are adequately mitigated b y requir ing the f ollowing:
1. an impact assessment where necessar y;
2. the type and nature of filtr ation to be used;
3. the height and position of an y chimne y or outlet;
4. promotion and use of ne w abatement technologies;
Land Contamination
M. The Council promotes , where necessar y, the remediation of contaminated land where de velopment
comes f orward. Potential contamination r isks will need to be proper ly considered and adequately
mitigated bef ore de velopment proceeds .
Construction and demolition
N. The Council will seek to manage and limit en vironmental disturbances dur ing constr uction and
demolition as w ell as dur ing e xcavations and constr uction of basements and subterr anean
developments .To deliv er this the Council requires the submission of Constr uction Management
Plans (CMPs) f or the f ollowing types of de velopments:
1. all major de velopments;
2. any basement and subterr anean de velopments;
3. developments of sites in confined locations or near sensitiv e receptors;  or
4. if substantial demolition/e xcavation w orks are proposed.
O.Where applicab le and considered necessar y, the Council ma y seek a bespok e charge specific to
the proposal to co ver the cost of monitor ing the CMP .The Council will encour age ear ly connection
to electr ic po wer in the course of de velopment to a void n uisance from gener ators .
25.28 Development should not contr ibute to or be
at risk from or adv ersely aff ected b y
unacceptab le levels of air , noise , light, soil
and w ater pollution or land instability .
Developers should e xplore w ays to minimise
any har mful and adv erse en vironmental
impacts of de velopment, including dur ing
constr uction and demolition. Where possib le,
development that is lik ely to gener ate
pollution should be located a way from
sensitiv e uses such as hospitals , schools ,
care homes and wildlif e sites .The design and
layout of ne w development should minimiseconflict betw een diff erent land uses , taking
account of users and occupiers of ne w and
existing de velopments .Theref ore, any noisy
or polluting activities or f eatures such as plant
equipment, should be positioned a way from
sensitiv e areas where possib le to ensure an y
detrimental impacts on health, living
conditions or amenity are k ept to acceptab le
levels.
25.29 In addition, where there are already
significant adv erse eff ects on the
environment, amenity or living conditions due
30625  Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18to pollution, sensitiv e uses should ideally be
steered a way from those areas . However,
given the limited a vailability of land f or
development in this borough, this will not
always be possib le.Theref ore, new
developments , including changes of use ,
should mitigate and reduce an y adv erse
impacts resulting from air and light pollution,
noise , vibration and dust to acceptab le levels.
25.30 The Agent of Change pr inciple places the
responsibility of mitigating the impact of
nuisances (including noise) from e xisting
nuisance gener ating uses on proposed ne w
development close b y, thereb y ensur ing that
residents and users of the ne w development
are protected from n uisances , and e xisting
uses are protected from n uisance complaints .
The Agent of Change pr inciple w orks both
ways; theref ore, any new
nuisance-gener ating de velopment will need
to put in place measures to mitigate noise
impacts on e xisting de velopment close b y.
Further inf ormation on the Agent of Change
principle is included in the NPPF , PPG and
London Plan, which set out ho w to mitigate
the adv erse impacts of noise as w ell as other
such as air and light pollution.
Air Quality
25.31 Good air quality is vital to health and
wellbeing. There are a n umber of areas in
the borough that do not comply with the air
quality targets and action m ust be tak en to
control, minimise and reduce the contr ibuting
factors of poor air quality .The whole of the
borough has been declared as an Air Quality
Management Area (A QMA) and as such an y
new development and its impact upon air
quality m ust be considered v ery carefully .
Strict mitigation will be required f or an y
developments proposed within or adjacent to
‘Air Quality F ocus Areas’.  An ‘Air Quality
Focus Area’  is a location that has been
identified as ha ving high le vels of pollution
(i.e. exceeding the Go vernment ann ual mean
limit v alue f or nitrogen dio xide) and human
exposure . Air Quality F ocus Areas are
designated b y the Greater London A uthor ity.
The Council will consider the impact of
introducing ne w developments to areas
already subject to poor air quality , and theimpact on the ne w occupiers of that
development, especially in sensitiv e uses
such as schools .
25.32 To tac kle poor air quality , protect health and
meet legal ob ligations , minor de velopments
are required to be at least “Air Quality
Neutr al” or “Emissions Neutr al”. Major
development proposals m ust be submitted
with an Air Quality Assessment which will be
enough to demonstr ate that the y are in
accordance with P art B1 of London Plan
Policy SI1.  However, where char acter istics
of the de velopment or local f eatures r aise
concer ns about air quality , or where there are
additional requirements f or assessment in
local policy , a full Air Quality Assessment ma y
be required.  Additional measures ma y also
be needed to address local impacts .
Londonwide Guidance on Air Quality Neutr al
will set out streamlined assessment
procedures f or minor de velopments .
25.33 Air quality positiv e is making an activ e
contr ibution to impro ving air quality in and
around a de velopment site or master plan
area and minimising e xposure to e xisting
sources of poor air quality .The k ey aim of
the Air Quality P ositiv e (AQP) Statement is
to demonstr ate ho w all aspects of a
development – including the b uildings , pub lic
spaces , landscaping and infr astructure – ha ve
responded to their en vironment, contr ibuted
to impro vement and implemented best
practice in relation to air quality . Compiling
the statement should ideally be a contin uous
process throughout de velopment design.
25.34 Although de velopers are e xpected to use
appropr iate mitigation measures to a void
adverse impacts , the Council will seek
financial contr ibutions through the use of
Planning Ob ligations to wards air quality
measures where a proposed de velopment is
not air quality neutr al or mitigation measures
do not sufficiently reduce the har m to air
quality . Developers will be required to
contr ibute to off-site measures b y making a
financial contr ibution to the Borough’ s Air
Quality Action Fund (A QAF) secured through
a Section 106 ag reement.  Further details are
set out in the Council’ s Air Quality SPD
including the r ates f or calculating
contr ibutions and ho w funds will be spent.
307Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1825.35 The Council’ s Air Quality SPD (2020) as w ell
as a De velopment Control f or Noise
Gener ating and Noise Sensitiv e Development
SPD (2018), need to be f ollowed.
25.36 The Council’ s Air Quality Action Plan 2020 –
2025 identifies actions and mitigating
measures to be implemented b y the Council
and par tners to reduce NO2 and PM10
borough wide from main emission sources
including road tr anspor t and ne w
developments .
Noise and Vibration
25.37 Noise and/or vibr ation ar ise from a v ariety of
sources , such as major roads , railways and
aircraft, as w ell as industr ial and commercial
sources .This can ha ve a significant eff ect on
health, quality of lif e, amenity , living
conditions and the en vironment in gener al.
This theref ore needs to be considered when
new developments ma y create noise and
vibration, and also when ne w developments
would be sensitiv e to e xisting conditions .
25.38 Applicants need to consider acoustic design
at an ear ly stage of the planning process to
ensure occupiers of ne w and e xisting noise
sensitiv e buildings are protected. The Council
has adopted a SPD f or De velopment Control
for Noise Gener ating and Noise Sensitiv e
Development. This sets out guidance
intended to help protect the local occupiers
of ne w or e xisting noise sensitiv e buildings
from e xisting or introduced noise sources ,
and, where possib le, impro ve amenity and
living conditions .The SPD will assist
applicants , decision mak ers, agents ,
occupiers and others to identify issues to be
addressed in an y planning application in
which noise and/or vibr ation will be an
impor tant consider ation.
25.39 The Agent of Change pr inciple places the
responsibility f or mitigating impacts fr om
existing noise-g enerating activities or
uses on the pr oposed ne w noise-sensitive
development . In other w ords, the person or
business responsib le for the change m ust
also be responsib le for managing the impact
of the change . New development m ust be
integ rated eff ectively with e xisting b usinesses
and comm unity f acilities (such as places ofworship , pubs , music v enues and spor ts
clubs). These e xisting b usinesses and
facilities should not ha ve unreasonab le
restrictions placed on them as a result of
development per mitted after the y were
estab lished. Where the oper ation of an
existing b usiness or comm unity f acility could
have a significant adv erse eff ect on ne w
development (including changes of use) in
its vicinity , the applicant (or ‘agent of change’)
should be required to pro vide suitab le
mitigation bef ore the de velopment has been
completed.
Light P ollution
25.40 Though a notab le par t of the urban
environment, ar tificial lighting when not
controlled, is poor ly designed or positioned
incorrectly can ha ve a detr imental eff ect upon
occupiers , residents and wildlif e. As par t of
the de velopment process steps m ust be tak en
to ensure that the impact of ar tificial lighting
is considered carefully .
Odour s and Fume Contr ol
25.41 Some commercial activities can ha ve an
impact upon the local en vironment;  these
impacts can include such things as odours ,
fumes , dust and steam.  As par t of the
development process steps m ust be tak en to
ensure that an y impact is considered carefully
and that mitigation is in place to manage
these types of emissions .
25.42 Applicants will be required to apply the
Depar tment f or En vironment, F ood & Rur al
Affairs' (DEFRA) Guidance on the Control of
Odour and Noise from Commercial Kitchen
Exhaust Systems .
Land Contamination
25.43 A wide r ange of uses ha ve occurred in the
borough throughout its histor y and there are
areas where small scale industr ial uses , such
as factor ies, garages , man ufactur ing w orks
and whar ves were once present, and which
may have left a legacy of contamination.  All
new development in the borough is en visaged
to tak e place on pre viously de veloped land
(i.e. brownfield sites) and theref ore
remediation is encour aged. The duty to
30825  Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18ensure that a saf e development is secured
on a site that is aff ected b y contamination
rests with the de veloper .Where de velopment
comes f orward potential contamination r isks
will need to be proper ly considered and
adequately mitigated bef ore de velopment
proceeds .
25.44 To deliv er this the Council will:
1. require a desk top study and preliminar y
risk assessment, including an
assessment of the site's histor y,
potential contamination sources ,
pathw ays and receptors;
2. where necessar y, require a site
investigation and detailed r isk
assessment in line with current best
practice guidance , including where
appropr iate ph ysical in vestigations ,
chemical testing and assessments of
ground gas r isks and r isks to
groundw ater;
3. where necessar y, require a remediation
strategy that sets out ho w any identified
risks from the repor ts abo ve are going
to be addressed;
4. where necessar y, require a v alidation
repor t once remediation has tak en place ,
including e vidence that demonstr ates
that r isks from contamination ha ve been
controlled eff ectively; and
5. require all abo ve repor ts and
investigations to be carr ied out b y a
competent person.
Construction and demolition
25.45 There is a need to ensure that occupiers are
protected from en vironmental disturbances
during the constr uction and demolition phaseof major de velopments , and in par ticular
during e xcavating and constr uction of
subterr anean de velopments such as
basements .
25.46 The Council requires the submission of
Constr uction Management Plans (CMP) f or
the types of de velopments as set out in the
policy . In addition, the Council's Good
Practice Guide on Basement De velopments
sets out guidance to ensure that prob lems
relating to e xcavation and constr uctions of
basements , such as highw ay/par king impacts ,
noise , dust, vibr ation and disturbance to
neighbours , are a voided.  Developers of
basements are also e xpected to sign up to a
Consider ate Constr uction Scheme .To
manage the en vironmental impacts and
ensure that the Constr uction Management
Plans are adhered to , the Council will seek a
charge to the applicant/de veloper to co ver
the cost of monitor ing the CMP .Where an
applicant/de veloper uses the Council’ s
Building Control ser vices , a discount ma y be
applied to this charge .
25.47 The Council also requires de velopers to set
out in a mitigation measures statement
attached to the CMP ho w the y will monitor
dust, noise and vibr ation, and where
necessar y tak e the appropr iate action if
issues ar ise. It will also be necessar y to
control the hours of oper ation f or noisy site
works and the processes that w ould need to
be followed in order to w ork outside these
hours when and if required.  As par t of the
Council's commitment to better air quality ,
the Council will also request, through planning
conditions , that the GLA Regulation relating
to Non-Road Mobile Machiner y (NRMM) is
imposed at all times .
Policy 54.  Basements and subterranean de velopments
A. The Council will resist subterr anean and basement de velopment of more than one store y belo w the
existing g round le vel to residential proper ties or those which w ere pre viously in residential use .
B.Proposals f or subterr anean and basement de velopments will be required to comply with the f ollowing:
1. extend to no more than a maxim um of 50% of the e xisting garden land or more than half of
any other unde veloped garden area (this e xcludes the f ootpr int of the or iginal b uilding);
2. demonstr ate the scheme saf eguards the str uctur al stability of the e xisting b uilding, neighbour ing
buildings and other infr astructure , including related to the highw ay and tr anspor t; a Str uctur al
309Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Impact Assessment will be required where a subterr anean de velopment or basement is added
to, or adjacent to , a listed b uilding.
3. use natur al ventilation and lighting where habitab le accommodation is pro vided to ensure the
health and w ell-being of its occupants;
4. include a minim um of 1 metre natur ally dr aining per meab le soil abo ve any par t of the basement
beneath the garden area, together with a minim um 200mm dr ainage la yer, and pro vide a
satisf actor y landscaping scheme;
5. demonstr ate that the scheme will not increase or otherwise e xacerbate flood r isk on the site
or be yond, in line with P olicy 8 Flood Risk and Sustainab le Drainage;  a site specific Screening
Assessment, under taken by a char tered prof essional, is required to assess lik ely impacts from
subterr anean de velopment within throughflo w and g roundw ater policy z ones and/or in an area
with >=25% susceptibility to g roundw ater flooding;  if the Screening Assessment deter mines
that the proposed subsurf ace de velopment ma y have an impact on the local en vironment, or
if it deter mines that fur ther in vestigation w ork is required, then a Basement Impact Assessment
is required;
6. demonstr ate as par t of a Constr uction Management Plan that the de velopment will be designed
and constr ucted so as to minimise the impact dur ing constr uction and occupation stages (in
line with P olicy 53 Local En vironmental Impacts);
7. demonstr ate that the proposal does not cause loss , damage or adv erse impact to biodiv ersity ,
including trees , and amenity v alue;  and
8. externally visib le elements such as light w ells, roof lights and fire escapes need to be sensitiv ely
designed and sited to a void an y har mful visual impact on neighbour ing proper ties or visual
amenity .
C.Proposals f or subterr anean and basement de velopments , including e xtensions , as w ell as lightw ells
and r ailings , will be assessed against the advice set out in the Council's SPDs relating to char acter
and design as w ell as the rele vant Village Planning Guidance and the f orthcoming SPD on Basements
and Subterr anean De velopments . Applicants will be e xpected to f ollow the Council's Good Pr actice
Guide on Basement De velopments . Any sub-surf ace, basement and cellar proposals within
throughflo w and g roundw ater policy z ones and/or in an area with >=25% susceptibility to g roundw ater
flooding need to f ollow the guidance set out in the Council’ s Basement Assessment User Guide .
25.48 This policy applies to all ne w basement
developments , including the constr uction or
extension of one or more store ys belo w the
prevailing g round le vel of a site or proper ty.
Subterr anean and other basement
developments are considered to be
'development' as defined b y the Town and
Countr y Planning Act 1990 as amended.
Theref ore, planning per mission is required
for the carr ying out of basement
developments .The Council has made tw o
Article 4 Directions that came into eff ect on
1 Apr il 2018, which remo ve per mitted
development r ights across the whole borough
for basement and subterr anean
developments .25.49 The de velopment of basements in residential
areas is becoming an increasingly popular
way of gaining additional space in homes
without the need to relocate to larger
proper ties as w ell as f or increasing the v alue
of a proper ty.The shor tage of land f or
development as w ell as high land v alues in
the borough, coupled with constr aints
imposed b y her itage designations , has led to
an increase in the n umber of applications f or
basement de velopments in recent y ears,
whereb y the v ast major ity of these relate to
new, or e xtensions to e xisting basements ,
under e xisting dw ellings within estab lished
residential areas .
25.50 The addition of basements to e xisting
proper ties is considered to e xacerbate the
issue of r ising residential land and proper ty
31025  Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18values in this borough, thus creating e ven
more homes that are not aff ordab le for local
comm unities , and it also contr ibutes to the
loss of small f amily dw ellings .Theref ore,
limiting the siz e and e xtent of a basement
also ensures that the special char acter of this
borough is preser ved and that proposals do
not lead to o ver-de velopment or inappropr iate
intensification of e xisting proper ties.
25.51 Adding basements to e xisting proper ties,
particular ly multiple basements in a
residential street or area, can significantly
change the char acter of an area, and can
cause significant impacts to living conditions
of residents in neighbour ing proper ties.
Theref ore, this policy restr icts the depth of
the basement e xcavation to a single store y
where it relates to residential proper ties or
those which w ere pre viously in residential
use. In this policy , a 'single store y' is one that
cannot be subdivided in the future to create
additional floors (appro ximately 2.7 metres
floor to ceiling height).
25.52 The policy ac knowledges that basements and
subterr anean de velopments , including
potentially those of more than one store y, can
be constr ucted and used without adv erse
impacts on the living conditions and amenity
of neighbours , provided that the proposal is
appropr iate f or the char acter of the area and
the site allo ws for appropr iate access f or plant
and machiner y to enab le constr uction without
adverse impacts .
25.53 In addition, this borough is char acter ised b y
low-rise residential areas that benefit from
garden areas . Garden areas ha ve
multi-functional benefits b y contr ibuting
significantly to the borough’ s green
infrastructure netw ork, pro viding biodiv ersity
value and contr ibuting to the special char acter
and uniqueness of this borough, including the
character of Conser vation Areas and settings
of her itage assets .They act as
stepping-stone sites f or wildlif e and impro ve
connectivity betw een habitats , help reduce
flood r isk and mitigate the eff ects of climate
change including the heat island eff ect.They
also pro vide g reen oases , tranquil areas and
amenity space f or residents as w ell as health
benefits .The impor tance of garden areas in
this borough is also estab lished b y virtue ofsome being designated as Other Open Land
of Townscape Impor tance . In addition, P olicy
15 Infill and Bac kland De velopment resists
the significant loss of garden land. While
basements ma y not ha ve a detr imental
impact on the openness of an area, the y can
introduce a deg ree of ar tificiality into the
garden area and restr ict the r ange of trees
and other planting. Theref ore, this policy
requires the retention of at least half of each
garden to enab le biodiv ersity to flour ish, and
natur al landscapes and the char acter to be
maintained.  In addition, this enab les the
treatment of surf ace w ater as close to its
source as possib le by retaining the infiltr ation
capacity of the un-e xcavated area of the
garden, thus ensur ing that proposals do not
increase surf ace w ater flo ws onto adjoining
proper ties.
25.54 To suppor t appropr iate planting and
vegetation that suppor ts biodiv ersity as w ell
as to allo w for sustainab le drainage , the
Council will require a soil depth o ver an y par t
of the basement beneath a garden of a
minim um of 1 metre , together with a minim um
200mm dr ainage la yer.This will allo w for both
a reduction in the amount as w ell as speed
of surf ace w ater r unoff , whereb y the surf ace
water dr ainage regime abo ve the basement
should be connected to the unaff ected par t
of the garden area.
25.55 All basement and subterr anean de velopment
should be installed with a pumped se werage
system to pre vent flooding from bac k flow in
public se werage system as recognised in P art
H of the Building Regulations . Issues of
groundw ater ing ress to basement le vels
should be addressed b y proper ty owners . In
areas at r isk of flooding, P olicy 8 Flood Risk
and Sustainab le Dr ainage will be applied,
which restr icts cer tain types of basements
and uses in accordance with the rele vant
flood z ones , for example , restr icted uses
include self-contained units and bedrooms at
basement le vel. In addition, an y sub-surf ace,
basement and cellar proposals within
throughflo w and g roundw ater policy z ones
and/or in an area with >=25% susceptibility
to groundw ater flooding are required to carr y
out a site-specific Screen Assessment, which
311Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18has to be under taken by a char tered
professional, to assess the lik ely impacts from
subterr anean de velopment.  It should address:
the impacts of the proposed subsurf ace
development on the area’ s subterr anean
character istics ,
land stability , and
flood r isk and dr ainage .
25.56 If the Screening Assessment deter mines that
the proposed subsurf ace de velopment ma y
have an impact on the local en vironment, or
if it deter mines that fur ther in vestigation w ork
is required, then a Basement Impact
Assessment is required, which has to be
under taken by a char tered prof essional.  A
Site and Assessment Verification F orm has
to be completed b y the char tered prof essional
who under took the assessment and submitted
as par t of the application. The Council’ s
Basement Assessment User Guide  provides
more inf ormation and guidance on Screening
Assessments and Basement Impact
Assessments .
25.57 Basements and subterr anean de velopments
can suff er inundation from flood w ater
enter ing the basement from abo ve. Policy 8
Flood Risk and Sustainab le Dr ainage of this
Plan sets out restr ictions f or basement
developments in areas at r isk of flooding.  In
addition, basements are vulner able to
groundw ater enter ing through the w alls and
floors as w ell as ser vice entr ies. Applicants
should f ollow the BSI Code of Pr actice f or
protection of belo w ground str uctures against
water from the g round (BS 8102:2009).
25.58 The impact of basement and subterr anean
constr uction, including issues relating to
noise , dust, disturbance and str uctur al
stability of surrounding proper ties as w ell as
the management of tr affic, plant and
equipment, is a g rowing concer n in the
borough, par ticular ly in residential streets . It
can aff ect the quality of lif e, amenity and living
conditions as w ell as tr affic and par king of
nearb y residents and local comm unities . In
some instances , multiple e xcavations in a
residential street can lead to detr imental
impacts dur ing the e xcavation and
constr uction processes .While Planning has
limited po wers to control the constr uctionprocesses , it does ha ve an impor tant role in
protecting amenity and living conditions .This
policy seeks to ensure that the amenity , living
conditions and the health and w ellbeing of
nearb y residents are protected b y reducing
the impacts from constr uction w orks, such as
noise , vibr ation, soil remo val and associated
plant, machiner y and hea vy vehicles .
Theref ore, a Constr uction Management Plan
(CMP), as set out in the Council's Local
Validation Chec klist, will be required f or all
types of basement and subterr anean
developments .
25.59 There are concer ns over the impacts of
basements and subterr anean de velopments
on the str uctur al stability of the host b uilding
as well as of adjacent and potentially other
nearb y proper ties. Careful control is required
to manage the detr imental impacts of
basement and subterr anean de velopments
and to pre vent long-ter m har m to amenity and
living conditions of the local comm unity.
25.60 Due to the potential irre versib le detr imental
harm to the histor ic integ rity and r isks to
structur al damage , particular care and
attention needs to be tak en where a
subterr anean or basement de velopment could
affect a designated her itage asset, such as
a listed b uilding or the associated garden land
of a listed b uilding.  Proposals will also need
to consider the potential archaeological
impacts in Archaeological Pr iority Areas
(APAs) where rele vant.Theref ore, where a
subterr anean de velopment or basement is
added to , or adjacent to , a listed b uilding, a
Structur al Impact Assessment, including
written confir mation that the applicant will pa y
for the str uctur al repor t to be independently
assessed, will be required.  In Conser vation
Areas , basements should conser ve or
enhance the char acter and appear ance of
the Conser vation Area. This is par ticular ly
relevant in relation to e xternal visib le features
such as light w ells and r ailings , which ma y
impact on the char acter of Conser vation
Areas .
25.61 The en vironmental impact of basement and
subterr anean de velopments is arguab ly
greater than the equiv alent abo ve ground
development due to the increased energy
and resource requirements in their
31225  Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18constr uction and use (e .g. heating and
lighting). The Council theref ore e xpects all
basement de velopment proposals to
demonstr ate that the y have sought to
minimise their en vironmental impact in
accordance with the rele vant climate change ,
sustainab le constr uction standards and
circular econom y policies of this Plan.
25.62 The Council's Good Pr actice Guide on
Basement De velopments sets out guidance
to ensure that prob lems relating to e xcavation
and constr uctions of basements , such as
highw ay/par king impacts , noise , dust,
vibration and disturbance to neighbours , are
avoided.  It is e xpected that all de velopers f or
basement and subterr anean w orks follow this
guidance . In addition, de velopers and
contr actors of basements and subterr anean
developments are e xpected to sign up to a
Consider ate Constr uction Scheme .The
Council strongly recommends f or contr actors
under taking basement constr uction to ha ve
membership of the Association of Specialist
Under pinning Contr actors (ASUC) or another
suitab le body . Applicants , and par ticular ly
contr actors , should also f ollow the ASUC
‘Guidelines on saf e and efficient basement
constr uction directly belo w or near to e xisting
structures’  (last updated in A ugust 2016),
which has been endorsed b y the Health and
Safety Ex ecutiv e.
25.63 Applicants wishing to under take basement
and subterr anean de velopments are strongly
advised to discuss their proposal with
neighbours and other par ties, who ma y be
affected, b y commencing P arty Wall
negotiations and discussing the scheme with
the Council pr ior to the submission of a
planning application.
313Creating saf e, health y and inclusiv e comm unities 25
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1826 Deliver y and Monitoring
Policy 55.  Deliver y and Monitoring
Deliver y
A. The Local Plan will be implemented and deliv ered through a combination of pr ivate sector in vestment,
the w ork of other agencies and bodies and the Council’ s own str ategies and initiativ es.The Council
will suppor t various initiativ es such as neighbourhood plans , town centre b usiness impro vement
districts and other netw orks, which contr ibute to the aims of the Plan in order to promote our centres ,
attract in vestment and manage impro vements to the pub lic realm.
Infrastructure
B.We will w ork in par tnership with k ey bodies that include TfL, the GLA and neighbour ing boroughs
to secure funding and ensure that tr anspor t infrastructure suppor ts the needs of residents b y
prioritising activ e travel.
C.We will also w ork with other infr astructure pro viders such as utility companies to ensure that adequate
infrastructure is in place to suppor t future and e xisting residents .The Council will contin ue to secure
planning ob ligations through legal ag reements (S106 ag reements) f or the deliv ery of on-site aff ordab le
housing in line with P olicy LP11.
Planning Ob ligations and Comm unity Infrastructure Le vy
D.The Council will also require planning ob ligations to mitigate an y adv erse impact from a de velopment.
In the first instance this mitigation should be on-site . If on-site mitigation is not f easib le then a
financial contr ibution will need to be secured to wards appropr iate off-site measures .
E. The Council will contin ue to secure funding from de velopment through the borough Comm unity
Infrastructure Le vy (CIL), and collect on behalf of the Ma yoral CIL. The borough CIL will be used
to fund local str ategic infr astructure in the borough.
Enforcement
F.The Council will tak e enf orcement action against unauthor ised de velopment where it is f ound to
cause har m in accordance with the pr iorities and processes f or enf orcement action as set out in the
Council’ s Planning Enf orcement P olicy. Such action is discretionar y and the Council will seek to
exercise these po wers in a manner that is propor tionate to the se verity of a breach.
Monitoring
G. We will contin ue throughout the Plan per iod to assess ho w our planning policies are w orking and
making sure the outcomes are impro ving our local area.
H. If a policy seems to not be achie ving its desired outcomes , the Council will decide if there is an y
action that could be tak en to impro ve this position.
26.1 The ne w Local Plan sets out the str ategy and
vision of ho w the borough will accommodate
growth which pro vides enough homes , jobs ,
school places and health f acilities f or existing
and ne w residents . Over the course of this
plan the Council will be e xpected to deliv er4110 ne w homes .This will put pressure on
existing infr astructure such as w ater w aste,
energy and tr anspor t.The Infr astructure
Deliv ery Plan (IDP) identifies future
31426  Deliv ery and Monitor ing
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18infrastructure and ser vice needs f or the
borough.  An update of the current IDP will be
under taken in 2022.
26.2 Physical, social and g reen infr astructure is
provided and managed b y a wide r ange of
organisations in the Richmond. This includes
Transpor t for London, Netw ork Rail, statutor y
under taker such as Thames Water and other
parts of the pub lic sector such as the NHS
and their v arious tr usts and educational
providers .The Council will engage with all of
the par tner organisations throughout the plan
period to mak e sure that deliv ery of
infrastructure is pro vided at the r ight time and
in the r ight place .
26.3 Planning ob ligations under Section 106 of the
Town and Countr y Planning Act 1990 (as
amended), commonly kno wn as S106
agreements , are a mechanism which mak e
a development proposal acceptab le in
planning ter ms, that w ould not otherwise be
acceptab le. For planning ob ligations to be
acceptab le the y must meet three tests set
out in regulation 122 of the comm unity
Infrastructure Le vy Regulations 2010 (as
amended) which are:
Necessar y to mak e the de velopment
acceptab le in planning ter ms.
Directly related to the de velopment;  and
Fairly and reasonab ly related in scale
and kind to the de velopment.
26.4 The Comm unity Infr astructure Le vy (CIL) is
a charge which is le vied b y the Council on
new developments in the borough to fund
infrastructure . Not all de velopments are liab le
to pa y CIL and the borough Comm unity
Infrastructure Le vy Charging Schedule sets
out the r ates and boundar ies which apply in
accordance with the CIL regulations .The
current charging z ones include a higher
residential r ate in the nor th of the borough
and a lo wer rate to the south.  A por tion of the
borough CIL collected is spent on local
priorities, this neighbourhood element is
operated through the Comm unity Fund.  An
Infrastructure Funding Statement is pub lished
each y ear setting out the income and
expenditure relating to the comm unity
infrastructure le vy (CIL) and section 106
(S106) ag reements .The Council will alsocontin ue collecting Ma yoral CIL which is used
by the Ma yor and the GLA to fund str ategic
projects that impact the whole of London, f or
example Crossr ail.
26.5 The planning system is under mined when
unauthor ised de velopment is allo wed to go
unchec ked. Unauthor ised de velopment can
have a negativ e impact on the borough’ s
residents , heritage assets and local areas .
The Council will tak e proactiv e measure
where it has been identified that an
unauthor ised de velopment causes har m and
will tak e appropr iate enf orcement action in
accordance with the Council’ s Planning
Enforcement P olicy, subject to resources
availab le.
26.6 The Council has a w ell-estab lished and
up-to-date monitor ing system in place f or a
range of indicators and targets which monitor
the eff ectiveness of the polices and str ategies
over time , set out in the Local Plan Monitor ing
Framework. Key aspects of monitor ing
contin ue to be under taken on an ann ual basis
and is repor ted as par t of the ser ies of
Author ity’s Monitor ing Repor ts.The GLA also
publish monitor ing inf ormation on the
Planning London Datahub . In addition, the
Sustainability Appr aisal process , along with
other monitor ing and research, are used to
inform monitor ing.The monitor ing fr amework
will be re vised to reflect the adoption of the
new Local Plan policies .
26.7 It is recognised that o ver the lif etime of the
Plan, e xternal circumstances will change . As
set out in P olicy 10 Ne w Housing, the
Government ann ually measures housing
delivery and if future deliv ery falls belo w
certain thresholds then action ma y be
required. Whilst the Plan is o verall considered
to be fle xible, the NPPF allo ws for Local
Plans to be re viewed in whole or in par t to
respond fle xibly to changing circumstances .
Theref ore, external factors such as changes
in national policy , a London Plan re view or
changes in local e vidence and need ma y
trigger a re view of this Local Plan. The
programme f or the prepar ation of
Development Plan Documents is set out
within the Council’ s Local De velopment
Scheme , which is regular ly reviewed and
updated.
315Deliv ery and Monitor ing 26
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1827 Appendices
Appendix 1:  List of K ey and Secondar y Shopping Fr onta ges
Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
ASHB URNHAM R OAD
Ashb urnham Road
Nos. 171-185 (odd)
BARNES
Barnes High Street
Nos. 1,1a,1b ,1c,2, (consecutiv e)
Nos. 65-69 (consecutiv e)
Nos. 33-36a (consecutiv e)Barnes High Street
Nos. 3- 25 (consecutiv e)
Nos. 51-64 (consecutiv e)
Chur ch Road
Nos. 125-145 (odd)
Nos. 54-102 (e ven)
Nos. 49-85 (odd)Chur ch Road
Nos. 145a-175 (odd)
Rocks Lane
Nos. 1-9
CASTELNA U
Castelnau
Nos.174-202 (e ven)
Nos.185-201 (odd)
EAST SHEEN
Sheen Lane
Nos. 105-135 (odd)
Nos. 28-40 (e ven)
Nos. 31-63 (odd)
Nos. 65A-77 (odd)Sheen Lane
Nos. 137-141 (odd)
Parkway House
Upper Ric hmond Road West
Nos. 220-254 (e ven)
Nos. 256-296 (e ven)
Nos. 341-361 (odd)
Nos. 363-445 (odd)Upper Ric hmond Road West
Nos. 184-218 (e ven)
Nos. 215-339 (odd)
Nos. 298-318 (e ven)
Nos. 447-501 (odd)
Nos. 1- 10 Gr and P arade (consecutiv e)
EAST TWICKENHAM
Richmond Road
Nos. 359-387 (odd)
Nos. 417-447 (odd) not including 439
Nos. 332-342 (e ven)
Nos. 382-428 (e ven)Richmond Road
Nos. 344-380 (e ven)
31627  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
FRIARS STILE R OAD
Friar s Stile Road
Nos. 19-23A (odd)
Nos. 36-56 (e ven)
FULWELL
Hampton Road
Nos. 206-224 (e ven)
HAM STREET / B ACK LANE
Back Lane
Nos. 4-14 (e ven)Ashb urnham Road
Nos. 2-16 (e ven)
Ham Street
Nos. 63-71 (odd)
HAM P ARADE
Richmond Road
Nos. 406-414a (e ven)Upper Ham Road
Parkleys Parade 1-6 (consecutiv e)
Nos. 21-31 (odd)
Richmond Road
Nos. 299-323 (odd)
Nos. 414-432 (e ven)
HAMPT ON HILL
High Street
Nos. 73-83;101-111;131-143
Nos. 185-201;  203-217(odd)
Nos. 10-48;  118a-118e
Nos. 120-122 (e ven)High Street
Nos. 50-78 (e ven)
Nos. 169-183 (odd)
HAMPT ON NURSER Y LANDS
Tangle y Park Road
Nos. 26-30 (consecutiv e)
HAMPT ON VILLA GE
Milton Road
Nos. 78-82 (e ven)Milton Road
Nos. 70-76 (e ven)
Ashle y Road
Nos. 27-37 (odd)Station Road
Nos. 70-82 (e ven)
Nos. 92-100 (e ven)
317Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
Station Appr oach
Nos. 4-9
Station Appr oach
Nos. 1-3 (consecutiv e) Oldfield Road
Nos. 55-63 (odd)
Wensle ydale Road
Nos. 1-13 (odd)Percy Road
No. 31
Prior y Road
Nos. 33-41 (odd)
HAMPT ON WICK
High Street
Nos.32-48 (e ven)
No. 56-58 (e ven)
HEATHSIDE
Hanw orth Road
Nos.646-670 (e ven)Powder Mill Lane
Nos.222-226 (e ven)
Nos.221-247 (odd)
HOSPIT AL BRIDGE R OAD
Staines Road
Nos.326-336 (e ven)
KEW GARDENS ST ATION
North Road
Nos. 102-109 (consecutiv e)Station Appr oach
Nos. 1-9 (consecutiv e)
Royal Parade
Nos. 1-9 (consecutiv e)Station P arade
Nos. 1-17 (odd)
Nos. 2-18 (e ven)
KEW GREEN
Mortlake Terrace
Nos. 1-9 (consecutiv e)
KEW R OAD
Kew Road
Nos. 101-145 (odd)
Nos. 84-112 (e ven)
KINGST ON R OAD
31827  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
Kingston Road
Nos. 210-216 (e ven)Kingston Road
Nos. 149-161 (odd)
Nos. 190-208 (e ven)
Bush y Park Road
Nos. 1-5 The P avement (consecutiv e)
LOWER MOR TLAKE R OAD
Lower Mor tlake Road
Nos. 225-231 (odd)Lower Mor tlake Road
Nos. 203-223 (odd)
NELSON R OAD
Nelson Road
Nos.300-310 (e ven)
Nos.314-322 (e ven)
RICHMOND MAIN CENTRE
Duke Street
Nos. 1-6 (consecutiv e)
No. 8Brewers Lane
Nos. 2-18 (e ven)
Nos. 3-13 (odd)
Eton Street
Nos. 1-3 (odd)Bridg e Street
Nos. 1-2 (consecutiv e)
Nos. 2-18 (e ven) Dome Buildings
Nos. 1-6 (consecutiv e)
Hill Rise
Nos. 1-17 (odd) Geor ge Street
Nos. 1-84 (consecutiv e)
Kew Road
Nos.1-61 (odd) Lower Geor ge Street
Nos. 1-8 (consecutiv e)
Petersham Road
Nos. 1-13 (odd) Chur ch Cour t
Nos. 1-6 (e ven)
The Quadrant
Nos. 19-32 (consecutiv e) Golden Cour t Parade
Nos. 1-9 (odd)
premises adj.  to 27-28 The Green & fronting Golden
Cour tRichmond Hill
Nos. 6-26 (e ven)
Red Lion Street
Nos. 10-32 (e ven)The Green
Nos. 13, 26-29 (consecutiv e)
Sheen Road
Nos. 15-21 (odd)Hill Rise
Nos. 2-32 (e ven)
Nos. 40-86 (e ven)
Westminster House
Nos. 1-7 (consecutiv e) Hill Street
319Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
Nos. 1-23 (odd)
Nos. 2-74 (e ven)
King Street
Nos. 4-16 (consecutiv e)
Nos. 19-19a, 20-26 (consecutiv e)
Lichfield Cour t Parade , Sheen Road
Nos. 1-16 (consecutiv e)
The P assa ge
Paved Cour t
Nos. 2-16 (e ven)
Nos. 1-17 (odd)
The Quadrant
Nos. 1-18 (consecutiv e)
Nos. 33-50 (consecutiv e)
Red Lion Street
Nos. 1-3 (odd)
Nos. 2-4(e ven)
Sheen Road
Nos. 1-13 (odd)
Nos. 2-4 (e ven)
The Square
Nos. 1-4 (consecutiv e)
Former pub lic con venience
ST MARGARETS
Amyand P ark Road
Nos. 208, 210Crown Road
Nos. 2-24 (e ven)
Crown Road
Nos. 26-32 (e ven)
Nos. 35-43 (odd)
Nos. 34-48 (e ven)St. Margarets Road
Nos. 125-155 (odd)
Nos. 109-119 (odd)
St Mar garets Road
No. 123 Station Kiosks
Nos. 116-126A (e ven)
Nos. 157-165 (odd)
ST MARGARETS R OAD (parade to the nor th of A316)
32027  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
St Mar garets Road
Nos. 379-391 (odd)
SAND YCOMBE R OAD
Sand ycombe Road
Nos. 296-308 (e ven)Sand ycombe Road
Nos. 293-303 (odd)
SHEEN R OAD
Sheen Road
Nos. 80-94Sheen Road
Nos. 106-124 (e ven)
STANLEY R OAD
Stanle y Road
Nos. 186-192 (e ven)
Nos. 139-147 (odd)Stanle y Road
Nos. 176-184 (e ven)
Nos. 91-121 (odd)
STRA WBERR Y HILL
Tower Road
Nos.50-56 (e ven)
Nos.70-74 (e ven)
Nos.39-45 (odd)
Wellesle y Parade
Nos.1-6 (consecutiv e)
TEDDINGT ON
Broad Street
Nos. 1-15 (odd) [including Ov al Cour t]
Nos. 2-6 (e ven)
Nos. 74-86 (e ven)Broad Street
Nos. 17-67 (odd)
Nos. 8-72 (e ven)
High Street
Nos. 6-42 (e ven)
Nos. 70-98 (e ven)
Nos. 19-67 (odd)
Nos. 73-121 (odd)Chur ch Road
Nos. 1-13 (odd)
Nos. 6-16 (e ven)
High Street
Nos. 100-160 (e ven)
Station Road
No. 1 The Cause way
Nos. 2-28 (e ven)
Nos. 1-13 (odd)
TWICKENHAM GREEN
321Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
Staines Road
Nos. 8-38a (e ven)
TWICKENHAM
Heath Road
Nos. 46-164 (e ven)
Nos. 1-85 (odd)
Nos. 149-157 (odd)Chur ch Street
Nos. 9-28 (consecutiv e)
Nos. 31-58 (consecutiv e)
Heath Road
Nos. 2-44 (e ven) King Street
Nos. 41-59 (odd)
King Street
Nos. 1-39 (odd)
Nos. 2-62 (e ven)London Road
Nos. 11-65 (odd)
London Road
Nos. 1-9 (odd)
Nos. 2-50 (e ven)York Street
Nos. 4-18 (e ven)
York Street
Nos. 1-19 (odd)
No. 2
WALDEGRA VE R OAD
Waldegra ve Road
No. 189-195 (odd)Waldegra ve Road
Nos. 150-158 (e ven)
Nos. 197-207 (odd)
WHITE HAR T LANE
The Br oadway
Nos. 1-10 (consecutiv e)White Har t Lane
Nos. 36-78 (e ven)
Nos. 147-153 (odd)
White Har t Lane
Nos. 1-7 (odd)
Upper Ric hmond Road West
Nos. 42-48 (e ven)
WHITT ON
High Street
Nos. 1-35 (including 35a) (odd)
Nos. 105-113 (odd)
Nos. 115-123 (odd)
Nos. 16-22 (e ven)
Nos. 108-114 (e ven)
Nos. 120-136 (e ven)High Street
Nos. 24-58 (e ven)
Nos. 60-106 (e ven)
Nos. 37-103 (odd)
32227  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Secondar y Fronta ge Key Fronta ge
Bridg e Way
Bridge Way House
Nelson Road
Nos. 109-121 (odd)
WHITT ON R OAD
Whitton Road
Nos. 97-105 (odd)
Table 27.1 K ey and Secondar y Fronta ges
323Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Appendix 2 Marketing Requirements
27.1 A number of policies in this Local Plan require
marketing e vidence to be submitted f or
applications in volving the loss of cer tain uses
in order to pro vide justification that those sites
are no longer required f or their e xisting uses ,
including:
Policy 18 De velopment in centres
Policy 20 Local shops and ser vices
Policy 40.  Rivers and r iver corr idors
Policy 49 Social and Comm unity
Infrastructure
Policy 23 Offices
Policy 24 Industr ial Land
27.2 This appendix sets out the details that should
be pro vided to enab le officers to assess the
acceptability or otherwise of the mar keting
under taken.The Council’ s assessment will
consider the o verall length, type and quality
of the mar keting to come to a vie w, and if the
applicant/agent puts f orward an y justification
for an y shor tcomings in the mar keting (e .g.
the use of only one specialist w ebsite r ather
than a r ange of gener ic websites due to the
nature of the e xisting emplo yment use , or that
a mar keting board w as not used because of
advertisement controls) these will be
considered, ho wever the e xpectation is the
below requirements should be fully
addressed.
27.3 Marketing should alw ays involve a rob ust and
active mar keting campaign and should:
Be ongoing f or a minim um per iod as set
out in the tab le belo w.
Be through a commercial agent.
The proper ty should be mar keted on
proper ty databases , search engines and
other rele vant w ebsites which f ocus on
the sale or letting of commercial
premises , which are free to vie w and
easily accessib le by prospectiv e
purchasers / tenants .
Prices should be commensur ate with
the e xisting quality and location of the
premises .Minim um
Marketing
PeriodLocal Plan
PolicyLand use
2 years Policy 18 Commercial or
comm unity use
(in designated
centres)
2 years Policy 20 Local shops
and ser vices
(selling
essential goods
and ser vices)
2 years Policy 20 Public Houses
2 years Policy 40 River-dependent
or river-related
industr ial and
business uses
18 months Policy 49 Social and
comm unity
infrastructure
2 years Policy 23 Offices
2 years Policy 24 Industr ial land
Table 27.2 Marketing Requirements
27.4 A mar keting repor t must be submitted and
include the f ollowing details:
Identify the last occupier including name ,
address , nature of b usiness and
floorspace . If the land / b uildings are
vacant, state the date the y were last
occupied.
The date when mar keting began and
ceased (if rele vant) f or each agent, if
more than one used.
It should be clear ly stated which land
uses the proper ty/site is being mar keted
for, identifying the dates of mar keting f or
each land use .
Identify the agents used f or mar keting
and a cop y of the agents par ticulars ,
including an y amended par ticulars to be
supplied.
Details of the pr ice the site has been
marketed at and whether the pr ice w as
reduced, stating the date that it w as
32427  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18reduced if this w as the case . Marketing
should alw ays be at a pr ice that
genuinely reflects the mar ket value of
the proper ty in its current use and
current quality .
Details of the mar keting methods used
must be pro vided. The repor t should
include:
The mar keting par ticulars .
Which w ebsites or press the
proper ty/site w as adv ertised on,
identifying dates when freely a vailab le
to be vie wed, and in the case of
websites , the n umber of 'hits'.
Details of direct mar keting used
including a cop y of the mar keting
brochure , details of who the mar keting
particulars w ere circulated to including
the siz e of the database , whether the
database used is mainly aimed at
potential occupiers based locally or
nationally . Distr ibution of mar keting
mater ial should be on a quar terly basis .
Whether a mar keting board has been
used and the dates it w as displa yed.
Use of a mar keting board is advised
where ver possib le.
Details of the mar keting outcomes
should include an y (a) e xpressions of 
interest;  and (b) off ers made . In both
cases the interested par ties should be
identified and where the premises w ere
rejected the reasons f or doing so should
be stated.
27.5 All mar keting under taken m ust meet the
requirements as set out abo ve and a
marketing repor t must be submitted which
includes the details set out.  More specific
marketing requirements are required f or
different types of uses , as set out belo w.
Retail (E(a) Use Class)
27.6 Where a proposal in volves a change of use
away from retail that is not suppor ted b y
policy within designated and non-designated
shopping frontages , mar keting m ust also
include the f ollowing:
A compar ison of rents achie ved for other
compar able E(a) uses rele vant to the
application site , taking into account thesize of the unit and other matters such
as location and ser vicing.
Marketing e vidence will be needed
where there is a total loss of a retail use
or where the loss (including ancillar y
floorspace) is v ery substantial.
Pubs (Sui Generis use)
27.7 The Council will resist the loss of pub lic
houses , which are considered to be a
valuab le comm unity f acility .Where the loss
of a pub lic house , or substantial reduction in
floorspace is proposed mar keting m ust also
include the f ollowing:
Details should be pro vided about the
operation of the pub lic house (including
at the time of closure if v acant) such as
the tur nover of the pub lic house , the
percentage split betw een w et sales and
food and whether the premises is used
as a m usic v enue etc;
It is e xpected that pub lic houses will be
marketed via an estate agent
specialising in the leisure industr y,
where this is not the case the applicant
should e xplain wh y
Applicants should also ha ve regard to
the Campaign f or Real Ale’ s (CAMRA)
Public House Viability Test.
Consider ation should be giv en to a full
range of other social and comm unity
infrastructure uses in line with P olicy 49
and the requirements set out belo w
under the heading f or Social and
Comm unity Infr astructure .
27.8 Please note that the Council will tak e into
account the consider ations set out in the
suppor ting te xt to P olicy 20 including whether
there is another pub lic house within 400
metres . Applicants should address this when
submitting a planning application.
Offices (E(g) (i) or (g) (ii) Use Class)
27.9 Where a proposal in volves a change of use
or rede velopment resulting in a loss of office
space , mar keting m ust clear ly demonstr ate
that there is no longer demand f or an office
based use in this location and that there is
not lik ely to be in the f oreseeab le future .
Marketing m ust also include the f ollowing:
325Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Evidence that the site has been
marketed f or the e xisting office use and
other types of office-based uses such
as fle xible, star t-up or co-w orking space .
Offices should be mar keted at a pr ice
commensur ate with their e xisting quality
or condition based on the local office
market, by reference to compar ables in
the locality .
The lease ter m should not be unduly
restrictive and should include the
potential f or a shor t-term lease in
appropr iate cases . Details of the lease
terms off ered should be included in the
marketing repor t
Alternativ ely, the potential of upg rading
the b uilding or adapting the b uilding to
meet moder n workspace requirements
should be e xplored. This ma y include a
viability assessment addressing the
feasibility of refurbishing or moder nising
the e xisting office space .
27.10 Please note that pro vision of mar keting will
not be accepted as justification f or an
exception to policy;  there should be no net
loss of office floorspace .
Industrial land and b usiness parks (E (g) (ii) or (g)
(iii), B2, B8 Use Class and Sui Generis uses)
27.11 Where a proposal in volves a change of use
or rede velopment resulting in a loss of
industr ial space mar keting m ust clear ly
demonstr ate that there is no longer demand
for an industr ial based use in this location and
that there is not lik ely to be in the f oreseeab le
future . Marketing m ust also include the
following:
Attempts to mar ket poorer quality
premises should be on the basis of their
present condition, and not on their
potential f or rede velopment in other
emplo yment uses , or proposing housing
as the only viab le option.
27.12 Please note that pro vision of mar keting will
not be accepted as justification f or an
exception to policy;  there should be no net
loss of office floorspace .27.13 Where a proposal in volves a change of use
or rede velopment resulting in a loss of
river-dependent or r iver-related industr ial and
business uses , mar keting m ust clear ly
demonstr ate that there is no longer an y
demand f or river-dependent or r iver-related
use(s) in this location and that there is not
likely to be in the f oreseeab le future .This
should include both tr aditional and moder n
industr ies, including the constr uction, repair ,
servicing and sale of r iver craft and uses
related to the function of the Riv er Thames
for transpor tation, comm unication and
recreation.  Marketing m ust be based on a
price commensur ate with the e xisting quality
or condition of the site , based on the local
market by reference to compar ables in the
locality .
Social and Comm unity Infrastructure ( within E,  F
Use Classes and Sui Generis uses)
27.14 For applications in volving an y loss of a social
and comm unity infr astructure , it is v ery
impor tant that the potential of re-using or
redeveloping the e xisting site f or the same or
an alter nativ e social infr astructure is fully
considered in line with P olicy 49.  Marketing
must also include the f ollowing:
Evidence that the f acility is no longer
needed.  Evidence of meaningful
engagement with ser vice pro viders or a
public disposal process w ould be
required to demonstr ate this .
Evidence that the loss of the f acility
would not ha ve a detr imental impact on
social and comm unity ser vice pro vision.
For example , a mar keting repor t could
provide details of alter nativ e facilities in
close pro ximity and pro vide e vidence
that e xisting users ha ve all been
successfully relocated and that this has
not resulted in an y shor tfall in pro vision.
Consider ation should be giv en to the
potential f or adapting the site / premises
to meet comm unity needs either no w or
in the future .
Evidence should be pro vided to sho w
that premises ha ve been off ered at a
reasonab le charge to appropr iate user
groups , e.g. at a discounted r ate to
32627  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18comm unity g roups or v oluntar y
organisations .
Where the site is an e xisting health
facility , consider ation should first be
given to re-using the site f or other health
facilities bef ore other social
infrastructure uses . Applicants should
contact NHS Proper ty Ser vices and
South West London CCG (or a future
Integ rated Care System) to discuss their
needs f or health floorspace in the area.
327Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Appendix 3: Tall and Mid-Rise Building
Zones
27.15 Teddington (rail way side ): Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
27.16 Broom P ark (Hampton Wick): Mid Rise
Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
27.17 Twickenham Station :Tall Building Zone
Appropr iate height: 7-10 store ys (21-30m)
27.18 The Stoop (T wickenham) : Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
27.19 Whitton Town Centre : Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
32827  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1827.20 Ham Close (Ham) : Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
27.21 Richmond Station :Tall Building Zone 
Appropr iate height:  7-8 store ys (21-24m)
27.22 Richmond Station : Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
27.23 North Sheen (Lo wer Ric hmond Road) :Tall
Building Zone
Appropr iate height:  7-8 store ys (21-24m)
27.24 North Sheen (Lo wer Ric hmond Road) : Mid
Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
27.25 Kew Retail P ark:Tall Building Zone
Appropr iate height:  7 store ys (21m)
27.26 Kew Retail P ark: Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
27.27 Stag Bre wery (Mor tlake) :Tall Building Zone
Appropr iate height:  7 store ys (21m)
27.28 Stag Bre wery (Mor tlake) : Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate height:  5-6 store ys (15-18m)
329Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 1827.29 Kneller Hall (Whitton) : Mid Rise Zone
Appropr iate Height : 5 store ys (15m)
27.30 Whitton Comm unity Centre:
Appropr iate Height : 5 store ys (15m)
27.31 St Clare (Hampton Hill):
Appropr iate Height : 5 store ys (15m)
33027  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Appendix 4:  Review of Sites of Impor tance
for Nature Conser vation
Picture 27.1 Ric hmond SINCs
Status Area (Ha) Grade Site Name Site Ref No.
Upgraded 3.419 Borough Gr ade Cassel Hospital RiB27 1
Upgraded 5.417 Local Gr ade Kew Pond and K ew Green RIB23 2
Existing site 1.453 Local Gr ade Old Mor tlake Bur ial Ground RiL09 3
Downgraded 0.114 Local Gr ade Kew Meado w Path RiL30 4
Existing site 0.519 Local Gr ade Church yard of St Mar y with St Alban,
TeddingtonRiL15 5
Existing site 3.528 Borough Gr ade Barn Elms Pla ying Fields RiB12 6
Existing site 652.566 Metropolitan Gr ade Bush y Park and Home P ark M084 7
Existing site 11.927 Borough Gr ade The Copse , Holly Hedge Field and Ham
AvenuesRiB17 8
Existing site 113.301 Metropolitan Gr ade Hounslo w Heath M081 9
Upgraded 6.626 Borough Gr ade Terrace Field and Terrace Garden RiB26 10
331Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Status Area (Ha) Grade Site Name Site Ref No.
Existing site 5.301 Borough Gr ade St Margarets Residential Grounds RiB22 11
Existing site 4.963 Local Gr ade Moor mead Recreation Ground RiL25 12
Existing site 80.717 Borough Gr ade Fulw ell and Twickenham Golf Courses RiB07 13
Upgraded 8.538 Borough Gr ade Ham Common w est RiB25 14
New Site 0.184 Local Gr ade Townmead Allotments , Kew RiL27 15
Existing site 0.556 Local Gr ade Pensford Field RiL03 16
Existing site 42.439 Metropolitan Gr ade London Wetland Centre M087 17
Existing site 8.196 Borough Gr ade Leg 'o' Mutton Reser voir LNR RiB02 18
Existing site 0.6 Local Gr ade Beveree Wildlif e Site RiL18 19
New Site 0.871 Borough Gr ade Whitton Railsides RiB15 20
Existing site 2.312 Local Gr ade Hampton Cour t House Grounds RiL07 21
Existing site 1082.175 Metropolitan Gr ade Richmond P ark and Associated Areas M082 22
Existing site 0.52 Local Gr ade The Wilder ness RiL28 23
Upgraded 7.796 Borough Gr ade Twickenham Cemeter y RiB31 24
Existing site 8.818 Borough Gr ade Petersham Lodge Wood and Ham House
Meado wsRiB16 25
Existing site 0.627 Borough Gr ade Duke of Nor thumber land's Riv er south of
Kneller RoadRiB08 26
Existing site 2316.542 Metropolitan Gr ade River Thames and tidal tr ibutaries M031 27
Existing site 29.893 Local Gr ade Marb le Hill P ark and Or leans House Gardens RiL02 28
New Site 0.305 Local Gr ade Garricks La wn RiL26 29
Upgraded 5.513 Borough Gr ade Teddington Cemeter y RiB30 30
Existing site 24.762 Local Gr ade North Sheen and Mor tlake Cemeter ies RiL19 31
Existing site 0.722 Local Gr ade St James' Church yard, Hampton Hill RiL01 32
Existing site 20.435 Borough Gr ade Strawberr y Hill Golf Course RiB09 33
New Site 1.692 Borough Gr ade Trowlock Avenue riverside land, Teddington RiB28 34
Upgraded 4.351 Metropolitan Gr ade Portlane Brook and Meado w RiB24 35
Existing site 3.889 Local Gr ade Langdon P ark RiL16 36
Existing site 61.763 Metropolitan Gr ade Crane Corr idor MO76 37
Existing site 2.797 Local Gr ade Twickenham Road Meado w RiL17 38
New Site 0.872 Local Gr ade St Andre ws Church yard RiL29 39
Existing site 1.047 Local Gr ade Hampton Cemeter y RiL20 40
Existing site 123.157 Metropolitan Gr ade Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew M154 41
33227  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Status Area (Ha) Grade Site Name Site Ref No.
Existing site 76.46 Metropolitan Gr ade Ham Lands MO83 42
Existing site 4.654 Borough Gr ade Hounslo w, Feltham and Whitton junctions RiB19 43
Existing site 16.663 Local Gr ade East Sheen and Richmond Cemeter ies and
Pesthouse CommonRiL06 44
Existing site 5.768 Borough Gr ade Longf ord Riv er in Richmond RiB06 45
Existing site 1.232 Borough Gr ade River Cr ane at St Margarets RiB20 46
Existing site 13.209 Local Gr ade Hampton Common RiL23 47
Existing site 82.247 Borough Gr ade Royal Mid-Surre y Golf Course RiBI01 48
Existing site 8.845 Borough Gr ade Beverley Brook from Richmond P ark to the
River ThamesRiB13 49
New Site 5.199 Borough Gr ade Udne y Park RiB32 50
Existing site 0.824 Borough Gr ade Duke of Nor thumber land's Riv er nor th of
Kneller RoadRiB04 51
Existing site 1.809 Borough Gr ade Oak A venue Local Nature Reser ve RiB17 52
Upgraded 4.716 Borough Gr ade Twickenham J unction Rough RiB29 53
Upgraded 65.664 Metropolitan Gr ade Hampton Water Treatment Works and
Reser voirsM085 54
Existing site 15.743 Borough Gr ade Hydes Field RiB03 55
Existing site 4.178 Borough Gr ade Hatherop Conser vation Area RiB18 56
Existing site 14.365 Borough Gr ade Petersham Meado ws RiB10 57
Existing site 1.761 Borough Gr ade Occupation Lane , Kew Embankment & Snail
Reser veRiB11 58
Existing site 3.336 Local Gr ade Barnes Green and P ond RiL12 59
Existing site 51.96 Metropolitan Gr ade Barnes Common M086 60
Table 27.3 Ric hmond SINCs
333Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Picture 27.2 Candidate SINCs
Site Name No.
St Mar y Bar nes - Church yard 1
Barnes Common, Bar nes Common Woodland 2
Palewell Park Allotments 3
St Mar y Magdalene's Church 4
Cavendish House Allotments 5
Ham Lands , Allotments 6
Collis Pr imary School 7
Twickenham Br idge Allotments 8
St Mar y's College Str awberr y Hill 9
Briar Road Allotments 10
Grotto Road Open Space 11
Marsh F arm Allotments 12
Cher tsey Road Meado w 13
33427  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Name No.
Heath Gardens Allotments 14
Bush y Park Allotments 15
Hounslo w Cemeter y 16
Bridge F arm Nurser y, Powder Mill Lane Cemeter y 17
The Manor House , Ham 18
Hatherop Road Allotments 19
Sunn yside Reser voir NW plot 20
Thames Middlese x bank, St Margaret's 21
Challenge Cour t open space 22
Heathfield Nature P ark & corr idor 23
Kneller Hall 24
St Mar y the Virgin, Mor tlake 25
Barn Elms Allotments 26
Royal Paddoc ks Allotments 27
The Amer ican Univ ersity 28
Grey Cour t School 29
Lensb ury Riv erside 30
Barn Elms Riv erside 31
School House Lane Orchard 32
Oak Lane Cemeter y 33
St Mar y the Virgin, Twickenham 34
St Mar y Magdalene , Richmond 35
St Mar y's, Hampton 36
Shor t Lots Allotments 37
Westfields Allotments 38
St Anne's P assage Allotments 39
Manor Road Allotments 40
Old P alace Lane Allotments 41
Queens Road Allotments 42
Brook Road Allotments 43
South Close Allotments 44
335Appendices 27
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18Site Name No.
Sheen Common 45
Broom Road Rec 46
Ham P olo Club boundar y 47
Hampton Cour t Green 48
Kew Riv erside 49
Kneller Gardens 50
Radnor Gardens 51
Udne y Hall Gardens 52
Radnor Gardens 53
Carlisle P ark 54
Nurser y Green, Linear Walk & P artridge Green 55
Orleans Gardens 56
York House Gardens 57
Table 27.4 Candidate SINCs
33627  Appendices
Richmond Local Plan - Regulation 18