EALING’S  
LOCAL  
PLAN  
Initial Proposals (Regulation 18),  
November 30th 2022Shaping Ealing The Local Plan 
 DOCUMENT  
CONTENTSOver the next few months there will  
be more opportunities to get involved  
in Shaping Ealing. To receive updates  
just register on  our website  
www.Ealing.gov.uk
For more information on Shaping Ealing  
visit  www.ealing.gov.uk/shapingealing
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan
02 Ealing Council 2022
 CONTENTS
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan 
  
 Leader’s foreword 07
Consultation Overview 11
Document Structure 13
Chapter 1 – About Ealing’s Local Plan 17
 Introduction  18
What is a Local Plan? 18
The Wider Planning Framework 20
A new Local Plan for Ealing 25
Preparing the Local Plan 27
Chapter 2 – Setting The Scene 29
 Introduction  30
Strategic context 32
Borough context 36
Strategic objectives and priorities 39Chapter 3 – Spatial Strategy 47
 Introduction  48
Vision  51
 Policy SP.1: A Vision for Ealing 51
Delivering the vision 52
 Policy SP.2: Tackling the climate crisis 52
  SP 2.1 Inclusive economy 52 
  SP 2.2 Climate action 52 
  SP 2.3 Thriving Ccommunities 54
 Policy SP.3: Fighting inequality 58
  SP 3.1 Tackling crime and inequality 58 
  SP 3.2 A fairer start 58 
  SP 3.3 Healthy lives 58
 Policy SP.4: Creating good jobs 60 
 and growth  
  SP 4.1 Good growth 60 
  SP 4.2 Decent living incomes 61 
  SP 4.3 Genuinely affordable homes 62
Strategic place interventions 65
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan
03 Ealing Council 2022
 CONTENTS
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan 
 Chapter 4 – Town Plans 71
 Our Towns  71
Delivering the Spatial Strategy through  
character-led growth 73
Structure of the Town Plans 74
 Acton Town Plan  75
Acton Today 76
Issues to address in Acton 78
Opportunities for Acton 81
Acton Spatial Strategy 82
 Policy A.1: Acton Spatial Strategy 84
 Policy A.2: Acton Town Centre  
 Neighbourhood Centre 89
 Policy A.3: South Acton 92
 Policy A.4: Acton Main Line station  
 and environs 94
 Policy A.5: East Acton  
 Neighbourhood Centre 96
 Policy A.6: North Acton and Park Royal 98
Acton development sites 100 Ealing Town Plan  129
Ealing today 130
Issues to address in Ealing 132
Opportunities for Ealing 135
Ealing Spatial Strategy 136
 Policy E.1: Ealing Spatial Strategy 138
 Policy E.2: Ealing Metropolitan  
 Town Centre 140
 Policy E.3: North Ealing 144
 Policy E.4: South Ealing and   
 Ealing Common 145
Ealing development sites 146
 Greenford Town Plan  223
Greenford today 224
Issues to address in Greenford 228
Opportunities for Greenford 231
Greenford Spatial Strategy 232
 Policy G.1: Greenford Spatial Strategy 234
 Policy G.2: Greenford District Centre 240
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan
04 Ealing Council 2022
 CONTENTS
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan 
  
  Policy G.3: Westway Cross   
 Neighbourhood Centre 242
 Policy G.4: Sudbury Hill  
 Neighbourhood Centre 244
 Policy G.5: Greenford Station  
 local centre 245
Greenford development sites 246
 Hanwell Town Plan  269
Hanwell today 270
Issues to address in Hanwell 272
Opportunities in Hanwell 275
Hanwell Spatial Strategy 276
 Policy H.1: Hanwell Spatial Strategy 278
 Policy H.2: Hanwell District Centre 280
Hanwell development sites 282
 Northolt Town Plan  311
Northolt today 312
Issues to address in Northolt 314Opportunities for Northolt 317
Northolt Spatial Strategy 318
 Policy N.1: Northolt Spatial Strategy 320
 Policy N.2: Northolt Neighbourhood  
 Town Centre 324
 Policy N.3: White Hart  
 Neighbourhood Centre 325
Northolt development sites 328
 Perivale Town Plan  361
Perivale today 362
Issues to address in Perivale 364
Opportunities for Perivale 367
Perivale Spatial Strategy 368
 Policy P.1: Perivale Spatial Strategy 370
 Policy P.2: Perivale (Bilton Road)  
 Neighbourhood Centre 374
 P olicy P.3: Medway Parade Local Centre  374
 Policy P.4: Perivale Station and environs  375
Perivale development sites 376 Southall Town Plan  387
Southall today 388
Issues to address in Southall 390
Opportunities for Southall 392
Southall Spatial Strategy 394
 Policy S.1: Southall Spatial Strategy 396
 Policy S.2: Southall Town Centre 406
 Policy S.3: King Street  
 Neighbourhood Centre 408
 Policy S.4: West Southall 410
 Policy S.5: East Southall 412
Southall development sites 414
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan
05 Ealing Council 2022
 CONTENTS
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan 
 Chapter 5 – Development Management Policy  469
 Introduction  471
Policy DAA:  Design and Amenity  
Ealing LPA – local policy 472
Policy D9: Tall Buildings London Plan  
Ealing LPA – local variation 474
Policy HOU: Affordable Housing  
Ealing LPA – local policy 476
Policy H16: Large Scale Purpose Built  
Shared Living – London Plan  
Ealing LPA – local variation 477
Policy SSC: Small Sites Contribution  
Ealing LPA – local policy 478
Policy E3: Affordable Workspace  
London Plan Ealing LPA – local variation 479
Policy E4: Land for Industry, Logistics and  
Services to Support London’s Economic  
Function – London Plan Ealing LPA –  
local variation 480Policy E6: Locally Significant Industrial  
Sites (LSIS) – London Plan Ealing LPA –  
local variation 482
Policy TCS: Town Centres Ealing LPA –  
local policy 483
Policy G4: Open Space – London Plan  
Ealing LPA – local variation 484
Policy G5: Urban Greening – London Plan  
Ealing LPA – local variation 485
Policy CO: Carbon Offsetting  
Ealing LPA – local policy 486
Policy FLP: Funding – The Local Plan  
Ealing LPA – local policy 487
Policy ENA: Enabling Development  
Ealing LPA – local policy  488Appendix 1 – Monitoring Framework  489
Appendix 2 – Glossary of Terms  495
Appendix 3 – Atlas of Change  519
Appendix 4 – Consultation Questions  549
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan
06 Ealing Council 2022
 CONTENTS
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan 
 Leader’s foreword
0.1  I am proud to present this Local Plan for 
consultation for you to read and comment on. Once 
adopted it will be used to guide and shape development 
and investment decisions in Ealing over a 15-year period, 
so it is very important that we consult and gather your 
feedback on the draft ideas and proposals within this 
document.
0.2  The Local Plan provides a platform enable 
a new conversation with our communities on how our 
towns, neighbourhoods, and their local economies 
grow and evolve. It is also a key tool in addressing 
the many challenges we face as a borough, as well as 
unlocking its many opportunities. Consequently, it must 
be underpinned by a strong set of values that are well 
understood and relevant to the everyday lives of our 
residents, businesses and those who visit the borough 
to study, work or socialise. These values are defined by 
the three core themes of ‘tackling the climate crisis’, 
‘fighting inequality’, and ‘creating good jobs and growth’. 
These themes underpin the vision of the Local Plan  
and are repeated and explained further throughout  
the document.0.3  In addition to the three core themes, it is 
also important to outline how the Local Plan can inform 
and steer new development and investment over the 
coming years. Unlike our current Development Strategy 
from 2012, which focused new development along the 
Elizabeth Line (Uxbridge Road) and Western Avenue 
(A40) growth corridors, the Local Plan is underpinned 
by ‘sustainable polycentrism’. This means having a more 
fair and balanced approach to new development and 
investment, whereby all the seven towns will have a 
prominent role accommodating growth, and as a result 
will benefit fairly from new investment.
0.4  This new approach to accommodating growth 
is important so no town is left behind and ensures that 
no town carries a significant burden or pressure for new 
development, as we have seen in Southall and parts 
of Ealing and in Acton in recent years. This seven-town 
approach will also capitalise on how behaviours in society 
are starting to shift, with more people wanting to enjoy 
their local neighbourhoods, town centres, and high 
streets. Sustainable polycentrism will enable these places  
to gain more investment and flourish.
Councillor Peter Mason   
Leader of Ealing Council
07 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan LEADER'S FOREWORD
0.5  This Local Plan helps showcase all the 
amazing opportunity that Ealing has to offer, not just for 
London but nationally and globally. It seeks to reinforce 
Ealing’s position at the heart of west London’s economy, 
particularly by bridging two strategic transport hubs of 
international importance; Heathrow Airport and the new 
High Speed 2 Terminus that will open in 2030. It sets out 
a new strategic ‘productivity arc’ for London to bring 
coherence to the significant reserves of Strategic Industrial 
Locations (SIL), linking the United Kingdom’s largest 
industrial estate at Park Royal in the east and the historic 
industrial hub at Southall in the west.
0.6  The Local Plan includes ambitious policies to 
capitalise on Ealing’s unique connectivity and industrial 
character to create a new economy, to bring more jobs, 
and to make Ealing a great place to invest, grow, or start 
a business. This will also make Ealing a great place to 
live, learn and start a family, which is so important to 
the future success of the borough, whereby Ealing’s 
rich heritage of industry, productivity, and creativity 
can be reenergised.0.7  If you are an Ealing resident or business 
reading our Local Plan, I hope it is clear on how it will 
pick up and reinforce the priorities that are already set 
out in the Council Plan, and how it will play a key role in 
addressing the issues that matter most to you. Similarly, 
if you are an Ealing landowner, developer, investor, or 
business hoping to invest in our great borough, I hope 
it is clear that we are ambitious and open for new 
development and investment across our seven towns, so 
long as it is inclusive and puts the needs of our existing 
communities at the very heart of local decision making.
0.8  Finally, I thank you for taking the time to 
read our Local Plan and I encourage you to share your 
comments so that we can capture a wide and diverse 
range of views and opinions through this consultation. 
Ultimately, this will enable us to produce a Local Plan 
that belongs to everyone associated with this special 
borough and help shape Ealing for the better over the 
next 15 years.THIS LOCAL PLAN HELPS 
SHOWCASE ALL THE 
AMAZING OPPORTUNITY 
THAT EALING HAS TO 
OFFER, NOT JUST FOR 
LONDON BUT NATIONALLY 
AND GLOBALLY .
Image:  Elizabeth Line at 
Ealing Broadway Station.
08 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan LEADER'S FOREWORD
Image:  Northala Fields Park, 
Northolt, West London.
09 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan LEADER'S FOREWORD
Image:  Emphasising the importance of green 
and open spaces within the Local Plan.
10 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan LEADER'S FOREWORD
Consultation overview
Your voice is important in shaping this 
New Local Plan
0.9  Ealing Council is committed to engaging with 
its local communities and stakeholders through genuine 
dialogue. We will continue to involve as wide a cross-
section of the community as possible in the development 
of the Local Plan. We know we need to tailor our 
engagement approach to suit different people. 0.10  There will be a variety of methods you can 
use to comment on the Local Plan. This includes in-
person events, a digital platform, and traditional methods 
such as printed versions of the document distributed to 
libraries across the borough. For those of you who do not 
wish to or are unable to use our digital platform we will 
keep speaking to you in-person. At the same time, we 
will continue to develop our digital methods so that they 
are easy and interesting to use for everyone.
How to provide consultation feedback
0.11  All consultation feedback received will 
be considered and inform an amended version of the 
Local Plan, called the Proposed Submission Local Plan 
(Regulation 19). We invite everyone with an interest in the 
future of Ealing to provide comments on the Local Plan 
by 25th January 2023. Further information is set out within 
the Consultation Strategy. Please visit our website to learn 
about the different ways you can make representations.
0.12  Within this document, we have placed 
questions requesting feedback on our proposals. The 
consultation questions are interactive, which will allow 
you to respond online by clicking on each question 
within the document. All the questions are identifiable 
throughout the document with the following icon (see 
yellow box to the left).0.13  Please note that we will be asking for personal  
information so that we can track representations to those 
who made them. We want to engage meaningfully, and 
this means reaching those communities we have not 
reached before. To help us achieve this we will also 
ask for demographic data to make sure we are in fact 
reaching our diverse communities by keeping track of 
who is responding.
0.14  There are additional approaches to providing 
consultation feedback through email, mail and in-
person events, which are set out in detail within the 
Consultation Strategy.
015  You will be able to find all information 
relating to this consultation, including the Local Plan, 
and supporting documents, on the Council’s website.  
0.16  Hard copies of the Local Plan are also  
available at the Ealing Council Office at 14 Uxbridge Rd 
(W5 2HL) and in libraries across the borough.
LINKS  
Click here  for more information on the 
Consultation Strategy.
Click here  for more information on the 
Local Plan and supporting documents.
SAMPLE  
QR CODEExample Question 
Look out for these question boxes
Click here  or scan the QR code  
to give us you views
11 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CONSULTATION OVERVIEW
Next steps
0.17  The consultation process will occur over an 
8 week period which will include a Call for Sites process.  
Following this, Ealing Council will review and assess 
the responses to inform the preparation of the Proposed 
Submission Local Plan (Regulation 19) in the Autumn of 
2023. Over the course of 2023 the evidence base that 
underpins policies will also be further developed.
0.18  Further information on the local plan 
stages is set out in Chapter 1 of this document.
Image : Ealing, Shri Kanaga Thurkkai 
Amman Temple, Chariot Festival.
12 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CONSULTATION OVERVIEW
Document structure 
Ealing’s New Local Plan is divided into five 
main parts
0.19  This Local Plan sets out a borough-scale 
vision over the next 15 years that will support delivery of 
concerted action Ealing Council’s core themes of tackling 
the climate crisis, fighting inequality, and creating good 
jobs and growth.
0.20  This Local Plan will set out a vision, 
strategic objectives and planning policies that together 
provide the overarching framework for the delivery of 
sustainable development in the borough. The plan will 
also support the implementation of the London Plan 
(2021) and its aspiration for achieving Good Growth.0.21  The Local Plan forms a tool to help 
guide investment within the borough, while shaping 
the overall spatial vision that the council, partners, 
stakeholders and community groups will help to deliver. 
The Local Plan addresses the issues and opportunities 
facing residents and businesses in the borough and 
establishes a spatial strategy that responds to the 
distinctive character of Ealing’s seven towns.
0.22  The Local Plan is set out in five chapters, 
with associated sub-sections that provide a borough-
scale and town-scale spatial strategy and associated 
development management policies to achieve these. The 
document must be read as a whole, particularly for the 
purpose of planning and investment decisions.
The five chapters
CHAPTER ONE:   
About Ealing’s  
local planCHAPTER TWO:   
Setting the sceneCHAPTER THREE:   
Spatial strategyCHAPTER FOUR:   
Town plansCHAPTER FIVE:   
Development 
management  
policiesLINK  
Click here  for more information on the 
Local Plan and supporting documents.
13 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
Part one: About Ealing’s Local Plan
0.23  This section provides background information 
about process of developing a Local Plan. This positions 
the Local Plan within the wider national, regional, sub-
regional and local planning frameworks. This is followed 
by a summary of what has been prepared as part of the 
development of the Local Plan and the next steps in the 
production of the Local Plan.
Part two: Setting the scene
0.24  This section establishes the strategic and 
borough-level context for the Local Plan and the borough’s 
core themes of tackling the climate crisis, fighting 
inequality, and creating good jobs and growth that flow 
from this. These frame the council’s strategic objectives.Part three: Spatial strategy
0.25  This section establishes the spatial strategy for 
Ealing and how it will be delivered over the next 15 years.
0.26  This responds specifically to and complements 
Chapter 1 of the London Plan (Planning for London’s 
future – Good Growth), which established Good Growth 
objectives for London. This planning framework informs 
an overarching borough-wide 15-year spatial vision 
and the subsequent spatial strategy that is aligned to 
Ealing Council’s core themes of tackling the climate 
crisis, fighting inequality, and creating good jobs and 
growth. This section sets out borough-scale place-based 
interventions that will deliver Ealing’s spatial strategy. 
The spatial strategy includes a ‘key diagram’ that brings 
together the main components of the spatial strategy, 
while outlining the strategic borough-wide policies.THIS PLANNING FRAMEWORK 
INFORMS AN OVERARCHING 
BOROUGH-WIDE 15-YEAR 
SPATIAL VISION.
Image: Departures, 
Heathrow Airport.
14 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
Image:  Elizabeth Line, 
Paddington Station, London.Part four: Town plans
0.27  This section explores in more detail Ealing’s 
seven towns and the local place-based interventions to 
deliver the spatial vision. It responds specifically to and 
complements Chapter 2 of the London Plan (Spatial 
development patterns). It includes place-based plans for 
the seven towns of the borough, including a local key 
diagram that illustrates the specific infrastructure required 
to support growth and address the issues faced in each 
town. These interventions will be imbedded within a 
series of town-based policies that focus on delivering 
infrastructure and place-based regeneration in each town. 
This section will also include Ealing’s Development Site 
List. This includes the sites which are considered to have 
significant development potential.
Part five: Development management policies
0.28  This section of the plan sets out the 
proposed development management policies that will 
provide the standards and guidelines that planning 
applications will need to comply with to support the 
delivery of the Local Plan. These are organised by policy 
topic areas that respond specifically to and complement 
Chapters 3 to 10 in the London Plan (Design; Housing; 
Social infrastructure; Sustainable infrastructure; Economy; 
Heritage and culture; Green infrastructure and natural 
environment; and Transport).
15 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
Appendices
0.29  A series of appendices accompany the Local 
Plan, providing additional information. These include:
 —Monitoring Framework, which sets out proposed 
parameters to assess the successful delivery of the 
Local Plan policies, in accordance with the plan vision 
and spatial objectives.
 —Glossary of Terms, which provides a summary of 
terminology used within the Local Plan.
 —Atlas of Change, which sets out the proposed 
changes to the Policies Map (to be updated as 
part of the Proposed Submission Local Plan in the 
Autumn of 2023). 
 —Consultation Questions, which lists all consultation 
questions within the Local Plan.
Image above: Aerial view 
of Acton Market Place.
16 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan DOCUMENT STRUCTURE
Image on next page: 
Uxbridge road, Ealing 
High Street.
CHAPTER ONE 
ABOUT EALING’S 
LOCAL PLAN
 
Image: Uxbridge Road, Ealing.
17 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
Introduction
What is a Local Plan? 
1.1  Ealing’s Local Plan will shape and guide the 
future development and help ensure this is sustainable. 
The priorities in the Local Plan will shape decisions 
taken by the council, developers and others about 
building new homes, providing necessary infrastructure, 
the use of physical space, tackling climate change, 
creating good jobs, and how we can address any 
concerns around health and inequalities in the borough. 
All planning applications must be determined in 
accordance with the statutory development plan for an 
area unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
Image:  Ealing’s seven 
towns are diverse.
18 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
1.2  London has experienced a period of 
growth over the past decade, which is reflected in 
Ealing and its continual evolution within London. 
Ealing’s Local Plan incorporates the planning principles 
and strategy of the London Plan and has been prepared 
to ensure there is a clear framework that will manage 
growth across the borough that respects the unique 
character of Ealing and its mosaic of towns. Through 
this character-led approach, the Local Plan will ensure 
investment decisions address the issues that concern 
local people and businesses. This document also 
incorporates the findings of the 2021 Shaping Ealing 
consultation, with its focus on the creation of inclusive 
and liveable communities across the borough.
1.3  The Local Plan incorporates the concept 
of ‘Good Growth,’ which underpins the London Plan. 
This is focussed on ensuring that future growth within 
London and its boroughs is socially and economically 
inclusive and environmentally sustainable. Therefore, 
the objective of Ealing’s Local Plan is to help deliver 
these strategic drivers at a local level, while ensuring 
that Ealing’s unique character is respected and 
celebrated, and that the borough’s economic role to 
the wider London region is maximised.1.4  Creating a Local Plan requires strong 
partnerships to be established between public and 
private stakeholders and the local communities that 
they serve. While Ealing Council is taking a leadership 
role to plan for the borough, it is important this 
continues to happen in close collaboration with 
community groups, and local people and businesses 
to deliver the Local Plan and achieve the best possible 
outcomes. The Local Plan will :
 Be prepared positively, in a way that is aspirational 
but deliverable. 
 Be influenced by early, proportionate and effective 
engagement between plan-makers and communities, 
local organisations, businesses, infrastructure providers 
and operators, and statutory consultees; 
 Contain policies that are clearly written and 
unambiguous, so it is evident how a decision maker 
should react to development proposals; 
 Be accessible, using both digital and traditional tools 
of engagement to assist public involvement and policy 
presentation; and 
 Serve a clear purpose, avoiding unnecessary 
duplication of policies that apply to a particular area.73%
Mobile
24%
Desktop
3%
TabletChart 1:  
How the public responded to Shaping Ealing  
by Digital Tools
Source: Shaping Ealing, Your views  
on our towns and communities
19 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
The Wider Planning Framework
1.5  The preparation of a Local Plan is set 
within a wider planning framework that includes the 
National Planning Policy Framework at the national scale 
and the London Plan at a regional scale. This planning 
framework works together to set the parameters for the 
plan making process. Preparation of the Local Plan must 
follow nationally set legal and procedural requirements 
that inform each of the plan-making stages, processes 
for community and stakeholder consultation, and the 
information that is required for the document to be 
found ‘sound.’ It is critical that Ealing’s Local Plan meets 
the requirements of the London Plan, that its proposals 
and policies are supported by evidence, and that the 
policies are deliverable and consistent with national policy.1.6  Figure 1 provides a diagrammatic 
illustration of the planning framework. National 
Planning Policy Framework.
National Planning Policy Framework
1.7  The Local Plan st be consistent with the 
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF). This sets 
out the government’s planning policies for England 
and how they should be applied. It must be considered 
in the preparation of the Local Plan and is a material 
consideration when making planning decisions. Separate 
policy documents deal with waste and traveller sites.
1.8  There is also associated National Planning 
Policy Guidance  (NPPG) which supports the framework 
and is published online and regularly updated.
Regional Planning Framework
1.9  As Ealing is a London borough it continues to 
work within the context of a regional spatial strategy (the 
“London Plan”) prepared by the Mayor of London and 
the Greater London Authority (GLA). The London Plan 
sets out a framework for how London will develop over 
the next 20-25 years. The London Plan sets out the Mayor 
of London’s vision for ‘Good Growth’ and helps ensure 
a coordinated approach to planning across the capital.1.10  The London Plan is an integral part of 
the statutory development plan for the local planning 
authority and Ealing’s Local Plan must be in “general 
conformity” with it. The London Plan is supported 
by several related strategies and Supplementary 
Planning Guidance (SPG) documents that support the 
implementation of the London Plan.
1.11  A new London Plan was published on  
2 March 2021, replacing earlier iterations. This followed 
a consultation process lasting over three years, with 
officers from Ealing Council responding at every stage. 
The London Plan contains many detailed strategic policies 
that are also intended for development management 
purposes. The Mayor of London considered that this 
would be helpful so that councils can concentrate on 
locally specific issues which differentiate their areas from 
others. The approach of Ealing’s Local Plan is to not repeat 
the London Plan policies as they already form part of the 
statutory development plan for the area.
LINKS  
Click here  for more information on the 
National Planning Policy Framework.
Click here  for more information on the 
National Planning Policy Guidance.
Click here  for more information on the 
London Plan.
Click here  for more information on the 
Supplementary Planning Guidance.
20 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
Figure 1:  
Planning Framework 
National
National Planning Policy 
Framework
Planning Policy Guidance
 Regional
London Plan
Supplementary Planning 
Guidance
 Borough
Ealing Local Plan
Supplementary Planning 
Documents
Policies Map
Local Development Scheme
Statement of Co mmunity 
Involvement
Authorities Monitoring Report
 Local
Neighbourhood Plans
Central Ealing Neighbourhood 
Plan
West Ealing Neighbourhood 
Plan
21 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
Sub-Regional Planning Framework
1.12 Alongside the GLA, Ealing Council has been 
working closely with its West London neighbours through 
the West London Alliance (WLA) to identify strategic 
priorities for the sub-region – with a focus on infrastructure 
– and to develop a shared and common evidence base. 
In particular, a Joint West London Waste Plan was adopted  
in July 2015. It is proposed that a revised plan will be 
produced and an agreed timetable for its update is 
expected to be published by the beginning of 2023.
1.13 Ealing Council is also an active member of 
the Heathrow Strategic Planning Group (HSPG) which 
includes local authorities, local enterprise partnerships, 
and other stakeholders around the airport campus to 
enable a co-ordinated approach to planning matters 
around the airport and to constructively engage with 
Heathrow Airport Ltd (HAL). HSPG produced a non-
statutory Joint Spatial Planning Framework (JSPF) for 
the future development of the sub-region in 2020. This 
is currently being reviewed and significant changes to 
the plan are expected to respond to new forecasts, 
evidence, national policies, and emerging priorities.Local Planning Framework
1.14  The Local Plan is the key spatial planning 
document for a local planning authority. It sets out 
local planning policies to guide future development, 
determining what will be built where, with guidelines 
on how buildings should be designed. It also shows what 
needs to be protected, conserved or enhanced such as 
green spaces, canals, heritage assets, retail frontages 
and space for industry and employment.
1.15  Local Plans are key to delivering sustainable 
development that reflects the visions and aspirations 
of local communities. Planning decisions must be 
taken in accordance with the Local Plan unless material 
considerations indicate otherwise.
1.16  Local Plans are prepared and adopted in 
accordance with the Planning and Compulsory Act 2004 
and associated local planning regulations. Further changes 
to the development plan system were introduced through 
the Localism Act 2011 and, in particular, the publication 
of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) which 
introduced a “presumption in favour of sustainable 
development,” a “duty to cooperate” and the creation 
of a new tier of “neighbourhood development plans ”.
Image:  District Line, 
Ealing Broadway.
LINKS  
Click here  for more information on the 
West London Alliance.
Click here  for more information on the 
Joint West London Waste Plan.
Click here  for more information on the 
Heathrow Strategic Planning Group.
Click here  for more information on the 
Joint Spatial Planning Framework.
22 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
1.17  The Local Plan is made up of different local 
development documents. These can be prepared by a 
local planning authority individually or in cooperation 
with other local planning authorities. These contain 
statements and spatial plans relating to ;
 — The development and use of land which the 
local planning authorities wish to encourage 
during any specified period;
 — The allocation of sites for a particular type of 
development or use;
 — Environmental, social and economic 
objectives which are specified in relation to 
attainment of the development and use of 
land; and
 — Development management and site 
allocation policies, which are intended to 
guide the determination of applications for 
planning permission.1.18  Parts of Ealing fall within the local 
planning authority area of the Old Oak and Park Royal 
Development Corporation (OPDC), including North 
Acton and Park Royal. Within their boundaries, OPDC is 
responsible for planning matters, including plan making  
and determining the majority of planning applications. 
As set out in the scheme of delegation between the 
OPDC and Ealing Council, some planning applications 
OPDC receives are determined by Ealing Council on its 
behalf. OPDC’s Local Plan was adopted in June 2022.
LINK  
Click here  for more information on the Old 
Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation.
Image:  Old Oak and 
Park Royal area.
23 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
Image:  Acton Park.
FOR THE PURPOSES OF NEIGHBOURHOOD 
PLANNING, ALL THE POLICIES IN 
EALING’S LOCAL PLAN ARE CONSIDERED 
TO BE STRATEGIC POLICIES.Neighbourhood Planning Framework
1.19  Neighbourhood plans are community-led and 
must meet certain basic conditions and be in conformity 
with the strategic policies in the Local Plan. They are also 
an integral part of the statutory local development plan. 
Two neighbourhood plans  have been developed within 
the borough, Central Ealing (adopted 19 December 2017) 
and West Ealing (adopted 12 June 2018). Two further 
plans are in the initial stages of production for Central 
Acton and Acton Hill.
1.20  For the purposes of neighbourhood 
planning, all the policies in Ealing’s Local Plan are 
considered to be strategic policies.
LINK  
Click here  for more information on the two 
neighbourhood plans.
24 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
A new Local Plan for Ealing
1.21  Once finalised, Ealing’s Local Plan will replace 
the current suite of local development plan documents, 
bringing the updated planning policies together into a 
single plan. It will provide a locally specific spatial policy 
framework for future planning and development of the 
local planning authority (excluding the OPDC area) for the 
period from 2024 to 2039.
1.22  Following adoption, Ealing’s Local Plan will 
become the statutory development plan for the Ealing 
Local Planning Authority, combining the Local Plan with 
the London Plan, the Joint West London Waste Plan and 
adopted neighbourhood plans. The document must be 
read as a whole, alongside the wider evidence base and 
local plan development documents, particularly for the 
purpose of planning and investment decisions.
Evidence Base
1.23  Ealing Council is required to ensure that 
the Local Plan is based on appropriate, up-to-date and 
relevant evidence about the economic, social and 
environmental characteristics and prospects of the area. 
In particular, local planning authorities must ensure that 
their assessment of need and the strategies geared tomeeting the need for housing, employment and other 
uses are integrated, and that they take full account of 
relevant market and economic signals.
1.24  A robust evidence base enables the 
preparation of a sound Local Plan. It also provides 
the rationale and justification for how the council has 
developed its policies and strategies in emerging local 
development plan documents.
1.25  The Council has worked with the Greater 
London Authority (GLA) and neighbouring local 
authorities in West London and the Heathrow Sub 
Region to share the development and production of 
the evidence base, where possible, and ensure that 
emerging findings accord with the duty to cooperate.
1.26  Existing evidence base reports together 
with any newly published reports can be found on the 
Council’s website .
1.27  Ealing Council is continuing to update the 
local plan evidence base throughout 2022 and 2023 
in advance of the publication of the Regulation 19 
Local Plan in the Autumn of 2023. This will include an 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), which will provide an 
infrastructure schedule of priority investment to support delivery of the Local Plan. Preparation of the 
IDP is to follow this Regulation 18 draft Local Plan to 
ensure that consultation responses are incorporated 
into the schedule of priority investment.
1.28  Ealing Council is also preparing updated 
design guidance and 20-Minute Framework documents 
for a number of towns within Ealing and further 
evidence base documents will be developed as required to 
support the delivery of the Local Plan. This will include 
further evidence to inform the planning approach 
related to tall buildings within Ealing.
LINK S 
Click here  for existing and 
newly published reports on 
the Council’s website .
25 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
Integrated Impact Assessment
1.29  The preparation of the Local Plan includes 
an assessment of how policies could influence the 
environment, health and equalities. As the assessment 
covers these three different areas, it is called an Integrated 
Impact Assessment (IIA). The purpose of the IIA is to 
highlight and, where possible, address any undesirable 
effects that may arise on the environment or on health 
or equalities as well as identify opportunities for 
improvements. All Local Plan policies, including alternative 
policy options, have been appraised in the IIA.
1.30  The IIA fulfils the statutory requirements for 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) and Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) (Directive 2001/42/EU) and associated 
UK Regulations. It also fulfils the requirements for Health 
Impact Assessment and Equalities’ Impact Assessment.
1.31  Ealing’s Integrated Impact Assessment for 
the Local Plan can be found on the Council’s  website .Consultation
1.32  Preparation of Ealing’s Local Plan is being 
informed by extensive consultation and engagement with 
local communities and other stakeholders. This includes 
drawing upon feedback from the “Shaping Ealing” 
campaign launched in November 2021. This incorporates 
the findings of a series of conversations, surveys, and 
both formal and informal meetings which were held 
to understand people’s views on where Ealing is as a 
borough now (its strengths and areas for improvement), 
and the shape it should take going forward.
1.33  To ensure inclusivity and maximise 
participation, Shaping Ealing consultation material was 
available in the nine most common languages spoken 
in the borough. Almost eleven thousand responses 
were received by the beginning of May 2022, and this 
enabled the Council to get important feedback on local 
priorities. Respondents that have expressed an interest 
will receive a regular newsletter to provide ongoing 
updates on the Local Plan.
1.34  More information on Shaping Ealing is 
available on the link to the left.
Image: South Acton 
Overground Station.LINKS  
Click here  for more information on Ealing’s 
Integrated Impact Assessment for the Local Plan.
Click here  for more information on the Shaping 
Ealing report.
26 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
Preparing the Local Plan
1.35  The production of a Local Plan is a staged 
process, which includes evidence gathering as well 
as multiple rounds of community and stakeholder 
engagement to refine proposals.
1.36  The following summarises the key stages 
of the Local Plan Preparation (as illustrated in Figure 2):
 —Stage 0 Shaping Ealing engagement 
(November 2021-May 2022):  The Local Plan has 
been informed by feedback from the public through 
early consultation and engagement exercises. This 
process has helped identify the key issues that local 
residents and businesses are dealing with, and it has 
helped to shape initial Local Plan proposals.
 —Stage 1 Evidence gathering (ongoing – 2021 
to 2023):  This is an ongoing stage throughout 
the development of the Local Plan. It involves the 
compilation of studies and supporting documents to 
inform the preparation of the Local Plan, ensuring 
that proposals and policies are appropriate, justified 
and based on the latest available information. —Stage 2 Preparation of the Regulation 18 
Local Plan (March 2022-November 2022):  The 
preparation of the Regulation 18 Local Plan involves 
the development of a set of draft proposals and 
policies that are informed by the evidence base and 
early stakeholder consultation.
 —Stage 3 Consultation on initial proposals 
(Regulation 18) (November 2022-January 2023):  
The Regulation 18 Local Plan is subject to a statutory 
public consultation period of a minimum of six weeks 
to obtain feedback from the local community, 
residents, businesses, developers and statutory 
consultees. As part of this process, a ‘call for sites’ 
exercise is undertaken and the development of 
three ‘reasonable alternative’ spatial options is 
prepared and analysed to enable a preferred spatial 
option to be identified.
 —Stage 4 Modifications to the Local Plan (January 
2023-September 2023):  Following the statutory 
consultation on the Regulation 18 Local Plan, Ealing 
Council will review the comments received to inform 
the development of the Regulation 19 Local Plan and 
the modifications that are made to this document.
Image:  Street food 
businesses.
27 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
Figure 2:  
Local Plan preparation stages 
Stage 0
Shaping Ealing consultation
Stage 1
Evidence gathering
Stage 2
Preparation of the Regulation  
18 Local Plan
Stage 3
Consultation on initial proposals  
(Regulation 18)
Stage 4
Modifications to the Local Plan
Stage 5
Publication of the Draft Local 
Plan (Regulation 19)
Stage 6
Submission of the Local Plan 
for independent Examination 
(Regulation 22-25)
Stage 7
Adoption by Council  
(Regulation 26) —Stage 5 Publication of the Draft Local Plan 
(Regulation 19) (Autumn 2023):  Having taken 
into account the responses from the Regulation 18 
consultation and the findings from the Integrated 
Impact Assessment (IIA), the council will publish its 
Final Proposals in a planning document for a statutory 
consultation period of six weeks before it is submitted 
to the government for examination by an independent 
inspector from the Planning Inspectorate.
 —Stage 6 Submission of Local Plan for independent 
examination (Regulation 22-25) (Winter 2023/24):  
At this stage, the final draft documents are submitted 
to the government, and an independent inspector 
holds an examination into the soundness of the plan 
and the associated IIA and evidence. The examination 
hears evidence from anybody who wishes to make a 
submission on any of the key issues or questions 
highlighted by the inspector. The Inspector considers 
all the evidence and representations made at each 
stage of the Local Plan consultation process. The 
inspector can recommend adoption when the 
document is considered to satisfy legal requirements 
and can be considered ‘sound.’
 —Stage 7 Adoption by council (Regulation 26) 
(2024):  This involves the formal adoption of the 
Local Plan by the local planning authority.
28 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 1
CHAPTER TWO 
SETTING THE 
SCENEImage: Art seller in 
Acton Market Place.
29 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Introduction
2.1  The Local Plan sets out how Ealing will grow 
and evolve over the next 15 years, while identifying how 
many new homes and jobs are required to support Ealing’s 
growing population. Critically, it will reflect and emphasise 
the seven towns that make Ealing a distinct place.
2.2  While the Local Plan will shape the future of 
Ealing and its seven towns, it will also look to protect and 
emphasise those places and communities by improving 
connectivity and provision of critical infrastructure.2.3  This section provides a brief overview of 
Ealing’s strategic context. This draws upon the extensive 
evidence base that has been developed as part of the 
Local Plan, including the Shaping Ealing consultation 
which provides a snapshot of the borough that highlights 
key issues and trends. This section identifies some of the 
key issues and opportunities that Ealing residents and 
businesses face. These issues and opportunities are further 
explored in Chapter 3 (spatial strategy) and Chapter 4 
(town plans).
2.4  This section will then set out the core 
themes of tackling the climate crisis, fighting inequality 
and creating good jobs and growth. These three themes 
act as the ‘golden thread’ within the Local Plan and are 
supported by nine priorities.
Image above:  Ealing 
Broadway Shopping Centre.
Image right:  New build along 
the Grand Union Canal.
Image:  Greengrocer, Ealing.LINK  
Click here  for more information on the 
Shaping Ealing report.
30 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Image: Pedestrian crossing, 
New Broadway, Ealing.
31 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Figure 2.1:  
London Borough of Ealing Regional Context
Canary Wharf
From
Paddington
Station
Old Oak Common 
 HS2 Terminus
 From
Euston Station
Central Activities 
ZoneHeathrow
AirportSlough
ReadingChiltern Line from OxfordHS2 from Birmingham
and the North
Great Western Line 
from the West and WalesM4M1
M3M40
M25Other Major StationsElizabeth Line StationKEY
EXISTING FEATURES
TRANSPORTLondon Borough of Ealing
River ThamesCentral Activity Zone
Borough BoundaryMetropolitan Greenbelt /Open Land
High Speed 2
West London Orbital
Great Western Mainline
National Rail StationHS2 Future Station
Elizabeth Line
Chiltern Line
Strategic Road NetworkHeathrow Airport
32 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Strategic context
2.5  Ealing’s residents, businesses and 
workforce already make a significant contribution  
to the economies of London and the United Kingdom. 
It is a borough of national importance – economically, 
socially and culturally.2.6  The borough’s strategic position near 
Heathrow Airport, the new High Speed 2 (HS2) terminus 
at Old Oak Common opening in 2030, and the five 
new Elizabeth Line stations that opened in 2022 to 
complement the wide range of existing underground 
and mainline stations, and ease of access to the strategic 
road network make it one of London’s best-connected 
boroughs. Figure 2 .1 illustrates Ealing’s strategic context 
within the wider London region.
2.7  As one of the largest concentrations of 
industrial floorspace in London and with Park Royal being 
the UK’s largest industrial estate, Ealing is well placed to 
maximise these infrastructure assets. The combination 
of Heathrow’s proximity and the concentration of 
employment land provides opportunity to further 
specialise in key growth sectors of digital/information 
and communication technology (ICT), professional 
services, film, tv, pharmaceuticals, manufacturing 
(linked to food manufacturing subsector) and logistics.
2.8  In addition, Southall is home to the United 
Kingdom’s largest South Asian population and there is a 
rich heritage of creativity and productivity in the borough, 
with globally renowned assets such as Ealing Film Studios. 2.9  However, Ealing’s local economy is fragile. 
An over-reliance on jobs related to the aviation sector, 
particularly within the borough’s most deprived 
neighbourhoods, saw communities suffer greatly 
during the Covid-19 pandemic, with the recovery 
continuing to this day. The impacts of the pandemic 
resulted in the borough experiencing some of the 
highest furlough rates in London, illustrating the need 
to build greater resilience within the borough through 
diversification of economic opportunity.
2.10  Over the past decade (2011 to 2021), 
Ealing’s population has increased by 8.5%, a higher rate 
of population growth than both the London and England 
rates over the same period. This population growth is 
geographically concentrated in Acton and Southall and to 
a lesser extent in Greenford. The disparities in towns that 
have experienced population growth and those with more 
static population levels translates into differing demand 
for housing and social infrastructure across the borough. 
Adding to the complexity is that while Ealing today has 
a relatively young population, over the life span of the 
Local Plan, the borough is likely to experience a continual 
ageing of the population (a trend experienced over the 
past decade). This will change the future needs of the 
local population and create different short-term and  
long-term needs that must be addressed if Ealing is to 
remain an attractive borough to live, work and invest in.
Image:  Remote working 
is increasingly common.
33 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Figure 2.2:  
London Borough of Ealing West London Context
Harrow
Uxbridge
EalingHILLINGDON
HOUNSLOWHAMMERSMITH
 & FULHAMHARROW
BRENT
Hounslow
Heathrow Airport
Central Activities Zone
Shepherds Bush
Southall
Richmond
Chiswick
Hammersmith
Fulham
Kilburn
Wembley
Wembley OA
Harrow and Wealdstone OA
Southall OA
Heathrow OA
OPDC
White City OA
Earls Court/West Kensington OA
Brent Cross/Cricklewood OA
Colindale/Burnt Oak OA
Edgware
Putney
Wandsworth
Clapham Junction
KEY
EXISTING FEATURES
TRANSPORT
West London OrbitalRiver ThamesEaling Boundary
High Speed 2
Elizabeth Line
Strategic RoadsHS2 Future Station
West London Orbital Station
Rail NetworkElizabeth Line Station
Heathrow Airport
ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITY
Central Activities Zone
Industrial LandProductivity Arc
Metropolitan Town Centre
Major Town Centres
District Centres
Opportunity Area
34 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
THE LOCAL PLAN 
WILL ADOPT A MORE 
INCLUSIVE APPROACH.2.11  Producing a Local Plan at this moment in 
time presents a unique opportunity to reset the role 
that Ealing can play in London and the wider United 
Kingdom. It provides the opportunity to address both 
the macro issues linked to the legacy of the pandemic 
and the climate change emergency, with consideration 
for local approaches that can support the borough to 
become a more inclusive, sustainable and socially just 
place for all residents.
2.12  The Local Plan picks up from the previous 
Core Strategy (2012)’s focus on how growth and new 
development can be better balanced across Ealing’s 
seven towns. Over the last decade Ealing has seen 
significant growth and investment concentrated in 
Acton, Ealing and Southall, compared with modest 
investment in Hanwell, Greenford, Northolt and 
Perivale. This historic approach to investment has not 
been equitable and inclusive for all of Ealing’s residents. 
The Local Plan will adopt a more inclusive approach 
so that each of the seven towns will play a role in the 
borough’s delivery of new homes and jobs, thereby 
reducing growth disparities and taking the pressure off 
Southall and Acton. This will enable those parts of the 
borough that have not benefited from as much growth 
or investment to share in any future prosperity. The 
Local Plan will strengthen the beneficial connections 
and ties between the towns and important assets outside the borough. One instance is the ‘Ealing 
Productivity Arc’ Which places Ealing in the centre of west 
London’s economic activity, by linking Heathrow airport 
and Hillingdon with the proposed HS2 terminus at Old 
Oak Common. The Arc will connect strategic industrial 
growth opportunities across Perivale, Greenford, Northolt 
and Southall to Heathrow. Figure 2.2 illustrates Ealing’s 
sub-regional context within West London.
2.13  The Local Plan will also look to address the 
imbalance between the delivery of new homes and jobs 
over the past decade. As an Outer London borough, 
Ealing has historically delivered a disproportionate ratio 
of homes to local jobs within the borough. The Local 
Plan will look to maintain and increase the delivery 
of new homes, in particular those that are genuinely 
affordable, while also supporting the delivery of new 
local jobs that Ealing residents can access. The Local 
Plan will aim to make Ealing a destination for growth in 
new businesses, complementing both Heathrow Airport 
and Central London employment hubs, and capitalising 
on the borough’s excellent transport connectivity and 
its social and cultural offer.
35 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Borough context
2.14  Ealing comprises seven towns: Acton, 
Ealing, Greenford, Hanwell, Northolt, Perivale and 
Southall. Each town has a strong local identity with its 
own unique character, challenges and opportunities. 
With the help of the Local Plan each of the seven 
towns will be able to perform to their full potential 
and contribute to the borough’s overall future success. 
Figure 2.3 illustrates Ealing’s borough context.
2.15  The London Plan has designated two 
Opportunity Areas within Ealing: Southall and Old Oak 
and Park Royal. Southall is entirely within Ealing and the 
responsibility of Ealing Council as the planning authority, 
whereas Old Oak and Park Royal is partially within Ealing 
and under the responsibility of Old Oak and Park Royal 
Development Corporation (OPDC) planning authority. 
OPDC acts as the planning authority and is responsible 
for overseeing one of Europe’s largest regeneration 
opportunities. This includes the neighbourhoods of North 
Acton and Park Royal, which contain a considerable 
proportion of the borough’s high-value economic activity.
2.16  Ealing contains large concentrations of 
Strategic Industrial Land (SIL) and Locally Significant 
Industrial Land (LSIS). These concentrations of industrial 
land are located within Southall, Greenford and Perivale, 
which are all locations that benefit from proximity and 
accessibility to the strategic road network.2.17  The borough includes large areas of strategic 
green open space, including sites currently designated as 
Green Belt and Metropolitan Open Land (MOL). These 
sites are mostly concentrated in the central and western 
parts of the borough, with more limited provision in the 
east of the borough, which has a more urban character 
and fewer green open spaces.
2.18  In addition, there are twenty-nine conservation 
areas in the borough, which cover approximately 677 
hectares or 12% of the borough’s land area. Most are 
located within the towns of Ealing and Hanwell.
2.19  The borough benefits from being one of the 
best connected in the United Kingdom. Ealing bridges 
the internationally significant transport hubs of Heathrow 
(in Hillingdon) and the future High Speed 2 terminus at 
Old Oak Common. This is complimented by five new 
Elizabeth Line stations along the Uxbridge Road, the 
Central Line serving seven stations, and the Piccadilly Line 
serving eleven stations. A business case is being prepared 
in conjunction with the WLA for a West London Orbital 
railway, to further enhance connections across west and 
northwest London, between Hounslow and Brent Cross.
Image:  Aerial view, North Acton 
and Park Roya.
36 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Figure 2.3:  
Ealing’s borough context
Ealing
Hanwell
Southall
Greenford
Perivale
Northolt
ActonA40
A40
Uxbridge RoadUxbridge Road
KEY
EXISTING FEATURES
TRANSPORT
OTHER FEATURESMetropolitan Greenbelt /Open Land
Locally Signiﬁcant Industrial Land
Strategic Area of RegenerationEaling Boundary
Open Space
High Speed 2
London Overground
London Overground StationTown Boundary
River/Canal
Strategic Roads
Major Town Centres
Metropolitan Town Centre
District CentreLondon Underground StationCentral Line
District Line
Piccadilly LineElizabeth Line
Strategic Industrial LandElizabeth Line Station
Opportunity Area
37 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
2.20  However, despite the benefits of global, 
international, and pan-London connectivity, there are 
parts of the borough, particularly areas in Greenford, 
Northolt and Southall that have very low public 
transport accessibility levels. Furthermore, many  
parts of the borough remain underserved by active 
travel infrastructure (walking and cycling routes) and 
major roads such as the Great Western Avenue (A40) 
can cause significant local severance and adverse 
environmental impacts.
2.21  The London Plan has also identified 
Strategic Areas for Regeneration (SAR) across the 
borough, which are areas that fall in the top 20% most 
deprived areas of England according to the Indices of 
Multiple Derivation (IMD). These areas are found across 
all the seven towns, but are most prevalent in Acton, 
Northolt and Southall, which have the highest levels 
of deprivation in the borough. In recognition of this, 
the council is preparing community-led regeneration 
frameworks for each of the seven towns, with Acton, 
Greenford, Northolt, Perivale and Southall having 
commenced, and Ealing and Hanwell to follow in 
early 2023. Ealing Council is also working closely 
with the Greater London Authority (GLA) to optimise 
the investment in new homes, new jobs and new 
infrastructure that will be enabled by these frameworks.  2.22  While the borough has a wide range 
of infrastructure and land use designations that will 
steer how the seven towns will grow and evolve over 
the next 15 years, the pandemic has reinforced the 
importance of local towns and the crucial support they 
provide for the neighbourhoods that surround them. 
Therefore, the idea of the 20 minute neighbourhood 
is incorporated into the New Local Plan as the key tool 
to ensure , future growth and investment throughout  
the borough. With access to safe cycling and local 
transport choices, the goal is to enable people to fulfil 
the majority of their daily needs within a 20-minute 
roundtrip walk from their homes.
Image: Southall 
Railway Station.
Image:  Greenford 
Quay, Ealing.
38 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Strategic objectives and 
priorities
2.23  The development of the Local Plan is closely 
aligned to the strategic vision and key priorities that are 
outlined in the Council Plan 2022-26. The Council Plan 
identified three strategic objectives. These are tackling 
the climate crisis, fighting inequality and creating good 
jobs and growth, and each is informed by the social, 
economic and environmental challenges and trends that 
the borough will encounter over the next fifteen years. 
2.24  To deliver on the three cross cutting strategic 
objectives of tackling the climate crisis, fighting inequality 
and creating good jobs and growth, a series of priorities 
have been identified. The three strategic objectives and 
nine priorities together inform the development of the 
15-Year Vision and spatial strategy set out in Chapter 3 
of this document.
TACKLING THE  
CLIMATE CRISIS FIGHTING 
INEQUALITYCREATING GOOD 
JOBS & GROWTH 
Image:  People working 
collaboratively.
LINK  
Click here  for more information on the 
Council’s Plan 2022-26.
39 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Tackling the climate crisis 
2.25  Ealing Council declared a climate 
emergency in April 2019, committing to treat the 
climate and ecological emergency as a crisis requiring 
immediate climate action. The aim is to become carbon 
neutral as a borough and an organisation by 2030. 
The Local Plan has a unique role within the council’s 
climate change agenda, with the ability to establish 
a spatial vision with supporting policy, influence new 
development and infrastructure, manage public land 
and assets, and commission public services that can 
support reducing emissions and creating resilience to 
climate change impacts. Further information in relation 
to climate action can be found within Ealing Councils’ 
declaration of a climate emergency and the Climate 
and Ecological Emergency Strategy.
2.26  In tackling the climate crisis, the Council 
has identified three main priorities:
An inclusive economy 
2.27  This means creating  
wealth within the community  
by making sure everything  
the council does contributes  
to social value and  makes  
Ealing a fairer place to live  
and work.LINK S 
Click here  for Ealing’s  
Climate Action declaration .
Click here  for the Climate and  
Ecological Emergency Strategy .
Image:  Importance of Active 
Travel in the Borough.
40 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
2.28  Ealing has a rich and proud heritage 
of industry and productivity, showcased by its vast 
expanses of industrial land stretching from Park Royal 
along the A40 corridor and down into Southall. Our 
local economy makes a significant contribution to the 
London economy and beyond, capitalising on our 
strategic location between Heathrow and London’s 
Central Activity Zone (CAZ).
2.29  However, the COVID-19 pandemic has 
exposed Ealing’s economy as one of the least resilient 
and least diverse in London, in part due to its heavy 
reliance on the aviation sector and the many local 
businesses and jobs linked to Heathrow.
2.30  The Local Plan seeks to develop 
sophisticated and ambitious employment policies that 
protect and strengthen the role of our industrial land 
and seven towns, and nurture the economy to grow, 
renew and diversify over the plan period.
Climate action 
2.31  This means greening and keeping Ealing 
clean, achieving net zero carbon, and ensuring our parks, 
open spaces and nature are protected and enhanced.
2.32  Climate change will affect all our lives 
and those of future generations, with global changes 
having local impacts. Ealing Council declared a climate emergency in 2019 and Ealing’s Climate Emergency 
and Ecological Emergency Strategy was adopted in 
2021. This sets out how carbon emissions can be 
reduced as quickly as possible. The Local plan will 
include policies that better enable our communities to 
adapt to the effects of climate change in the borough 
including heat waves, increased flood risk, and impacts 
on biodiversity, energy and food. 
2.33  Policies will also encourage waste reduction, 
an increase in recycling and the development of a stronger 
circular economy across the borough. This is particularly 
important because climate change will disproportionately 
affect our least well-off residents. Further information 
in relation to climate action can be found within Ealing 
Councils’ declaration of a climate emergency  and 
Climate and Ecological Emergency Strategy .
Thriving communities 
2.34  This means bringing people together to 
build strong neighbourhoods, empowering volunteers, 
encouraging community activism, engaging civic and 
faith leaders, and delivering well-loved community 
facilities and services.
2.35  Ealing will become one of London’s most 
connected boroughs once the Elizabeth Line and High 
Speed 2 are delivered. However, it will be critical thatall neighbourhoods within the borough become well 
served by bus, tube and rail that provide connectivity 
to London and to other parts of the country. Beyond 
these major infrastructure projects, more investment 
is required to make walking and cycling the primary 
modes of transport across the borough, particularly 
now as we expect to be using our local services and 
visiting our town centres much more. 
2.36  There is an important link between how 
places are planned and the health and well-being 
of people who live in them, in terms of how people 
move through and between places and how different 
communities are encouraged to interact with one 
another to create community cohesion and local pride. 
Ealing’s Health Study helps underpin the Local Plan 
policies to ensure growth and development play a much 
more meaningful role in reducing health inequalities 
and create a more welcoming and safer environment for 
everyone. Further information in relation to thriving and 
healthy communities can be found within the Health 
Study that comprises part of the wider evidence base .
41 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Fighting inequality
2.37  Regeneration and new development will 
only be acceptable if health and wellbeing outcomes 
are prioritised. A comprehensive view of the wider 
health determinants has highlighted opportunities for 
the Local Plan to influence health across a broad range 
of social, economic and environmental factors. The 
fighting inequality theme looks to the root causes of 
health inequalities and the role of spatial planning and 
development in addressing those inequalities. The fighting 
inequality theme looks at opportunities related to:
 — enhancing town centres and associated to 
economic opportunity and community facilities; 
 — increasing access to quality green open space, 
healthy food options and health care services; 
 — enabling opportunities for active travel;
 — delivering well designed affordable housing;
 — providing community facilities; 
 — reducing crime; and 
 — increasing community cohesion .
2.38  Further information in relation to Fighting 
inequality can be found within the Health Study as part 
of the wider evidence base .2.39  In fighting inequality, the Council has 
identified three main priorities:
Tackling crime and inequality
2.40  This means relentlessly focusing on reducing 
poverty and inequality for those that most need support 
and promoting wellbeing and safety for all.
2.41  The Local Plan includes policies that require 
high quality design for all new developments and 
capitalise on opportunities to make adjacent open 
spaces and connecting routes safer and inclusive 
while reducing opportunities for anti-social behaviour. 
This, in turn, will create more opportunities for social 
cohesion, especially in places where long established 
neighbourhoods are undergoing change and 
welcoming new people into their communities.
A fairer start 
2.42  This means ensuring all our children and 
young people get the best start in life, from their 
earliest years through to a great education.
2.43  There is a wide variation in socio-economic 
outcomes across the borough. Acton, Northolt and 
Southall are home to some of the most deprived 
communities in London, whereas communities close to 
Ealing town centre, in Northfields and Southfield are 
amongst the most prosperous. Barriers to accessing REGENERATION AND NEW 
DEVELOPMENT WILL ONLY BE 
ACCEPTABLE IF HEALTH AND 
WELLBEING OUTCOMES ARE 
PRIORITISED.
LINK  
Click here  for more information 
on the Health Study.
42 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
affordable housing and good services is the biggest 
factor driving inequality, which is being compounded 
by an increasing number of Ealing’s residents working in 
insecure and low paid jobs, known as in-work poverty.
2.44  The Council wants to ensure all residents 
have access to good housing, jobs, skills, training and 
education, public transport and health and community 
facilities to help promote equality and inclusion, to ensure 
that everyone can succeed and prosper. The Local Plan 
fully embeds the recommendations of Ealing’s Race and 
Equality Commission Report to ensure planning policy 
can help significantly reduce inequalities and poverty 
over the plan period.
Healthy lives
2.45  This means protecting and enhancing the 
physical and mental health of all, supporting our older 
residents to enable them to remain independent and 
resilient and dealing with the ongoing impact of COVID-19.
2.46  There is a direct correlation between the 
quality of the built environment and how the people 
and communities who live, work, or visit experience it 
as a safe, inclusive, accessible, and welcoming place. 
A poorly designed built environment can also enable 
discrimination, which is particularly harmful for our 
more marginalised and vulnerable residents.
Image:  Supporting  
vulnerable residents.
LINK  
Click here  for more information on the 
Race and Equality Commission .
43 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Creating good jobs and growth 
2.47  The Local Plan will promote an inclusive 
economy based around principles of a sustainable, 
inclusive and socially just borough where residents, 
businesses, towns and communities grow and thrive  
together. Policies will encourage an equitable 
distribution of regeneration and investment and the 
spread of associated benefits across the borough’s 
seven towns. These benefits include access to new 
employment opportunities, new genuinely affordable 
homes, enhancements to the prosperity and wellbeing  
of residents and wider environmental benefits.
2.48  Policies will nurture existing businesses whilst 
attracting new sectors and industries to the borough to 
create a more diverse, resilient, inclusive and sustainable 
economy. The role of town centres will be repurposed 
and reimagined, so they become more vital and resilient. 
Town centres will be the beating heart of 20-minute 
neighbourhoods for the residents, workers and visitors 
they support. Industrial and commercial land will be 
intensified and will include affordable workspaces to 
maximise opportunities for residents and local businesses.
2.49  Further information in relation to creating 
good jobs and growth can be found within the Affordable 
Workspace Study, the Industrious Ealing Study, and 
within the 20-Minute Frameworks as part of the wider 
evidence base .2.50  In creating good jobs and growth, the 
Council has identified three main priorities:
Good Growth 
2.51  This means making sure making sure the 
growth that takes place in Ealing enhances its character, 
conserves its future and makes a great place where 
people want to live.
2.52  Ealing has many attractive and historic and 
natural environments, including twenty-nine designated 
conservation areas , numerous listed buildings , green 
open spaces  and a canal network. These all contribute 
greatly to the attractiveness and unique identity of the 
borough. Growth and development are necessary to 
deliver the new homes, new jobs and new amenities 
Ealing’s residents need. However, the Local Plan 
includes robust policies to enshrine the principles of 
‘good growth’, whereby new development respects 
the character and heritage of the borough’s valued and 
special places in each of its distinctive town centres.ATTRACTING NEW SECTORS AND 
INDUSTRIES TO THE BOROUGH 
TO CREATE A MORE DIVERSE, 
RESILIENT, INCLUSIVE AND 
SUSTAINABLE ECONOMY .
Image:  Greengrocer, South Ealing.
44 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Image:  Improving 
employment opportunities.
45 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
Decent living incomes 
2.53  This means bringing new and well-paid jobs 
back to Ealing and ensuring good businesses can thrive.
2.54  Accessing a well-paid and secure job is a key 
for raising the prosperity of Ealing residents. However, 
recent evidence shows Ealing has a high number of jobs 
paying less than the London Living Wage. In 2018, 31,000 
jobs were not paying a secure living wage – the sixth 
highest out of all London boroughs. This is compounded 
by the fact that 40% of the jobs in the borough are in 
typically ‘low paying sectors’ such as retail, hospitality, and 
leisure, compared to 33% in London. This is considerably 
higher in Southall (52%) and Northolt (47%).
2.55  The combination of these factors is 
contributing to rising in-work poverty, with the number of 
children living in absolute low-income families having risen 
by 10% since 2015, suggesting work is failing to pay for 
many Ealing families. The Local Plan is not the key tool to 
address this but it is an important one. It includes policies 
specific to the seven towns that will support them to 
become great places to invest, to start or grow a business, 
thereby providing more well-paid and secure jobs locally. 
Local Plan policies for employment also draw upon the 
recommendations of the Ealing Race Equality Commission.Genuinely affordable homes 
2.56  This means delivering our radical programme 
of social rent council house building, affordable homes 
and ensuring our tenants are empowered and have 
ownership of their communities.
2.57  Access to genuinely affordable housing is 
the primary barrier to prosperity for all seven of Ealing’s 
towns. There is a severe shortage of homes compared 
with the number of families and people that need them, 
with almost 11,000 applicants on the council’s housing 
register. Some of these are council tenants who would like 
to move, some are renting privately or living with family, 
and some have been accepted by the council because 
they are homeless.
2.58  Many people want to live in Ealing but 
there is a limited supply of genuinely affordable homes. 
Through housing policy, it is important that we protect 
and strengthen Ealing’s social diversity and ensure the 
borough does not become hollowed out or polarised 
between wealthy and less well-off residents. Local Plan 
policies for housing will draw upon the recommendations 
of the Ealing Race Equality CommissionTHERE IS A SEVERE 
SHORTAGE OF HOMES 
COMPARED WITH THE 
NUMBER OF FAMILIES 
AND PEOPLE THAT 
NEED THEM.
31,000  
JOBS WERE 
NOT PAYING 
A SECURE 
LIVING WAGE
46 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 
THREE 
SPATIAL 
STRATEGY 
Image: Aerial view of Ealing
47 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Introduction
Developing a new spatial strategy
3.1  This chapter establishes the spatial strategy 
for Ealing over the next 15 years that will be the tool 
used by the council, partners, and stakeholders to 
identify where investment in infrastructure and services 
should be focussed.
3.2  Figure SS1 presents the key considerations 
by the council in developing the spatial strategy for 
Ealing. This is set out in greater detail within the Spatial 
Options Report (see link below).
3.3  The spatial strategy has been developed by 
incorporating key considerations from the wider planning 
framework, set out in Chapter 1 of this document, with 
a focus on the priorities set out in the National Planning 
Policy Framework (NPPF) and London Plan.3.4  The Local Plan incorporates from the NPPF 
the need to be positive and flexible in approach, with 
the purpose to achieve sustainable development.
3.5  The  Local Plan incorporates from the 
London Plan the concept of Good Growth, which is 
growth that is socially and economically inclusive and 
environmentally sustainable. Ealing’s spatial strategy 
therefore aligns with the broader direction of growth 
and planning policies set out in the London Plan.
3.6  The London Plan outlines four spatial 
dimensions that also underpin Ealing spatial strategy:
(i) Focus growth in opportunity areas and  
 growth corridors;
(ii) Focus growth within town centres first;
(iii) Prioritise strategic and local regeneration  
 areas; and
(iv) Deliver character-led growth.3.7  In addition, the London Plan places a specific 
requirement on boroughs to deliver character-led growth. 
The character of Ealing’s neighbourhoods contributes to 
its uniqueness and distinctiveness within London. 
Reflecting on this, Ealing Council prepared an Ealing 
Character Study as part of the wider  Evidence Base.
3.8  Utilising the planning and spatial 
considerations from the NPPF and London Plan 
(alongside the wider evidence base), a spatial vision 
has been developed by Ealing Council that sets out 
what we aim to deliver over the next 15-years.
Image: People enjoying 
green spaces.LINK  
Click here  for more information on Ealing’s 
Spatial Options Report.
48 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Figure SS1:  
Key considerations in developing the Spatial Strategy
1. National Planning 
Policy Framework
Planning Practice 
Guidance2. London Plan ‘Good 
Growth’ Objective
GG1 Building Strong and 
Inclusive Communities
GG2 Making the Best  
Use of Land;
GG3 Creating a Healthy 
City
GG4 Delivering the 
Homes Londoners Need
GG5 Growing a Good 
Economy
GG6 Increasing Efficiency 
and Resilience3. London Borough  
of Ealing ‘Vision’
4. London Borough of 
Ealing ‘Core Themes’
 —Tackling the Climate 
Crisis
 —Fighting Inequality
 —Creating good jobs  
and growth
5. 15-Year Spatial 
Strategy6. Place Interventions  
(i) Significant levels of development at Ealing 
Metropolitan Town Centre
(ii) Moderate levels of employment-led development 
at Southall
(iii) Delivery of significant levels of development in 
proximity to planned and proposed public transport 
infrastructure
(iv) Delivery of significant levels of development in 
Greenford and Northolt town centres
(v) Delivery of moderate levels of development along 
key north-south corridors in Acton and the west of the 
borough
(vi) Delivery of lower levels of development in Hanwell 
and Perivale
(vii) Invesment in sustainable connectivity between 
the strategic green and blue network, neighbourhood 
centres and industrial sites
(viii) Maintaining and intensifying Strategic Industrial 
Land and Locally Significant Industrial Land
49 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Image: Homes in Ealing.
50 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Vision
3.9  This section sets out the 15-Year vision 
for Ealing aligned to the core themes of tackling the 
climate crisis, fighting inequality and creating good 
jobs and growth.
3.10  An overarching vision statement is 
further supported by the spatial strategy and strategic 
place interventions. This provides the structure for 
the subsequent borough-scale, town-scale and 
development management policies.Policy SP .1: A Vision for Ealing
A. The unique characteristics and cultural 
identities of each of Ealing’s seven towns will be 
respected and enhanced, through the application 
of locally sensitive Good Growth principles. 
B. Ealing will become the engine of West London’s 
new economy, with growth managed to provide 
equitable access to jobs that provide decent living 
incomes which can support genuinely affordable 
homes for all. We want growth in Ealing to be 
inclusive so that people can both contribute to 
and benefit from growth. Ealing will grow and 
diversify its business space, and further strengthen 
the role of its industrial areas.
C. By promoting 20-minute neighbourhoods 
across the borough, where most daily needs can 
be met within a short walk or cycle, Ealing will 
become a cleaner, greener and more sustainable borough. Firm action will be taken on climate 
change to protect the boroughs future, there will 
also be a range of measures to foster civic pride 
and belonging, promote thriving communities 
and spread the benefits of access to modern 
infrastructure.
D. The future being shaped is a borough in which 
all children and young people get a fairer start in 
life, and everyone can enjoy long, healthy lives. A 
focus on fighting crime and inequality will enable 
more people to fulfil their dreams and aspirations. 
QUESTION 
Do you support the vision that is set out in 
this Local Plan?
Click here  or scan the QR code  
to give us your views
Image:  Importance of local 
shops across Ealing.
51 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Delivering the vision
3.11  This section includes three strategic planning 
policies that collectively set out the approach to deliver 
the vision of the Local Plan. The core themes of the 
Local Plan – Tackling the Climate Crisis; Fighting 
Inequality; and Creating Good Jobs and Growth; also 
form the strategic policy headings, with each strategic 
policy integrating the relevant priorities that were outlined 
in Chapter 2. This ensures that the core themes, strategic 
objectives, and priorities of the Local Plan are fully 
integrated and therefore at the heart of delivering the 
vision in a clear and coherent way.Policy SP .2: Tackling the climate crisis 
SP 2.1 Inclusive economy
A. Spreading the benefits of new growth more 
equally across the borough’s neighbourhoods.
B. Retaining vital public assets and buildings, 
using them for the maximum benefit for the 
residents of our borough and keeping them in 
public hands for public use.
SP 2.2 Climate action 
A. Making the best use of land and investing in 
sustainable connectivity by:
(i) Supporting the principles of the 20-minute 
neighbourhood by investing in places in which 
most of people’s daily needs can be met within  
a short walk or cycle, with ease of access to 
public transport;
(ii) Enhancing active travel networks that connect 
each of these hubs and surrounding communities 
via high quality pedestrian and cycle routes that 
combine with strategic green and blue 
infrastructure (parkland and waterways).(iii) Encouraging appropriate meanwhile uses in 
multi-phased schemes particularly for employment 
uses on vacant industrial land and premises.
(iv) Reducing the number of motorised vehicles 
travelling in and through Ealing.
(v) Increasing the sustainability of the logistics 
network in light of the introduction of the 
Ultra-Low Emission Zone.
B. Managing waste and promoting greater self-
efficiency by:
(i) Supporting circular economy principles, with 
buildings and spaces designed with their full 
lifespan in mind. This will include a focus on 
resilient place-making, with buildings and spaces 
that they can readily adapt to changing uses and 
demands. This will maximise the use of buildings 
and their materials for the longest period possible 
and will reduce waste.
(ii)  Avoiding household landfill waste through 
increasing reuse and recycling.
Image:  Active travel, 
commuting in London.
52 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
(iii) Promoting self-sufficiency in waste 
management through identifying sufficient sites 
and capacity for waste management facilities, 
whilst prioritising facilities which meet minimum 
greenhouse gas performance standards.
(iv) Working with neighbouring planning authorities 
and the West London Waste Authority to revise the 
adopted West London Waste Plan to plan effectively 
for the future management of waste in the area. 
This will enable appropriate sites for waste 
processing to be safeguarded and secured.
C. Promoting greater energy efficiency and 
investment in new technologies by:
(i) Contributing to Ealing’s ambition to become net 
carbon neutral by 2030.
(ii) Promoting sustainable design and construction 
techniques including requiring new developments 
to significantly reduce CO2 emissions and water 
consumption, whilst encouraging and promoting 
retrofitting in older properties.
(iii) Setting measurable sustainability standards for 
new developments, such as BREEAM or Passivhaus.(iv) Promoting, supporting and investing in the 
use of low and zero carbon energy sources and 
technologies including combined heat and power 
schemes, district heating heat pumps and solar 
thermal heating.
(v) Installing more on-street electric vehicle (EV) 
charging points.
D. Building resilience, mitigation and adaptation 
to changing environments by:
(i) developments do not lead to a further 
deterioration of existing air quality, contribute to 
improved air quality where possible, and avoid 
exposure to unacceptable levels of poor air quality, 
or incorporate design solutions to minimise 
increased exposure.
(ii) Preventing an increase of flood risk through 
inappropriate development and supporting flood 
resilience and alleviation projects.
(iii) Promoting Sustainable Urban Drainage 
systems (SUDs). 
(iv) Maximising opportunities for urban greening 
and a net gain in biodiversity.(v) Mitigating the environmental impacts of the 
aviation industry, particularly in the context of any 
proposals for expansion of Heathrow Airport or 
Royal Air Force (RAF) Northolt, with major 
improvements in the way that measurable 
environmental targets are applied, monitored 
and reported.
(vi) Taking a character and heritage-led approach to 
mitigating the causes and effects of climate change 
as appropriate in areas of high character and 
heritage value and in relation to heritage assets.
E. Maintaining, enhancing and expanding the 
network of green infrastructure by:
(i) Ensuring that green spaces can fulfil their full 
potential using, where appropriate, development as 
a potential enabler or facilitator for improvements, 
including creating new parks, improved public 
access, recreation facilities and habitat creation.
(ii) Supporting tree planting, woodlands, orchards, 
hedgerows, and rewilding to promote carbon 
capture and help promote greater biodiversity.
(iii) Promoting community food growing, protecting 
allotments and leading food partnerships.
53 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Image:  Children playing 
on a green in Acton.SP 2.3 Thriving communities 
A. Safeguarding, improving, and facilitating the 
restructuring of existing social infrastructure to 
better meet the needs of Ealing’s population and 
meet any needs generated by population growth.
B. Ensuring that development supports the delivery 
of necessary new social infrastructure and has no 
adverse effect upon existing infrastructure.
C. Protecting and enhancing community facilities 
to help develop strong inclusive communities and 
contribute to social integration, cohesion and 
civic pride.
QUESTION 
Do you support the priorities in this 
tackling the climate crisis policy?
Click here  or scan the QR code  
to give us your views
54 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
3.12  The council wants to make sure that new 
growth in our borough benefits every resident and every 
neighbourhood. An essential part of this strategy is 
to ensure that public assets – land and buildings – are 
retained and are in future used for the maximum benefit 
for the local community.
3.13  In recognition that the effects of climate 
change are predicted to cause profound impacts on 
humanity and the ecological systems it relies on, Ealing’s 
full Council declared a climate emergency in April 2019  
and pledged to make Ealing carbon neutral by 2030. 
The scope of the declaration aims to address all carbon 
emissions, both produced and consumed, by everyone 
in the borough. This strategy also connects to the 
extraordinary power of the Local Plan and its unique 
position to build resilience through policy making.
3.14  The council will ensure development in 
Ealing makes a positive contribution to sustainability and 
minimises future carbon emissions at every opportunity 
within the built environment. The council acknowledges 
the steep and fast learning curve of climate action but 
will not limit its ambition to ensure outcomes from the 
plan contribute to a fair, just society operating within 
planetary boundaries.3.15  The Council’s Climate Change and Ecological 
Emergency Strategy (January 2020) recognises the pivotal 
role of the Local Plan and land use planning because:
 —Planning policies significantly influence the standard 
of the built environment and directly contribute to 
how a place looks, feels and operates.
 —Planning determines how the borough grows and 
shapes how a person experiences a place.
 —Planning has responsibilities for the development of 
new buildings, new transport linkages and major 
pieces of infrastructure.
 —It has an important role to play in supporting a 
transition to a low carbon future, through shaping 
places which reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
minimise our vulnerability to the consequences of 
environmental change.
 —The decisions made at the planning stage are long-
term and far reaching, so it is important that these 
policies are progressive and proactive.
3.16  The Local Plan will play a vital role in 
contributing to Ealing Council’s ambition to become net 
carbon neutral by 2030 both as a Council and a borough. 
This means ensuring that future development achieves 
the highest measurable standards of sustainable design 
technologies for low and zero carbon energy sources anddelivers more EV charging points across the borough. 
It also means promoting retrofitting and adaptation of 
existing buildings to conserve energy and enhance building 
conditions, for example, through good sound insulation.
3.17  Ealing Council is committed to achieving net 
waste self-sufficiency and supporting the principles of 
the circular economy. The separate West London Waste 
Plan (WLWP) aims to identify and safeguard sufficient 
sites for waste management facilities in the area and was 
adopted by Ealing and neighbouring authorities as a joint 
Development Plan Document in July 2015.
3.18  The London Plan sets ambitious waste 
apportionment targets for the boroughs with the 
goal of achieving greater self-sufficiency. Ealing’s waste 
apportionment target accounts for a 6.6% share of 
London’s household, commercial and industrial waste 
(2021-2041) although that figure includes the whole of 
the London Borough of Ealing.
3.19  However, this target makes no allowance 
for the OPDC, which is the largest area of industrial land 
in the borough and makes a significant contribution to 
overall waste levels. The London Plan requires Mayoral 
Development Corporations like the OPDC to: “cooperate 
with host boroughs to meet identified waste needs” 
(Policy S1 8 C).
55 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
3.20  The WLWP will be revised to take account of 
the new waste apportionment targets. Plans for its revision 
including a timetable will be published by early 2023.
3.21  Building resilience, mitigation and adaptation 
are also essential if places are to face up to the reality of 
climate change. These environmental; threats are real and 
present, and Ealing needs to be prepared for them. This 
includes addressing:
 —Poor air quality. This has direct effects on health, 
quality of life and life expectancy. It is anticipated 
that the majority of Development Sites identified 
will require mitigation as part of scheme design if 
taken forward at Regulation 19.
 —The risk of current and expected flooding from all 
sources. The jointly prepared West London Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) identified surface 
water flooding zones comparable to fluvial and tidal 
zones. Further work will be undertaken to ensure 
that all development sites will be subject to a further 
strategic assessment prior to their final allocation at 
Regulation 19. —Measures to encourage urban greening in new 
developments (including planting more trees, 
rewilding, rain gardens, green walls and roofs) and 
to promote greater biodiversity, the creation of new 
wildlife habitats and better access to nature will 
be strongly encouraged. Ealing is also committed 
to protecting and enhancing the network of green 
infrastructure in the borough, including improved 
accessibility. Whilst providing land for food growing 
also helps to support and foster a healthier 
environment and promotes healthy lifestyles.
3.22  Ealing Council is opposed to the future 
expansion of either Heathrow Airport or RAF Northolt 
unless it can be demonstrated that that the adverse 
environmental impacts, such as increased noise or 
poorer air quality arising from aircraft or the surface 
transport impacts of additional freight and passenger 
movements, can be successfully mitigated or remediated, 
where necessary. 
3.23  Ealing Council is an active participant 
in Heathrow Spatial Planning Group (HSPG), a joint 
partnership of many of the local authorities and Local 
Enterprise Partnerships (LEPS) responsible for planning 
the land use, transport, environment, economic 
development and sustainable development of the 
sub-region surrounding Heathrow Airport. HSPG has 
produced a Joint Spatial Planning Framework (JSPF)(published in February 2020) which sets out a sub-
regional scale strategic vision and action plan for the 
sustainable development of the area that responds to 
the opportunities and challenges presented by Heathrow 
Airport Ltd’s expansion proposals, although it is equally 
relevant to the existing airport campus.
3.24  Ealing Council is committed to maintaining, 
enhancing and expanding the network of green 
infrastructure in the borough and improving biodiversity 
and air quality. During the pandemic, access to green 
space was critical for residents’ health and wellbeing 
and the council want to increase access to open and 
green space, tree planting, food growing and protecting 
biodiversity. A key aspiration is to ensure greater 
integration of open spaces into our physical environment 
in designing and developing new infrastructure and by 
investing in existing facilities. 
3.25  Ealing Council is committed to maintaining, 
enhancing and expanding the network of green 
infrastructure in the borough and improving biodiversity 
and air quality. During the pandemic, access to green space 
was critical for residents’ health and wellbeing and the 
council want to increase access to open and green space, 
tree planting, food growing and protecting biodiversity.
3.26  An assessment of all of Ealing’s Green Belt 
and Metropolitan Open Land (MOL) sites has beenEALING COUNCIL’S AMBITION  
TO BECOME NET CARBON 
NEUTRAL BY 2030.
56 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
conducted against the NPPF and London Plan criteria 
respectively. This review has sought to not only provide 
an objective, criteria-based assessment that reflects the 
geography, character, and current use of each site, but 
to also ensure there is consistency in how sites across the 
borough are designated. Having correct site designations 
is crucial to preparing a robust new Local Plan and for 
efficient strategic planning. It concluded that none of 
Ealing’s seven Green Belt sites meet the criteria for this 
designation with some areas reverting to MOL. In terms 
of MOL sites, the assessment concludes that most sites 
should maintain their MOL designations, while others 
reverted to other policy designations. More information 
can be found at Appendix 3 which sets out the proposed 
changes to the Policies Map.
3.27  Direct provision of supporting infrastructure 
is also a key part of the planning system and in addition 
to health infrastructure itself, which is evidenced in 
Ealing’s comprehensive health evidence, all forms of social 
infrastructure have a role to play in the web of social and 
economic factors that directly influence health. The global 
consequences of climate change and the importance of 
mitigating these effects on health will also be essential 
to the success of the plan.
Image: Residents 
gardening in Ealing.
57 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Policy SP .3: Fighting inequality 
SP 3.1 Tackling crime and inequality 
A. Reducing spatial inequalities within Ealing 
by promoting mixed and balanced communities 
particularly in those areas of high levels of 
multiple deprivation.
B. Creating a more equal and affordable borough, 
where the opportunities to access good quality 
housing, employment, digital connectivity, culture 
and physical, social and green infrastructure  
are maximised.
C.Designing safe, secure and accessible urban 
environments and ensuring that new developments 
reduce opportunities for criminal behaviour and 
contribute to a sense of security and community 
cohesion.
D. Investing in a new purpose built and designed 
Gypsy, Roma, and Traveller (GRT) site(s) to meet 
existing and future need whilst also looking to 
establish a dedicated transit site ensuring the 
GRT community can travel through the borough 
safely with viable alternatives to unauthorised 
encampments on private land and open spaces.SP 3.2 A fairer start 
A. Ensuring every child in Ealing continues to have 
access to good and sustainable schools in their local 
community by investing in modern, fit-for-purpose 
buildings and expanding provision for those with 
special educational needs.
B. Working closely with education providers to 
identify need and opportunities for new educational 
establishments within and around developments.
SP 3.3 Healthy lives
A. Improving air quality and tackling congestion 
to improve respiratory health.
B. Implementing 20-minute neighbourhood 
principles which encourage active travel, improve 
social mixing, and provide essential services such 
as access to healthy food.
C. Ensuring new development meets the highest 
design standards, responds positively to the local 
character and recognises the role of heritage in 
place-making.
D. Reintegrating land uses, particularly living, 
working and recreation, to encourage a better 
work life balance, to reduce journey times and 
leading to improved mental health and wellbeing.E. Maintaining a sufficient supply of indoor 
and outdoor sports and recreation facilities and 
improving access to green and open spaces 
leading to physical and mental health benefits.
F. Mitigating the effects of climate change, 
particularly the urban heat island effect, and 
improving the existing housing stock to limit 
impacts upon general health and particularly 
more vulnerable parts of the population.
G. Working closely with National Health Service 
(NHS) partners to identify need and opportunities 
for new health infrastructure and health services 
within and around developments, particularly 
within Acton and Southall.
H. Implementing the Health Impact Assessment 
(HIA) process for major or strategic developments.
I. Meeting needs for specialist housing where this 
can complement conventional supply.
QUESTION 
Do you support the priorities set out in this 
fighting inequality policy?
Click here  or scan the QR code  
to give us your views
58 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
3.28  Our greatest strength is our diverse 
community, with people of different backgrounds living 
side by side. We want a strong cohesive community, 
where diversity is celebrated, and everyone has equal 
opportunity regardless of their background. This means 
tackling inequality and poverty by creating a more 
equal and affordable borough where opportunities to 
good quality housing, employment, digital connectivity, 
culture and physical, social and green infrastructure 
are maximised.3.29  In addition, the Council aims to provide 
30 pitches for Gypsy, Roma and Traveller community 
(including the potential reprovision of the 24 pitches 
at the existing Bashley Road site) together with a new 
transit camp.
3.30  Key to a fairer start is supporting excellent 
educational outcomes and ensuring children and young 
people are successful in life. We want to continue to 
ensure there are sufficient high-quality school places 
available and will work closely with partners to do so.
3.31  Reducing health inequality and ensuring 
that people from all backgrounds can have a healthy life  
is another key ambition of the Council. Socio-economic 
and built environment factors account for as much 
as 50% of the determinants of health, equal to the 
collective effects of health behaviours and clinical care. 
While the built environment directly comprises only 
10% of the total, 40% is made up of the overlapping 
web of social and economic factors that constitute the 
community as a whole, its access to local and public 
services, employment, and greenspace. The importance 
of mixed and inclusive public spaces therefore goes far 
beyond purely architectural value or economic growth, 
although town centres are vital to both.3.32  The borough’s town centres are focused 
upon the seven towns but extend also throughout 
all of Ealing’s including 1 Metropolitan Town Centre 
(Ealing), 1 Major Centre (Southall), 3 District Centres 
(Acton, Greenford and Hanwell), 9 Neighbourhood 
Centres (including Northolt and Perivale) and 63 Local 
Centres. Collectively, this network makes up the main 
social and civic spaces of Ealing, and also forms 
its commercial and employment core along with 
designated industrial sites. Town centres do not just 
constitute the retail hierarchy, but also make retail and 
employment provision alongside the public and social  
life of the borough.
3.33  Accessible and inclusive public places are 
therefore essential to economic and health equalities, 
but they are also integral to minimising climate change 
and ensuring resilience to its effects. Mixed centres 
are more sustainable not just because of their capacity 
for active travel but also because they offer social and 
environmental resilience through measures such as 
shared public infrastructure and urban greening.
Image:  Ensuring every child has 
access to good schools.
59 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Policy SP .4: Creating good jobs  
and growth
SP 4.1 Good growth 
A. Directing development to sustainable locations 
that are well connected to sustainable transport 
modes or within close proximity to town centres, 
and thus deliver patterns of land use that reduce 
the reliance on the car and facilitate making 
shorter and regular trips by walking and cycling.
B. Ensuring that the most efficient use of land is 
made so that development on sites is optimised, 
which will contribute to more sustainable patterns 
of development and land uses.
C. Following a character-led and contextual 
approach to growth that optimises the capacity 
of sites while reflecting the valuable components 
of the built environment.
D. Taking a strategic approach to the preservation 
and enhancement of Ealing’s built heritage, 
including the capacity for heritage-led regeneration 
and development where appropriate.
Image: Ealing residents.
60 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
E. Identifying appropriate areas for tall buildings 
and change that adds quality to and complements 
Ealing’s character and place-making ambitions.
F. Making provision for necessary physical, social 
and green infrastructure by:
(i) Delivering strategic infrastructure that enhances 
both east-west and north-south connectivity 
including supporting proposals for the West London 
Orbital (WLO) maximising the catalytic potential 
benefits of the Elizabeth Line stations and future 
High Speed 2 (HS2) station; and working with 
neighbouring authorities to promote cross-boundary 
infrastructure improvements where relevant.
(ii) Producing an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) 
and schedule that sets out how infrastructure will be 
delivered at the right locations and at the right time 
to support the levels of good growth to be delivered 
and reflect borough wide and local infrastructure 
priorities.
(iii) Creating a clear framework for future 
negotiations on planning obligations, including 
developer contributions that will include a new 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL).SP 4.2 Decent living incomes 
A. Maintaining the existing supply of industrial land 
on designated and undesignated sites and adding 
to this where possible.
B. Managing Strategic Industrial Land (SIL) exclusively 
for conforming uses and undertaking any necessary 
consolidation through the plan-making process.
C. Setting out a specific strategy for Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites (LSIS) in line with the 
London Plan and actively by means of plan-led 
comprehensive masterplans undertaking mixed 
intensification.
D. Fully testing non-designated sites for industrial 
redevelopment including mixed use where 
this is necessary to enable industrial reuse and 
intensification.
E. Delivering affordable workspace where this 
also serves a broader social or economic purpose 
and to enable more small and medium sized 
businesses to start up.
F. Sustaining the vitality and viability of our town 
centres by:(iv) Maintaining and enhancing the role of Ealing 
Metropolitan Town Centre as a commercial and 
employment hub for West London.
(v) Promoting the distinctive economic role and 
offer of other centres, particularly Southall Major 
Centre, and Acton, Greenford and Hanwell 
District Centres.
G. Growing the size and range of the employment 
offer (particularly in Northolt, Greenford and Perivale 
based upon their strong industrial sector) and the 
potential for mixed commercial development in 
town centres.
H. In the event of any plans for expansion of 
Heathrow Airport and any related development, 
shaping any proposals to maximise the contribution 
and benefits for Ealing’s local economy, including 
improved connectivity.
I. Supporting culture and creative industries.
J. Promoting and supporting a strong and diverse 
night-time economy.
61 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
SP 4.3 Genuinely affordable homes
A. Meeting and where appropriate exceeding 
the 21,570 unit 10-year housing supply target 
identified in the London Plan for the period 
2019-22 to 2028-29.
B. Providing new homes in truly mixed, inclusive 
communities across a range of tenures.
C. Maximising the provision of affordable 
homes with a particular emphasis on social 
rented properties including delivering 70%  
of new affordable housing as affordable rent.
D. Improving opportunities for higher quality 
market rented properties including build to rent 
where appropriate.
E. Working with residents to support the 
development of local community-led housing 
initiatives, including Community Land Trusts, 
to provide solutions to local housing issues.
QUESTION 
Do you support the priorities in this 
creating good jobs and growth policy?
Click here  or scan the QR code  
to give us your views
Image: Dickens Yard Ealing.
62 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
3.34  Land is a scarce and increasingly expensive 
commodity so making optimal use of land and buildings 
and ensuring good design in any new development are 
at the heart of how we enhance our borough, Ealing has 
a wealth of designated heritage assets including over 
300 buildings and structures covered by statutory listing. 
including six scheduled monuments and four registered 
Parks and Gardens, as well as 28 conservation areas. 
In addition, there are over 700 non-designated heritage 
assets identified in Ealing’ local heritage register. Places do 
evolve and change over time and new development has 
the potential to offer significant opportunities to enhance 
and better reveal heritage assets to enable cultural, social 
and economic benefits of these assets to be realised. This 
will be achieved by placing heritage at the heart of place-
making, good growth and good design.
3.35  The Council also wants to contain the spread 
of tall buildings by being clear about those locations 
where tall buildings may be appropriate and ensure that 
any future schemes are built to the highest standards of 
design and environmental efficiency, fit in with their 
local neighbourhood and help promote greater levels 
of open green space and biodiversity.
3.36  Existing communities and new residents 
coming into new developments in the borough will 
need additional physical, social and green infrastructure including health facilities, schools, sports and leisure 
amenities, transport, utilities, and spaces for the 
community. The successful delivery of the spatial 
objectives in the Local Plan therefore requires good 
infrastructure planning. Put simply, without the necessary 
infrastructure needed to support development then the 
levels of growth that the plan seeks to achieve over the 
next 10-15 years will not be sustainable. Further work 
will be undertaken to identify the specific infrastructure 
needed to support future growth and development as 
well as identifying when and where this will be and who 
will provide it. This will be set out in an Infrastructure 
Plan and schedule.
3.37  The delivery of planned and proposed 
public transport infrastructure will be critical, including 
the Elizabeth Line, West London Orbital and the 
Brentford to Southall Line. In addition, targeted 
green infrastructure, landscape, and public realm 
enhancements will support the delivery of active 
travel interventions. These investments present the 
opportunity to create new strategic north-south routes 
that will reinforce (or establish) interdependencies 
between local neighbourhoods, metropolitan centres, 
and employment sites. The delivery of targeted green 
infrastructure and public realm improvements also 
provide opportunities for enhancing biodiversity and 
building resilience to future climate related events.BUILDING UPON AND 
PROMOTING SOUTHALL’S 
ROLE AS A CULTURAL HUB 
AND DESTINATION OF 
NATIONAL IMPORTANCE.
Image: Elizabeth Line at 
Southall Railway Station.
63 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
3.38  Ealing faces a wake-up call for its economy 
which is increasingly being driven by relatively land-hungry 
uses like logistics together with insecure employment 
in the gig economy and industries such as call centres. 
COVID-19 and other economic challenges have created 
economic uncertainty, but they also present opportunities 
for growth that supports Ealing’s seven towns, the 
health and economic security of local residents, and the 
transition to a low-carbon economy.
3.39  Industrial demand in Ealing falls into two 
broad categories: land necessary to provide for modern 
consolidated logistics uses, and particular types of space 
essential to meeting the demands of light industry and 
manufacturing. Limited opportunities also exist for the 
expansion of the area in industrial use, and these have 
been identified where possible as site specific allocations. 
Similarly, the comprehensive review of Ealing’s industrial 
land has highlighted some sections of SIL that do not 
perform in their current designation and proposals for 
their designation as LSIS or in mixed development are set 
out in spatial policies and site allocations.
3.40  Ealing’s town centres represent a 
complimentary economic function to its strong industrial 
base with a distinct offer of knowledge intensive industries 
particularly in Ealing, Acton and Hanwell. Other centres in 
the Borough have a physically close relationship with SIL and LSIS sites and these form a springboard for the growth 
of existing town centres in Southall, Greenford, Northolt 
and Perivale.
3.41  The delivery of better paying and more secure 
forms of employment is also essential to the plan and the 
Council will deploy a complimentary programme of non-
planning measures to help deliver this inclusive economy.
3.42  The reintegration of living and working, 
and particularly of workplaces throughout the Borough 
that can be reached by means of public transport or 
active travel, are essential to people‘s health and the 
broader strategy of action to address the current climate 
crisis. A contextual approach to growth, reflecting the 
comprehensive Borough-wide character study will build 
upon valuable elements of local character and help to 
address any existing shortcomings.
3.43  Access to housing represents a significant 
economic constraint and source of inequality in the 
borough which appears to be constraining population 
growth and causing outmigration of the crucial working 
age population. In particular Ealing will pursue a unit 
based, rather than percentage based, delivery target for 
identified affordable housing needs and will also set out 
a strategy for the delivery of specialist housing types.
Image:  Acton Park.
64 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Strategic place interventions
3.44  Sitting below the spatial strategy are 
the strategic place interventions. These are a set of 
interventions that should be seen as cross-cutting and 
often support multiple core themes. Chapter 4 of this 
Local Plan presents town-level local place interventions  
within the town spatial policies that will support the 
delivery of the 15-year vision.
3.45  Figure SS3 presents the key diagram, 
which illustrate the spatial strategy and strategic 
place interventions.
3.46  The Spatial Options Report provides 
further details about the strategic place interventions, 
which can be found on the council’s website (see 
link below).
Image:  Importance of providing 
amenity and children’s playspace 
across the borough.LINK  
Click here  for more information on Ealing’s 
Spatial Options Report.
65 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
1. Delivery of significant levels of 
development at Ealing Metropolitan 
Town Centre
3.47  Building on its excellent connectivity, 
Ealing Metropolitan Town Centre will be the location 
for significant, high density residential and employment 
growth. Development will focus on delivering strategic 
office, commercial, retail, and residential growth, while 
improving key health determinants including accessibility 
to and provision of healthcare facilities, deficiency in green 
open space provision, and improving air quality within the 
town centre. This will enhance the Metropolitan Town 
Centre’s role as a destination, with a diverse retail, leisure, 
and cultural offer and a stronger night-time economy.
2. Delivery of moderate levels of 
employment-led development at Southall
3.48  Building upon and promoting Southall’s role 
as a cultural hub and destination of national importance, 
delivery of moderate levels of employment-led growth 
and development above extant permissions. Office, 
retail, and leisure-based development will be encouraged 
and reinforced within the Opportunity Area and the 
wider Ealing Productivity Arc to develop a more diverse 
and resilient local economy, while ensuring communityand civic infrastructure is delivered alongside residential 
development. Accessibility to healthcare facilities and 
provision of new school spaces (early years and secondary 
schools) have been identified as key health determinants 
that should be reinforced.
3. Delivery of significant levels of 
development in proximity to planned  and 
proposed public transport infrastructure
3.49  The delivery of strategic infrastructure that 
enhances both east-west and north-south connectivity 
will be critical to enable the spatial strategy, deliver 
significant levels of development and create new 
economic opportunity. The recently delivered Elizabeth 
Line and the proposed investment in the West London 
Orbital are critical infrastructure schemes to enable the 
spatial strategy. These investments provide connectivity 
to the CAZ, Heathrow Airport, and other outer London 
town centres. Significant levels of development will be 
focussed along both route alignments and their stations 
in order to maximise the transport investment and ensure 
accessibility of local residents to opportunities within and 
beyond Ealing.4. Delivery of significant levels of 
development in Greenford and Northolt 
town centres
3.50  Significant levels of development will 
be delivered within Greenford and Northolt that will 
support in delivering new 20-minute neighbourhoods by 
unlocking a wider number of sites close to these existing 
and emerging town centres (Greenford, Northolt, and 
White Hart Roundabout). The spatial strategy will aim to 
deliver a greater intensity and quantum of development 
within the wider network of town centres and the Ealing 
Productivity Arc. The ambition will be for these centres to 
play a larger role in creating economic opportunity, the 
provision of services and acting as centres of connectivity. 
Investment in these locations will also support in 
addressing key health determinants through increased 
provision of social infrastructure and access to services.
66 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
5. Delivery of moderate levels of 
development along key north-south 
corridors in Acton and the west of the 
borough
3.51  The spatial strategy will deliver enhanced 
north-south connectivity across the borough. This will be 
through rail-based public transport investment in the West 
London Orbital at Acton Central and South Acton stations. 
This will enable Acton to capitalise on its excellent existing 
and future connectivity to accommodate significant levels 
of new development. Alongside this investment, to the 
west of the borough the focus will be on the delivery 
of new sustainable transport infrastructure to improve 
north-south connectivity in Northolt and Greenford. This 
will be through enhancing the existing public transport 
network (primarily bus based) and through targeted green 
infrastructure, landscape enhancements and enhanced 
public realm that will create high quality infrastructure for 
new active travel routes. These public and active travel 
investments will enable moderate levels of development 
along the route alignments.
Image: Improving transport  
and Northolt’s connectivity.
67 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
6. Delivery of lower levels of development 
in Hanwell and Perivale
3.52  The spatial strategy will deliver a lower 
quantum of residential led development within Hanwell 
and Perivale due to fewer opportunities. Where 
development opportunities exist within both towns, 
these are primarily located away from the town centres 
or rail infrastructure and therefore rely on sustainable 
connectivity investments (existing public transport 
network and green infrastructure and public realm 
enhancements for improved active travel). Employment-
led growth within existing industrial estates (through 
intensification) as part of the wider Ealing Productivity 
Arc will be encouraged with stronger connectivity to 
the town centres.
7. Investment in sustainable connectivity 
between the strategic green and blue 
network, neighbourhood centres, and 
industrial sites
3.53  Investment in sustainable connectivity that 
utilises the green infrastructure network and improved 
public realm will enhance active travel routes with the 
objective to improve connectivity between industrial sites 
and town centres across the borough.This will support in providing a more balanced approach 
to development across Ealing and ensure that all town 
centres are delivering development. This approach will 
support the creation of complementary uses between 
town centres and industrial land and strengthen the role 
of smaller town centres across the borough.8. Maintaining and Intensifying Strategic 
Industrial Land and Locally Significant 
Industrial Sites
3.54 The spatial strategy will reinforce and 
intensify existing Strategic Industrial Land (SIL) and Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites (LSIS) within the borough and 
explore options to improve industrial land and intensify 
employment where appropriate.
Figure SS2:  
Conceptual London Borough of Ealing Key Diagram
68 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
Figure SS3:  
London Borough of Ealing key diagram
Ealing
Hanwell
Southall
Greenford
Perivale
Northolt
White Hart
Acton
OPDC
KEY
EXISTING FEATURES
TRANSPORT
PLANNING
ACTIVE TRAVEL LINKSPROPOSED TRANSPORT AND
TOWN CENTRESEXISTING AND PROPOSED
Town Centre
Industrial LandEaling Boundary
High Speed 2
West London Orbital
Elizabeth Line
Central Line
District Line
RoadsPiccadilly Line
Opportunity AreaTown Boundary
River/Canal
Open Space
West London Orbital Station
Elizabeth Line Station
Active travel Route
Town CentresGreen Link
69 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
70 Ealing Council 2022
Shaping Ealing The Local Plan CHAPTER 3
