APPENDIX – MAIN MODIFICATIONS  
The modifications below are expressed either in the conventional form of strikethrough for deletions and underlining for addi tions of text, 
or by specifying the modification in words in italics.  Modifications in bold relate specifically to changes to policies.  
The page numbers and paragraph numbering below refer to the submission local plan, and do not take account of the deletion or  addition 
of text. 
 
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy 
Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Main Modification  
MM1 2 Introduction  Paras 2.14 
– 2.17 Layout of the Brent Local Plan  
 
2.14 As indicated earlier, the London Plan contains many detailed strategic policies that are 
also intended  for development management purposes.  The Greater London Authority 
considered that this would be helpful so that councils can concentrate on locally specific issues 
which differentiate their areas from others.  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF ) and 
draft London Plan both emphasise that there is no need for Local Plans to repeat their policies.  
The Local Plan therefore follows this advice where it is considered national or London policy 
provides sufficient policy detail.  The Brent Local Plan s hould be seen as complementary to be 
read in conjunction with the London Plan, NPPF, National Planning Practice Guidance and 
London Plan Supplementary Planning Guidance documents.  
 
The NPPF (paragraph 21) requires local planning authorities to make explici t which policies are 
strategic in their Local Plan.  Accordingly, the Council has used the criteria provided in the NPPF 
to assess the policies and site allocations contained within the draft Brent Local Plan.  The 
outcome of this assessment is set out in Table 1 of Appendix 6 of this Plan with the assessment, 
criteria and conclusions shown within Table 2 of the Appendix.   Where a policy was considered 
to meet at least one of the NPPF criteria, it was determined to be a strategic policy.  
 
2.15 As a result , such the structure of the Brent Local Plan is such that it obviously 
complements the Good Growth Policies and chapters of the London Plan.  This is shown in 
Figure 4.  The Plan has a brief overview of Brent’s characteristics, identifying some of the 
challenges and opportunities.  This sets the scene for the following Spatial Vision for Brent, 
identifying locally specific examples of how the Good Growth Policies will be delivered in Brent 
either across the borough or through specific areas/ sites.  In recog nition of the fact that the 
borough is not homogenous but is made up of a series of smaller places, the Plan splits the 
borough up and focuses on 7 ‘Places’.  The extent of these Places is loosely based on a scale Ref  Chapter / 
Policy 
Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Main Modification  
that is likely to be more locally relevant  taking account of a mixture of town centres that exert 
an influence within them, plus their character and clearly defined physical features which might 
effectively separate them from other identified Places.  
 
2.16 For each of these Places there is an over view of matters such as physical features that 
define its boundary, a high level analysis of its current attributes, such as town centres, culture 
and character, transport, employment and education.  The challenges and opportunities of the 
Place are set ou t.  This helps inform a vision for the Place and then the Policy for matters such 
as culture and character, transport, employment and education, and town centres.  In addition, 
key Site Allocations are set out.  
 
2.17 The Plan then sets out a general position statement in relation to new development in the 
borough, before using the same chapter headings as the draft London Plan to set out locally 
specific Brent policies on these matters.   
MM2  3 Brent 
Characteristics  3.17, page 
20 Amend sentence of pa ra 3.17 to read:  
 
However, to support new residential development, current projections indicate a new 
primary school will be required in Wembley Park by 2023. There are however  projected 
shortages of space for secondary pupils which will require provision  of the equivalent of 
two additional secondary schools by 2023/24.  
 
 3 Brent 
Characteristics  3.19, page 
21 Amend latter part of para 3.19 to read:  
 
In terms of indoor sports facilities, the Council's Indoor Sports and Leisure Needs 
Assessment identified  provision is significantly below needs.  Swimming pools are 
between ¼ -½ of the provision per head of population in adjacent boroughs10. There is 
also the need for additional sports halls. The Council's Playing Pitch assessment identified 
that for some spor ts, additional pitches are required.  
 3 Brent 
Characteristics  3.32, page 
25  Amend last part of para 3.32 to read:  
 
It however is severely congested at peaks times.  It has significant adverse impacts on 
communities in terms of severance, pollution and noise.  It is used as the boundary of the 
extended Ultra -Low Emissions Zone (ULEZ)  to be introduced in 2021 is unclear in terms Ref  Chapter / 
Policy 
Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Main Modification  
potential changes on these adverse impacts.  Transport for London predict that the ULEZ 
2021 will reduce air pollution in Brent by  NO2 by 36%, with greater reductions within the 
ULEZ and lower reductions on and north of the North Circular.  
MM3 
 
 4 Development 
Vision and 
Good Growth in 
Brent  How Will 
Good 
Growth In 
Brent be 
Delivered?, 
page 28 -29 
 Amend to read:  
 
How will Good Growth in Brent Be Delivered?  
4.1 4.37 The London Plan includes six Good Growth Policies Objectives  that set out the 
fundamentals on which development in London should deliver.  In Brent highlights of how 
these will be addressed in relation to places and subje ct chapters in supporting delivering 
the development vision and good growth are:  
 
1. Strong & Inclusive Communities  
a) Reduce spatial inequalities within Brent and incidences of areas with high levels of 
multiple deprivation by promoting mixed and balanced communities particularly 
around Wembley, Stonebridge, Harlesden, Neasden and South Kilburn and on 
council housing estates  
b) Building on Brent’s status as London Borough of Culture 2020 by supporting 
inclusive places, where ethnic diversity is celebrated and recognised, and places 
where cultural activities are already concentrated, e.g. Wembley, Cricklewood and 
Kilburn High Road  
c) Create a more equal and affordable borough, where the opportunities to access 
good quality housing, employment, education, digital co nnectivity and culture are 
maximised  
d) Strengthen the existing sense of community by celebrating Brent’s diversity, 
heritage and culture, and creating places where Brent’s community can meet  
e) Ensuring the delivery of a wide range of essential social infras tructures in Growth 
Areas and across the Brent to support the delivery of sustainable communities  
 
2.  Making the best use of land  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy 
Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Main Modification  
a) Prioritising the majority of residential development in new and more efficiently and 
intensively developed Growth Areas such including  Northwick Park, Staples Corner 
and Neasden Stations and continuing to deliver in those that have already been 
started, such as in  Alperton, Burnt Oak/ Colindale, Church End, South Kilburn and 
Wembley to enhance environmental quality, and bring b enefits to the community;  
b) Supporting higher density development in Brent’s town centres , Intensification 
Corridors  and in areas with good accessibility to public transport,  
c) encouraging greater access, recreational use and also understanding of ecology in 
Brent’s extensive areas of open spaces, such as the Welsh Harp and Fryent 
Country Park  
d) Identifying appropriate areas for tall buildings and change that add quality to and 
complement Brent’s character and sense of place  
 
3.  Creating a Healthy Borough  
a) Using the iconic sporting heritage associated with Wembley Stadium to play its 
part in stimulating greater levels of activity.  
b) Integrating physical activity back into the everyday lives of residents through 
promoting safe environments, active travel and improvin g access to open spaces, 
sports and leisure facilities.  
c) Improving physical and mental well -being for borough residents by adopting a 
health -integrated planning approach  
d) Reducing health inequalities through focusing on narrowing the gap between the 
most aff luent and the most deprived areas of the borough  
e) Ensure that there is sufficient supply of indoor and outdoor sports provision to 
meet demand which will assist in increasing the levels of sports participation and 
physical activity within the Borough  
f) Improv ing Brent’s air quality overall and particularly in Growth Areas  
 
4. Growing a Good Economy  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy 
Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Main Modification  
a) Make better use of Brent’s employment  industrial  land and overall increase its 
industrial floorspace through  a structured approach to deliver industrial  its 
intensification and land release, where appropriate  and also where possible 
support additional housing/ community facilities through co -location  
b) Support Brent’s priority high streets in adapting to the changing lifestyles, 
including the way people shop , lifestyles  and the challenges posed by other large 
centres in London, with, where appropriate, additional retail and leisure floorspace 
and supporting Wembley’s growth to metropolitan centre status  
c) Promote and support a strong and diverse night -time economy  in Wembley, 
Cricklewood, Kilburn and Wembley Park   to contribute to London’s role as a 24 -
hour city  
d) Delivering a minimum of 2,622 serviced accommodation rooms to support town 
centre economies, particularly those of Kilburn and Wembley  
e) Protecting existing  viable office floorspace and identifying sites within Wembley to 
provide new high quality office floorspace.  
f) Continue to support Brent’s high level of entrepreneurship and small business 
formation by encouraging new creative industries and affordable work space  
 
5. Increasing Efficiency and Resilience  
a) Reduce carbon emissions by supporting the continued expansion of local and 
renewable energy systems such as those at Wembley Park and South Kilburn and 
into other Growth Areas  
b) Tackle congestion and air quality ar ound the North Circular, improving orbital 
public transport routes such as the West London Orbital railway scheme and 
prioritising active travel to provide realistic alternatives to travelling by car  
c) Reduce the risk of flooding from the River Brent and its  tributaries and other 
sources by putting the right development in the right places and reducing surface 
water run -off and potable water use  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy 
Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Main Modification  
d) Provide a safe and inclusive environment around Wembley Stadium and Wembley 
Arena to support their iconic status fo r positive memories to be made  
e) Continue to support Brent’s award -winning street tree planting initiatives and 
greening of the built environment to combat air pollution, flooding, overheating 
and threats to ecological habitats  
f) Enhancing the capacity of existing green and blue infrastructure such as Welsh 
Harp, the river Brent corridor and Grand Union Canal across a range of needs, 
including recreation, biodiversity and climate change  
 
6.  Delivering the homes to meet Brent’s needs  
a) Housing delivery will be m aximised, with sufficient planning permissions to support 
delivery of more homes than the minimum London Plan housing target of 23,250 
between 2019/20 -2028/29.  A minimum 46,018 dwellings will be delivered for the 
whole plan period of 2019/20 -2040/41 on av erage 2040 homes a year in the 
period to 2041  to meet principally Brent’s housing needs but also those of wider 
London;  
b) Providing new homes in truly mixed, inclusive communities across a range of 
tenures, maximising the provision of affordable homes with a  particular emphasis 
on social rented properties, but also more affordable home ownership and 
improved opportunities for higher quality market rented properties;  
c) Providing new family housing with at least 25% of new homes being 3 bedrooms 
or more , recognising that Brent’s suburban context provides opportunities for 
houses as well as flats ; 
d) Meeting the growing need for specialist housing such as the 230 homes for older 
people per year to accommodate Brent’s aging population and others with 
challenges  who may require additional support.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy 
Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Main Modification  
MM4 FIGURE 6: 
Brent Key 
Diagram  Page 29  
Replace Figure 6:  
MM5 DMP1  Page 30  Amend part e) of policy to read:  
 
c) provided with the necessary physical and social infrastructure;  
d) conserving and where possible enhancing the significance of heritage assets and their 
settings;  
e) maintaining or and where possible enhancing sites of ecological importance;  
f) safe, secure and reduces the potential for crime;  
 
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM6  5.1 Central Place  Challenges 
table, page 
43 Amend point to read:  
 
 No net loss and maximising employment  industrial floorspace in new developments, 
where there is  existing industrial use , is required due to Brent being recognised as a 
provide capacity borough . 
MM7 
 
  
 
 5.1 Central Place  Policy BP1, 
page 45  Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Character, Heritage and Design  
a) Tall buildings are appropriate within the Wembley masterplan area  tall building zone , 
taking care to preserve protected views of the stadium and create a high quality new 
neighbourhood, integrating well with the suburban character of the surrounding area  
Homes  
d) Minimum of 13,700 additional homes in the period to 2041, which will be 
predominantly achieved t hrough  residential -led mixed -use development within the 
Wembley Growth Area will be supported  which in total will deliver  delivering a total of  
over 15,000 new homes, principally within the Wembley Park development  
e) Intensification and higher residential de nsities will be supported around Wembley Park 
Station where it can be demonstrated development would take advantage of the area’s 
good access to public transport  
Town Centres  
f) To ensure that the development around the national stadium is compatible and 
coordinated with regeneration proposals in the surrounding area, and that Wembley town 
centre, the main focus for new retail and town centre uses in the borough, is expanded  
g) Planning for the development by 20281of 6,700 2,100  sqm comparison goods retail 
floorspace by 2028, and 6,100  4,300  sqm of convenience goods  retail  floorspace, in 
addition to that already existing and consented, directed towards Wembley and Wembley 
Park town centres to support their future designation as a single metropolitan centre at 
the London Plan level  
                                                           
1 Total combined floorspace to be delivered ov er the Central and South West Places.   Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
h) Providing at least one additional food store of between 1,000 and 2,000sqm  
i) Diversifying the town centre offer to include more cultural and leisure fa cilities  
Employment and Skills  
j) Encouraging the intensification of existing Strategic Industrial Locations closer to the 
North Circular Road  
k) Retaining  Introducing  a greater  significant  proportion of employment  industrial  
floorspace in new mixed -use develop ments on Watkin Road and First Way to the east of 
the Stadium  than previously allocated in the Wembley Area Action Plan  
l) Increasing the supply of modern affordable workplace developments for the arts and 
creative industries consistent with Policy BE1  
5.1 Central Place  5.1.19, 
page 46  While much of this area has a strong suburban character dominated by two storey detached 
and semi -detached homes built during the early 20th century, the building of the national 
stadium provided a context for the provision of  a concentration of tall buildings. As a recognised 
transformational area, additional tall buildings are appropriate in the Wembley Growth Area.  
The taller elements within the area will be consistent with the parameters set out in the 
Wembley masterplan as sociated with the outline planning permission 15/5550  for the 
remainder of Wembley Park. Further guidance on the location and scale of tall buildings in other 
parts of the Growth Area  is set out on the Policies map and policy BD2 as supported by the 
Brent Tall Building Strategy.  
5.1 Central Place  5.1.25, 
page 47  Amend last sentence of para 5.1.25 to read:  
 
For the Wembley town centres, vitality and viability will be enhanced through 6,700  2,100  sqm 
net comparison goods retail floorspace, and 6,100  4,300 sqm convenience retail floorspace, 
diversifying the offer through specialist markets and meanwhile uses.  
MM8  
 
 5.1 Central Place   Policy 
BCGA1, 
pg.50  Amend last paragraph of policy to read  
  
All developments will achieve the highest design standards. Energy efficient design and 
renewable energy are encouraged. Development will provide at least 15,000 new homes, 
supported by infrastructure identified within the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. Anticipated 
infrastructure will include:  
 Junction improvements  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 New nursery and primary school at York House  
 Multi-use community centre  
 Open space provision:  
 1 x 2.8ha (7 acres) Local Park  
 4 x 0.2ha pocket parks  
 Series of equipped play areas within new developments, 
improvement to existing open space, creation of i nformal recreation 
and good quality public realm  
 Outdoor sports/ gym and MUGAs  
 New public open space (7 -acre park plus other smaller spaces) incorporating play 
areas   
 Improvements to the quality and accessibility of existing adjacent open spaces  
 Planting new trees  
 New health facilities  
 Extension of Combined Heat and Power network  
5.1 Central Place  5.1.40, 
page 50  Amend para 5.1.40 to read:   
 
Wembley Growth Area is the Wembley Opportunity Area, as designated in the London Plan. Its 
designation as an Opportunity Area means that its growth is of strategic importance to 
the whole of London. It  covers an extensive element of the Central place and part of the 
South West Place and certainly is the major contributor to the majority of the change 
that will oc cur in this place . The exception to this are the intensification corridors and 
land that retains its SIL designation. As these changes have essentially already been 
addressed in the justification for the Place, it is not proposed to unnecessarily repeat 
them again.  
 
MM9 
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA1, 
page 52 -53 Amend parts of policy to read  
 
Timeframe for Delivery:  
0-5   1-5 Years 20 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
5-10  6-10 Years 88 78 
10+ 11+ Years 377  408  
 
Description of Existing Site:  
Site currently comprises a Kwik Fit, Public House and ASDA supermarket with associated 
carpark and four -pump petrol station. These are for the most part single storey buildings with 
large areas of car parking. The site is located approximately 200m northeast of Wembley Park 
Station and is bordered b y the A4088 Forty Lane to the north, commercial properties to the 
south west and a retail parade and by residential development to the south and east. It is 
immediately adjacent to the Barn Hill Conservation Area and the Grade II Listed 
Lycee International  De Londres (former Brent Town Hall).  
 
PTAL Rating  
4-5 (current),  5-6a (2031 estimate)   
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site forms part of Wembley Park Town Centre , the Wembley Opportunity Area  
and sits within the wider Wembley Growth Area, making it suitabl e for residential 
development.  
 The site is not within a Conservation Area or Archaeological Priority Area, however it is 
immediately adjacent to the Barn Hill Conservation Area and the Grade II Listed Lycee 
International De Londres (former Brent Town Hall ).  
 There are  two vehicular access points to the ASDA site from the A4088 and  Opportunities 
exist  to create further access points via Wellspring Crescent.  
 The site is well served by public transport with tube and bus links located approximately 
200m south west of the site at Wembley Park Station, potentially  allowing the site to be 
partly or wholly car free development.  
 Given  the presence of filling station on ASDA site and current use on Kwik Fit site, there 
is a risk of contamination. Where development does come forward  As such,  a 
Preliminary Risk Assessment will be required and if necessary, remediation.  
 Given the identified need within the Brent’s status as a provide capacity borough, the 
Council will seek no net loss of employment  industrial  floorspa ce and encourage to 
maximise its provision.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 There are a number of mature trees across the sites w hich should be retained where 
possible.  
 Small part of the site to the south falls under Flood zone 3a and is susceptible to surface 
water flooding. As the site is over one hectare a site specific Flood Risk Assessment will 
be required.  
 Developers should p rovide  Development and its associated works should 
incorporate noise mitigation measures accompanied by a  noise management plan 
to minimise where possible noise levels at source. Any works on site are to comply with 
the Control  of Noise regulations . Any ne w development should have good sound 
insulation due to HGV’s on site  
 A replacement of public house, pub or community facility D1 use class  will be required.  
 Space for potential junction improvements at Forty Lane/Bridge Road may be required.  
 
Design Princ iples 
 To provide a vertically  Mixed -use development incorporating ground floor 
retail/leisure/commercial uses that maximises the potential of the site.  
 An active frontage along Bridge Road, Forty Lane, Wellspring Crescent and Chalkhill 
Road.  
 Ideally the ASDA store entrance will be closer to Forty Lane and any servicing 
arrangements not  Creating a break in the  connection with the rest of the town centre . 
The potential for  through  smaller scale ground floor retail/commercial to create a 
positive frontage that adds to the retail offer and vitality and viability of the town centre 
should be considered  if the supermarket cannot provide the active frontage.  
 To remove the obvious levels differences along the southern and south eastern 
boundaries for at least on e building width by providing at street level building frontage.  
 Adjacent development of nine and seven storeys indicate the potential for taller buildings 
than the traditional suburban context that will need to take account of the setting of the 
opposite Grade 2 Listed former Town Hall, Barn Hill conservation area   and not 
adversely impact on protected views of the stadium.  
 The relationship with space required for potential junction improvements need to be 
considered with a new development.  
 Retain or prov ide for sufficient space along the frontages to accommodate large broad 
leaf trees such as the London Planes that currently exist.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indicated the local waste water network capacity in this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure where required essentia l infrastructure is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 Space for potential junction improvements at Forty Lane/Bridge Road may be 
required . 
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the dev elopment process and the 
development.  
MM10  
 
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA2, 
page 54 -55 Amend parts of policy to read  
 
Timeframe for Delivery:  
0-5   1-5 Years  
5-10  6-10 Years 644 966  
10+ 11+ Years 322  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site is currently home to large retail units, a branch of McDonalds and the former Fountain 
Studios building, and is subject to planning application for a redevelopment known as Fulton 
Quarter. The site is just south of Wembley Park Station and is bordered by Olympic Way to  the 
East, Wembley Park Drive to the west and Fulton Road to the south. The Wembley campus of 
the College of North West London sits immediately north of the site.  
The site is not within a Conservation Area or Archaeological Priority Area and contains no 
heritage assets.  
 
PTAL Rating  
5-6a (current and 2031 estimate)  forecast  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site forms part of Wembley Park Town Centre,  the Wembley Opportunity Area  
and sits within the wider Wembley Growth Area, making it suitable for all main to wn 
centre uses, plus residential/student accommodation.  
 Meanwhile uses will be encouraged on site on those parts that remain vacant until 
construction begins.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The existing retail, although out of town in format contributes towards capacity within a 
town centre. As such, given the limited opportunities to find new large -scale sites to 
accommodate identified retail needs, any development should seek to maximise re -
provision of existing floorspace. The opportunity to accommodate convenience retail in 
particu lar needs to be considered.  
 The Fountain Studios is a cultural facility, which in the context of Wembley’s identification 
in the London Plan as a Cultural Area of strategic importance, Brent’s London Borough of 
Culture 2020 status and the desire to suppor t the evening economy would ideally be 
replaced with another cultural facility.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 The principle of t all buildings is acceptable on this site, subject to their height not 
adversely affecting protected views of the stadium.  
 The frontage along Wembley Park Drive will require a reduction in scale to heights shown 
elsewhere by new development along Empire Wa y.  
 The site is in flood zones  2 and 3a and susceptible to surface water flooding. All 
proposed development will require a detailed Flood Risk Assessment (FRA). 
Development must be consistent with the recommendations of the Brent 
Strategic Flood Risk Asses sment Level 2.  
 The site proposal  should take into account the College of North West London site 
allocation  to the north which is also an allocation. Ideally The two sites  It should be 
planned as such one, to  that it  increases the potentially efficiency of land use and 
optimum place making. At the very least development should not compromise the ability 
of that site to be developed in an efficient manner.  
 
Risks 
No significant long -term risks identified, however  leaseholders who operate on the site might 
be reluctant to end their occupation early. The site is owned by Quintain who are keen to 
develop to support the wider Wembley Park development.  
 
Design Principles  
 Building height and massing should build upon the established rhythm in this part of the 
Wembl ey Park development  regeneration scheme . It should correspond to the 
neighbouring buildings and step down in scale towards the west of the site.  
 Density should reflect the site’s high PTAL.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Active frontages should be provided at ground floor level, particularly along Wembley 
Park Drive, Olympic Way and Fulton Road.  
 The site should retain an element of permeability to support pedestrian movement from 
Olympic Way to Wembley Park Drive.  
 Due to the site’s location in Flood Zone 3a, the ‘sequential appro ach’ at site level should 
be applied to steer more vulnerable development such as residential, student 
accommodation, hotels, and certain community uses towards areas of lowest risk within 
the site; north west area and southern edge. Density should be vari ed to reduce the 
number of vulnerable units in high risk areas.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Significant social infrastructure is being provided nearby as part of the wider Wembley 
development area Wembley masterplan, therefore no specific infrastructure apart from 
that usually required on large residential sites at this stage.  
 Associated infrastructure including water attenuation tanks, and the diversion of any 
utilities and services to accommodate the development.  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure s hould be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local waste water capacity in this area is likely 
to be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development. 
Upgrades to the local waste water network a re likely to be required. Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing 
and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure where required essential 
infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified 
additi onal capacity requirements . 
 
Justification  
 The site ’s town centre location with excellent public transport access offers 
substantial development potential as an integral part of the wider Wembley development 
area.  
 The Wembley masterplan Given the viabilit y and vitality of uses within this town 
centre location , suggests that there are  a number of mixed use options where creative 
office and other accommodation can be combined with educational and commercial 
accommodation at lower levels with residential deve lopment in upper storeys.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Proposals should maximise opportunities for development that would Benefit from a town 
centre location with excellent public transport access and the close proximity to bus, rail 
and underground transport interchanges.  
 
MM11  
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA3, 
page 56 -57 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years - 
5-10  6-10 Years  80  
10+ 11+ Years 370  
 
PTAL Rating  
4-5 (current) 5 -6a (2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 Part of the site is within the Wembley Park town centre (Premier Inn). The site is 
located within the Wembley Opportunity Area . It all sits within  and the wider 
Wembley Growth Area.  
 The Premier Inn site has the potential to accommodate a larger hotel or a hotel and 
range of other main t own centre uses or residential. The remainder of the site along 
Brook Avenue can accommodate much higher density residential.  
 The site is not within a Conservation Area or Archaeological Priority Area.  
 The site is accessed via Brook Avenue by both vehicle s and pedestrians and is  well 
served by public transport,  with good tube and bus links close to the site on Bridge Road.  
as such car free development is likely to be acceptable in this location.  
  The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Some of the existing dwellings in Brook Avenue are within functional floodplain zone 3a 
and 3b (surface water and fluvial and tidal) and are at risk of flood ing. The 
redevelopment of these dwellings provides the opportunity to reduce the real risk of 
flooding to property by bringing development closer to Brook Avenue away from the 
watercourse. As the site is over one hectare all development will be required to  
undertake a detailed Flood Risk Assessment (FRA). Development must be consistent 
with the recommendations of the Brent Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 
2.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 South of the site is the SINC Grade II Wealdstone brook. The site is recognised as a 
waterside  development,  developments adjacent  and will be required to contribute 
towards restoration and naturalisation of the Brook, improve access to the waterway, 
provide appropriate landscaped setback, enhance water quality and biodiversity. 
Development should s eek to incorporate the potential for fish easement weir behind Elliot 
Close as part of the potential naturalisation/channel enhancement works.  
 There are a number of mature trees spread across the site. Where possible these should 
be maintained and integrat ed into newly provided open space.  
 The site is adjacent to a wildlife corridor, where the London Plan Policy 7.19G6 is 
applicable. The developers need to take into consideration a positive contribution to the 
biodiversity, improve access to nature and its  recreational function that are important 
contributing factors to health and well -being of the community.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Design Principles  
 The Premier Inn site provides the opportunity to provide a more defined edge to 
Wembley Park Drive/Brook Avenue and introduce an active frontage containing main 
town centre uses.  
 The site is adjacent to a mixture of residential and commercial buildings up to ten 
storeys. Within this conte xt, development that is taller than the existing two storey 
suburban dwellings will be acceptable to the eastern side of the site, stepping down 
towards the residential buildings to the west of the site which is identified as an 
intensification corridor al ong Forty Avenue.  
 A minimum of 8m setback from Wealdstone Brook will be sought. Development will be 
required to positively contribute to the biodiversity, improve access to the waterway 
and provide an appropriate landscaped setback which may include public  open space.  
 The building line should be closer towards Brook Avenue.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Brook Avenue/Bridge Road junction improvements are scheduled to be delivered in 2021, 
at this stage it is not anticipated any further improvements will be sought in relation to 
this allocation.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area is 
unlikely to be able to support the de mand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing 
and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure required essential in frastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The site is located in an area with  Excellent public transport accessibility levels and  
 Potential to  could  improve the public realm as  a gateway to the new Wembley Park 
development.  
 Given the high levels of development around this site, it would benefit from good access 
to local shops and services.  
 Redevelopment of this site can contribute towards an improved setting for the 
Wealdstone  Brook, including the delivery of open space and river restoration work to 
improve ecological diversity and climate change adaptation.  
MM12  
 
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA4, 
page 58 -59 Replace Site Plan  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Amend parts of policy to 
read:   
 
Existing Use  
Retail Warehouse and car 
park of Euro Car Parts and 
adjacent vehicle/skip site for 
Generay  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use, residential -led 
development to maximising 
re-provision of industrial 
floorspace  incorporate 
maximum of business use 
floorspace, hotel and 
potentially student 
accommodation  
Indicative Capacity  
Up to 700 dwellings 
(residential and student 
accommodation).  Employment  space and hotel space to be confirmed. 450 dwellings and 
industrial space to be confirmed  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years  200 450  
5-10  6-10 Years   500  
10+ 11+ Years  - 
 
Area 
1.3ha 1.14 ha  
 
Description of Existing Site  
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
The site is currently in commercial and  industrial use with approximately half the site occupied 
by large sheds and the remainder comprising associated car parking and storage. Wealdstone 
Brook forms the northern border of the site, with new housing development coming forward to 
the south and west. Directly east of the site it becomes industrial in nature characterised by 
small scale low -rise sheds along Four th Way.  
 
PTAL Rating  
3 (current)  3-4 (2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is located within the Wembley Opportunity Area and Wembley Growth 
Area . 
 The site was allocated within the Wembley Area Action Plan for mixed -use development 
with capacity for 360 dwellings.  
 The approval of the Wembley Park masterplan and  subsequent increases in height and 
therefore density within that context means that a larger amount of development is now 
considered appropriate on the site . The site is appropriat e for tall buildings, subject to 
them achieving an appropriate relationship sensitive to its surroundings and not 
adversely affecting protected views of the stadium.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area . As such, development at 
this si te should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area . 
development at this site should achieve to reduce pollutant emissions and minimise 
exposure.  
 Given the identified need within the  Brent’s status as a provide capacity  borough, the 
council will seek the maximum viable re -provision of  no net loss of  employment  
industrial floorspace and if a plot ratio of 0.65 is greater, encourage the maximisation of 
its provision suitable for and  B1 (c), B8 and B2 use as a part of any redevelopment of 
this site. 
 Given current and historic industrial use there is a risk of contamination and a 
Preliminary Risk Assessment will be required and, if necessary, remediation.  
 North of the site is the SINC Grade II Wealdstone brook. The site is recognised as a 
watersi de development , as such , developers will be required to  contribute towards 
restoration and naturalisation of the Brook,  improve access to the waterway, provide 
appropriate landscaped setback, enhance water quality and biodiversity.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Small sections of the site is susceptible to surface water flooding. The site is also 
adjacent to flood zone 3a (fluvial and tidal) so an appropriate buffer zone along the brook 
will remove the developable area of the site of any major risks.  
 A critical trunk sewer runs throug h this site which would need to be considered.  
 Waste water facilities enhancement.  Thames Water has indicated the scale of 
development is likely to require upgrades to the wastewater network. Thames Water will 
need to be engaged at the earliest opportunit y to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the development 
creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Risks 
None Existing employment use of the site means that the policy contex t has changed from 
when the site was allocated in the Wembley Area Action Plan. As such re -provision of 
employment  space could impact on previously assumed capacity for other uses and 
development economics.  
 
Design Principles  
 The creation of an appropriat e buffer between the existing industrial and new non -
industrial uses will be required.  
 Given the permitted  neighbouring heights permitted as part of the Quintain masterplan , 
tall buildings will be appropriate, stepping down towards the eastern edge of the  site and 
not adversely affecting protected views of the stadium.  
 Active frontage along Fifth Way and Fulton Road.  
 Biodiversity improvements and flood risk adaptation measures will be sought when 
development proposals come forward.  
 A buffer strip of at lea st 10m wide should be retained for a publicly accessible brook side 
park to allow for a cycle way/footpath, associated landscaping, tree planting and street 
furniture as agreed in consultation with the Environment Agency and Brent Council.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Developers would be required to contribute towards restoration and 
naturalisation of the SINC Grade II Wealdstone brook . 
 Further master planning work will provide additional requirements .  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of  the development process and the 
development.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area is likely 
to be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  Upgrades 
to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the 
development creating identified additional capacity requi rements. Public sewers 
cross or are close to the site. The risk of damage during construction must be 
minimised. It must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access for 
maintenance or the services in any other way.  
 
MM13  
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA5 , 
page 60 -61 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed use main town centre uses, education/campus or residential incorporating flexible retail 
uses, leisure and community uses  (A1, A2, A3, A4, D1, D2) at ground floor level  
 
Indicative Capacity  
253 residential units plus 1,051sqm of flexible retail uses/ if the site comes forward for 
residential as set out in the planning permission – currently it is anticipated that it will now be 
where the  or College Of North West London campus is the assumed occupier currently  so 
no residential dwellings have been assumed for  anticipated in  the housing delivery trajectory 
on this site.  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years  
5-10  6-10 Years   
10+ 11+ Years  
Address  
Olympic Office Centre, 8 Fulton Road, Wemble y, HA9 0NU  
 
PTAL Rating  
5 (current), 5 -6a (2031  estimate ) forecast  
 
Planning Considerations  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site falls within Wembley town centre boundary , the Wembley Opportunity Area 
and forms part of the wider Wembley Growth Area.  
 The site is suitable for a tall b uilding subject to this not adversely impacting on protected 
key views of the National Stadium. and does not fall within a Conservation Area or 
Archaeological Priority Area.  
 A small part of the site falls under Floodzone 3a and is susceptible to surface w ater 
flooding.  
 Although it has planning permission for principally a residential development,  . Its town 
centre location makes it suitable for office -led mixed -use development  Its town 
centre location makes it appropriate for a range of town centre uses as well as for any 
potential CNWL/further/higher education campus.   
 Excellent  Public Transport Accessibility Levels are very high for this site, and so parking 
spaces should be minimal  so car free development should be prioritised . 
 The site is located wit hin an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Public realm improvements associated with removal of vehicle crossings/new access 
points.  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 A critical trunk sewer runs through this site which would need to be considered.   
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area ma y be 
unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  Upgrades to 
the wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be 
engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing 
plan to ensur e essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the development 
creating identified additional capacity requirements. Risk of damage to the trunk 
sewer during construction must be minimised. It must be ensured that 
development doesn't inhibit access for m aintenance or the services in any other 
way.  
MM14  
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA6, 
page 62 -63 Replace Site Plan  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use, residential -led 
development  incorporating 
maximum re -provision of 
industrial space  to the west 
of the site, adjacent to other 
schemes coming forward as 
part of the Wembley Park 
masterplan transitioning to a 
more commercial -led use 
towards the east of the site 
bordering Wembley Business 
Centre industrial estate . 
 
Indicative Capacity  
Assumed 1000 dwellings  on basis of density of existing permissions prior to more detailed 
assessment , 717 plus employment  industrial  floorspace at ground floor  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years  500 229  
5-10  6-10 Years  350  
10+ 11+ Years 150 138  
 
Planning History  
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
17/2782 – approved application for the demolition of Parkwood House to provide 113sqm 
affordable workspace plus 283 bedroom student accommodation within a part 13 and part 17 
storey building. Under construction.  
Part of the site: 18/3381 approved application and under construction - Demolition of existing 
buildings and redevelopment of the site to provide 219 residential units and 584.6sqm of 
affordable workspace (Use Class B1(a)) on ground floor, in a new building ranging between 2 
and 23  storeys together with associated infrastructure works including private and communal 
space, car parking, cycle storage and public realm improvements.  
 
PTAL Rating  
4 (current and 2031 estimate) 2031 forecast –PTAL  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is loc ated within the Wembley Opportunity Area and  The site falls under  
Wembley Growth Area.  
 The approval of the Wembley Park masterplan and subsequent increases in height and 
therefore density within that context means that a larger amount of development is now  
considered acceptable on the site than was identified in the Wembley Area Action Plan. 
The site is appropriate for tall buildings, subject to them being lower than the adjacent 
approved Wembley masterplan  parameters  of sites to the south , and not adversely 
affecting protected views of the stadium or the residential amenity of the occupiers of 
North End Road.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within th e Growth Area.  
 Given current and historic industrial use there is a risk of contamination and a 
Preliminary Risk Assessment will be required and, if necessary, remediation.  
 The site falls within Flood Zones 3a (Surface, Fluvial and tidal). A Flood Risk Ass essment 
will be required as part of any development coming forward . Development must be 
consistent with the recommendations of the Brent Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment Level 2 . 
 Wealdstone Brook runs along the northern boundary of the site and is designate d as a 
Grade II Site of Interest for Nature Conservation (SINC) of Borough Importance.  
 Although the loss of existing employment industrial land was considered appropriate in 
the WAAP, Brent’s London Plan ‘provide capacity’ status for employment.  Given the  
identified industrial land need within the borough,  means that  employment the 
maximum viable replacement industrial  floorspace at least on the ground floor of Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
0.65 plot ratio or existing floorspace whichever is the greater  will now be sought in 
developmen ts as part of the redevelopment of the site . 
 Development in proximity to the north -eastern part of the site  (adjacent to Wembley 
Business Park)  must adopt the ‘agent of change principle’, potentially through 
incorporation of more commercial uses to ensure the potential activities within the 
Wembley Business Centre is not compromised.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Design Principles  
 Tall buildings will be acceptable taking into account need to mediate between heights of 
the adjacent Wembley masterplan  development sites plus Parkwood House, Apex House 
and Amex House and Empire Court.  
 Proposed development must ensure it does not adversely affect the ability of other plots 
within the allocation to maximise their own development potential. Particular attention 
must be paid to the relationship between developments on the north and south sides of 
Watkin Road.  
 Active frontages along Fulton and Watkin Road at ground floor level will be sought . 
 Where possible existing trees should be maintained and new trees should be planted 
within the new development.  
 Flood mitigation should not compromise a high quality deliverance of public realm and 
interface between street and ground floor use.  
 Development shoul d bring forward an improved setting for Wealdstone Brook including 
the delivery of open space, potential for increased access and river restoration work to 
improve ecological diversity and climate change adaptation.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Green and s ustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 A vehicular link on the eastern end of the site between Fulton Road and Watkin Road 
might be required to improve the efficiency of access for service vehicles.  
 Thame s Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area is 
unlikely to be able to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Water will need to be engaged at  the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The site is located in an ar ea with  Good public transport accessibility levels  and 
 Potential to  could improve the public realm as a transition from the new Wembley Park 
development to the industrial land located east of Wealdstone Brook.  
 Given the high levels of development around th is site, it would benefit from good access 
to local shops and services.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MM15  
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA7, 
page 64 -65 Replace Site Plan  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
 
Amend parts of policy to 
read:   
 
Policy name  
BCSA7: WEMBLEY PARK 
STATION ( NORTH &  
SOUTH)  
 
Existing Use 
Car parking and office 
facilities for Wembley Park 
Station and disused 
railway sidings  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use residential -led 
development to include 
replacement of the 
existing office space  TfL 
ancillary 
accommodation  
 
Indicative Capacity  
456 400 dwellings (300 southern site, 100 northern)  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 150 
5-10  6-10 Years  250 456  
10+ 11+ Years  - 
 
Description of Existing Site  
The two sites lies to the north and south of the rail line running through Wembley Park Station. 
The northern site comprises rail sidings associated with Wembley Park Station. The main road 
access to the site comes from Forty Avenue. To the north there is a nursing home and opposite 
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
the site on the other side of Forty Avenue is the Sattavis P atidar Centre.  The southern  site runs 
along the south side of the train tracks at Wembley Park Station and currently comprises TfL 
offices and car parking. Brook Avenue runs along the southern boundary of this site and 
provides two vehicular access points to the existing car park. The site is bounded by residential 
development to the south and west. To the south of Brook Avenue there is a mixture of 
residential blocks up to 10 storeys, two storey detached and semi -detached houses and a 
Premier Inn, while to  the west there is a development of four residential blocks ranging from 5 
to 8 storeys.  
 
Planning History  
 
No relevant planning history .20/0967 - Resolution to grant planning permission – 
Demolition of existing buildings and structure and redevelopment of  the site to 
provide 454 residential units, 1,101sqm of replacement train crew accommodation 
and 115sqm of commercial floorspace across five buildings ranging from 13 -21 
storeys in height.  
 
 
PTAL Rating  
5-6a (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerat ions 
 The site is adjacent to the boundary of Wembley Park Town Centre . The site is located 
within the Wembley Opportunity Area  and sits within the wider Wembley Growth 
Area, making it suitable for residential or mixed -use development.  
  The site contains no  designated heritage assets however  Development must ensure that 
it does not impact on the protected view of Wembley Stadium from Barn Hill Open Space.  
 Access to the northern parcel of land is constrained and so development will likely be of a 
lower densit y than that on the southern parcel.  
 There is a row of mature trees along the site boundary on Brook Avenue which ideally 
should be retained  are of a limited quality. Development proposals should look to 
retain the existing trees but where this is not possi ble, compensatory tree 
planting should be provided that delivers a betterment on the existing, both in 
terms of tree quality and quantum.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site falls within the Tall Building Zone as such it is suitable for tall 
buildings .  
 The site to the south  is adj acent to a wildlife corridor, where the London Plan Policy 7.19 
is applicable.  The developers need to take into consideration a positive contribution to 
the existing ecology, biodiversity, improve access to nature and its recreational function 
that are imp ortant contributing factors to health and well -being of the community.  
 Future development will mitigate potential noise and vibration from the nearby train 
tracks.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a hou sing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 Sufficient replacement on -site parking should be provided on site to meet any of the 
operati onal needs required by the station and not cause unacceptable impacts on the 
surrounding residential areas through displacement of user parking.  
Risks 
Site is considered available and developable;  no significant risks identified.  
 
Design Principles  
 The no rthern part has better ecology now than what existed when it was in full time use, 
thus consistent with its identification as a wildlife corridor is required to address existing 
ecology through good design. The northern parcel of land will be developed at a lower 
density than that currently opposite to the south of the railway on Matthews Close. 
Building height should take reference from the surrounding three and four storey 
residential and commercial uses. Buildings may step up to four or five storeys howe ver 
the northern site is not suitable for tall buildings of a significant scale.  
 The southern site is adjacent to a mixture of residential and commercial buildings. Up to 
ten storeys will be considered acceptable to the western side of the site stepping up  
slightly directly adjacent to the station (all subject to impact on protected views of the 
stadium).  
 A contemporary design will be supported, and  Links should be established between this 
site and others coming forward as part of the wider Wembley Park  development  
regeneration scheme  to ensure this development is  successful ly integrated  integration 
with the surrounding schemes coming forward over the Local Plan period.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Active frontages will be provided  along Brook Avenue with substantial soft landscaping t o 
create defensible space for residents.  
 Sufficient set back from the railway lines will be required to assist in mitigating against 
potential adverse impacts of train movements/engineering works.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Green/blue and sustainable inf rastructure should be part of the development process and 
the development.  
 The development should not compromise the ability to add potential platforms 
at Wembley Park station on the Chiltern Line Aylesbury Branch.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local wate r network capacity in this area is likely 
to be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  Upgrades 
to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a  housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the 
development creating identified additional capacity requirements . 
 
Justification  
 Consistent with  London Plan Policy H1 the site is a  states that boroughs should 
optimise the potential for housing delivery on all  suitable and available brownfield site s, 
in particular through the redevelopment of sites  around transport hub and mixed -use 
redevelopment of  car park s. 
 Other recent developments along Brook Avenue suggest that the site can be intensified 
to provide a mixed -use scheme which co -locates TfL’s commercial space with a 
significant number of new dwellings.  
 The site has excellent access to public transport and local infrastructure including sh ops 
and green spaces.  
 The council needs to ensure continued provision of employment space so will seek its 
retention on this site.  
 
MM16  
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA8, 
page 66 -67 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Indicative Capacity  
2180 2260  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Timeframe for Delivery  
NE01/02, NE03, NE04/05/06  
0-5   1-5 Years 468 
5-10  6-10 Years  17122260  
10+ 11+ Years  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site forms the North Eastern Lands section of the Wembley masterplan and  is currently 
occupied by a small number of industrial warehouse units to the east and temporary office 
facilities and playing pitches. The majority of the site is currently covered by car parking 
associated with Wembley Stadium. The site boundaries are formed by Engineers Way, Fulton 
Road and Ruthe rford Way, with plots of land adjacent to this site also under construction or 
planned to come forward for development either as part of the Wembley masterplan or as 
standalone schemes . 
 
Planning History  
Forms plots NE01 -06 as well as the northern section of the new park planned for the 
area part of application 15/5550, a hybrid planning application for the redevelopment of land 
around Wembley Stadium.  
 
PTAL Rating  
3-5 (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is made up of plots NE01 -06 of the approved Wembley masterplan as well as the 
northern section of the new park planned for the area.  
 The site falls just outside Wembley Town Centre boundary however it does sits within the 
Wembley Opportunity Area and  wider  Wembley Growth Area, makin g it suitable for 
residential led mixed -use development.  
 The site is not within a Conservation Area or Archaeological Priority Area and contains no 
heritage assets.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Given Brent’s status as a provide capacity borough,  the identified need within the 
borough,  should the parameters of the existing outline need to be reviewed or a full Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
application received the council will seek to ensure no net loss of the remaining 
employment maximum industrial  floorspace and encourage maximisation of additional 
reprovision.  
 The site falls within the Tall Building Zone was identified  as such it is suitable for tall 
building s in the Wembley Area Action Plan  and will be home to the tallest building in the 
proposed development, signalling the northern entrance into the park.  
 Small part of the site to the south falls under Floodzone 3a and is susceptible to surface 
water floodin g. As the site is over one hectare a site specific flood risk assessment will be 
required.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opp ortunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Design Principles  
 Scheme should be designed in line with principles  set out in planning application 
15/5550.  
 Building height and massing should respond to surrounding development 
coming forward as part of the Wembley Park redevelopment. The massing set 
out as such to protect the views of the stadium. The ground floor shou ld provide 
an active frontage on Rutherford Way/Fulton Road and Engineers Way.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Significant infrastructure is being provided throughout the masterplan area.  
 This site should provide the northern section of the planned new 7 -acre park 
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area is 
unlikely to be able to support the demand anticipated from this developme nt.  
Upgrades to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to t he development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM17  
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA9, 
page 68 -69 Replace Site Plan  
 
 
Amend parts of policy to 
read:   
 
Allocated Use  
Residential -led mixed -use 
development, including 
student accommodation/ 
education and business  
industrial .  
 
Indicative Capacity  
1312  1200 dwellings  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 419 
5-10  6-10 Years 500 
10+ 11+ Years 393  
 
Area 
4.42ha  4.58ha  
 
Description of Existing Site  
 The site currently  Comprises low -rise industrial units although there is an emerging 
taller, residential and commercial character with the UCFB campus building approved for 
the old Canon industrial units and the under -construction Kelaty House adjacent to the 
north .  
 The site is  Bounded by Fir st Way to the west and Second Way to the east.  
 The site was previously allocated for development in the Wembley Area Action Plan, and 
has come forward in part for mixed -use residential -led schemes.  
 
PTAL Rating  
1a-3 (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Planning C onsiderations  
 The site falls outside Wembley Town Centre boundary however it does Sits within the 
Wembley Opportunity Area and the wider  Wembley Growth Area, making it suitable 
for residential led mixed -use development.  
 The site is not within a Conservatio n Area or Archaeological Priority Area and contains no 
heritage assets.  
 The site was identified as sensitive to tall buildings in the Wembley Area Action Plan and 
The site falls within the Tall Building Zone as such it is suitable for tall buildings 
altho ugh it should come forward at lower heights than those buildings further west 
towards the stadium.  
 New development should demonstrate that if providing non -residential use then the 
delivery of the equivalent of 1200 dwellings will be accommodated within the site.  
 The site has a low PTAL although it stands to benefit from better connections to the high 
levels of surrounding development and is within close walking distance to two rail 
stations.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As  such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Some land within the site will be required for highway improvement measures to South 
Way/First Way. This is part of the Wembley transport improvements around Wembley 
Industrial Estate and the two -way working.  
 Prior to its Wembley Area Action Plan allocation, the site was formerly Strategic Industrial 
Land It still  Contains numerous occupied business  industrial  premises. Notwithstanding 
the acceptability of res idential on site,  Given the identified need within the borough,  
Brent’s status as a ‘provide capacity’ borough in the London Plan means that  the 
maximum re -provision of business  industrial  uses at ground floor level  should be 
undertaken as part of developm ent. 
 Includes a West London Waste Plan protected site. This should be 
accommodated in the redevelopment, or suitable capacity for the waste 
function provided elsewhere.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to t he 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requ irements.  
 
 
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Design Principles  
 Development on this site  should provide master planning showing   a transition of heights 
and mediate between the taller schemes coming forward immediately east of the stadium 
and the Strategic Industrial Land that makes up Wembley Stadium Industrial Estate.  
 As its adjacent to what will remain as industrial sites,  Development should adopt the 
‘agent of change principle’ and not undermine  industrial premises operation . 
produce a Noise Management Plan and take into considerati on noise mitigation in design.  
 Developments within this allocation must ensure they provide  Provision of high quality 
public realm and  strong east -west pedestrian and cycling connections through the site 
to link routes delivered adjacent to the stadium  to future development to the east 
between First Way and Second Way to the  . This should be consistent with the 
pedestrian routes provided the development coming forward through Wembley 
Masterplan 15/5550 development , north and south of the Dhamecha.  
 Developme nts must take care to ensure they do not compromise the ability of other sites 
within this allocation to make the most efficient use of land possible at a later date.  
 They will also need to provide a successful transitional area between them and the 
adjac ent industrial uses on Second Way . 
 Where business  industrial  premises are being provided on -site, the design should 
support the amenity of both residential and business  industrial  uses to ensure their long 
term compatibility.  
 Development should provide ac tive frontages along First Way and South Way and the 
planned pedestrian routes north and south of Dhamecha.  
 The proximity to the national stadium and coach/car parking means acceptable noise 
mitigation measures will be required to address event day activit y. 
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Small parcels of land at the north and south of the allocation along Fifth Way and  South 
Way may will be required for future road improvements.  
 High quality public realm link from west to east between First Way and the site’s eastern 
boundary to provide for future connections through to Second Way.  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area is  
unlikely to be able to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
infrastructure phasin g plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The site is located at the edge of the current approved masterplan for the land around  
wider  Wembl ey development adjacent to the  Stadium and provides a key opportunity 
to mediate between the tall residential blocks to the west and the low -rise industrial units 
which make up Wembley Stadium Industrial Estate.  
 The impermeable nature of this site current ly does not provide good east -west links to 
the stadium. There is an opportunity to strengthen these links by creating new streets 
and pedestrian paths between First Way and Second Way.  
 Whilst previously allocated for non -industrial uses, given Brent’s pr ovide capacity status, 
consideration needs to be given to potentially accommodate business premises in the 
redevelopment of sites that takes place.  
 
MM18  5.1 Central Place   BCSA10, 
page 70 -71 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Existing Use  
Commercial office space and associated  Car parking  
 
Allocated Use  
Nursery and  3FE primary school  
 
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years  
5-10  6-10 Years  
10+ 11+ Years  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The majority of the site is comprised of car parking formerly assoc iated with York House.  
The site is not within a Conservation Area or Archaeological Priority Area and contains no 
heritage assets.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Planning History  
Site forms part of application 15/5550 for the redevelopment of land around Wembley Stadium. 
This plot is s hown as YH1. 18/0204 granted permission for a 3 form primary school with 60 
place nursery.  
 
PTAL Rating  
5-6a (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site falls outside  sits inside  Wembley Town Centre boundary,  however it sits within 
the Wembley Growth Area and Wembley Regeneration.  Wembley Opportunity Area.  
 A primary school is required as part of the Wembley Park development. This site is the 
preferred location and has full planning permission. It is anticipated that the school will be 
required once sufficient occupation of Wembley Park creates the need for additional 
school place capacity. If the site is not required for the school, then alternative suitable 
provision will be required elsewhere within the Wembley Growth Area  before this si te is 
considered appropriate for alternative uses .  Should this be the case, the site’s 
location within the town centre boundary would make it suitable for a range of 
town centre uses, community uses and residential development.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water wil l need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 The Wembley transport improvements for York House Gyratory will be delivered in 
conjunction with the developer of the school.  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 Thames Water has indicated th e local water network capacity in this area is 
unlikely to be able to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunit y to agree a housing and Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 
MM19  
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA11, 
page 72 -73 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years - 
5-10  6-10 Years 155  
10+ 11+ Years - 
 
PTAL Rating  
6a (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site falls outside  inside Wembley  Park Town Centre boundary , however it sits within 
the Wembley Growth Area and  Wembley Regeneration. Wembley Opportunity Area  
 Most of  the site falls almost entirely  within Flood Zones 2 and 3. A Flood Risk 
Assessment will be required as part of any development coming forward. Development 
must be consistent wi th the recommendations of the Brent Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment Level 2 .   
 Waterside development must ensure it is in accordance with Local Plan policy BGI1 Green 
and Blue Infrastructure in Brent.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Ar ea. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 The area site is identified as acceptable for tall buildings , although development has to 
take account of its location on the edge the Wembley Park master plan site and the 
suburban context around Wembley Park Drive and protected views of the stadium .  
 The loss of the site to non -D1 educational uses is on the basis that that the use 
is being re -provided elsewhere within the borough.  
 
 
 
Design Principles  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 This is a gateway site in that it is one of the main sites viewed when coming out of the 
Wembley Park station.  
 Building height and massing should build upon the established rhythm in this part of the 
Wembley Park development regeneration scheme , correspondin g to the neighbouring 
buildings and stepping down towards the west of the site.  
 The design should be sensitive to the protected views of the stadium.  
 Density should reflect the site’s high PTAL.  
 Active frontages should be provided at ground floor level, particularly along Wembley 
Park Drive and Olympic Way.  
 There are a number of mature trees within the site adjacent to the Wealdstone Brook. 
Where possible these should be maintained and integrated into newly provided open 
space.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Significant social infrastructure is being delivered nearby as part of the Quintain 
masterplan.  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 The loss of the site to non -D1 educational uses is on the basis that that the use is being 
re-provided elsewhere within the borough.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area is 
unlikely to be able to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development cr eating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
MM20  
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA12, 
page 74 -75 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Existing Use  
Industrial/ D2 night club  /Concrete batching plant  
 
Allocated Use  
Residential -led mixed -use development including business industrial  premises.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years - 
5-10  6-10 Years - 
10+ 11+ Years 500  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site currently comprises a mixture low -rise industrial units (one in use as a night club) and 
a concrete batching plant. It is bound on the northern edge by South Way, to the south is the 
Chiltern line. To the west is the national stadium, to the north are industrial premises allocated 
for residential led mixed use development through Policy BCSA9. T o the east a multi -storey car 
and coach park is being  constructed for use in association with the national stadium/event 
days. The site was previously allocated for development in the Wembley Area Action Plan, and 
part has come forward for the car park und er construction.  
The site is not within a Conservation Area or Archaeological Priority Area and contains no 
heritage assets.  
 
 
PTAL Rating  
2 (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site falls outside Wembley Town Centre boundary however it  does sit within the 
wider Wembley Growth Area and the Wembley Opportunity Area , making it suitable 
for residential led mixed -use development.  
 The SINC Grade I Chiltern line passes south of the site. The site is also adjacent to a 
wildlife corridor, where the London Plan Policy G6 Biodiversity and access to nature  is 
applicable . As such , the developers need to take into consideration a positive 
contribution to the biodiversity, improve access to nature and its recreational function 
that are important contri buting factors to health and well -being of the community.  
 The site falls within the Tall Building Zone however development was identified as 
sensitive to tall buildings in the Wembley Area Action Plan and so should come forward at 
heights consistent with buildings being constructed further west along South Way on 
sites SW03/04/05 that step down towards the south and from the east to west of the 
site.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Tall buildings are acceptable on this site, subject to their height not adversely 
affecting the protected views of the stadium   
 The site has a low PTAL although stands to benefit from better connections to the high 
levels of surrounding development and is within close walking distance to two rail 
stations.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management A rea. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Prior to its Wembley Area Action Plan allocation,  The site was formerly Strategic 
Industrial Land. It still and  contains numerous occupied business  indus trial premises. 
Notwithstanding the acceptability of residential on site consistent with the previous WAAP 
allocation, Brent’s status as a ‘provide capacity’ borough in the London Plan means that 
no-net loss of employment  Given the identified industrial  floor space need in the 
borough, the maximum viable amount of industrial  floorspace will be required.  
and the re -provision of B1 (c), B8 and B2 use at ground floor/basement level should be 
undertaken as part of development consistent with a plot ratio of 0.6 5. 
 Given the intensification of development in the area it is likely the concrete batching 
plant will be an important component to supporting delivery of new homes. Residential 
development on the adjacent sites (if in advance of the batching site) should b e 
consistent with the ‘agent of change principle’ and not undermine the operation of that 
site. This principle should also apply to the operation of the proposed replacement 
business space provided on site, so that it creates business space that will remai n viable 
for the long term.  
 The proximity to the stadium, railway and adjacent coach/car parking will require 
appropriate attenuation measures to deal with noise, vibration and disturbance to create 
a suitable living environment.  
 A two -way road system at South Way/First Way is planned as highway improvements, 
new development should take this into consideration.  
 As industrial land the site may contain contamination that will need to be satisfactorily 
addressed to create a safe residential environment.  
 If the business space is provided in a separate building/s to the residential (i.e. not part 
of a vertically mixed use scheme), this will be required to be built to a standard ready for 
occupation prior to occupation of the residential development.  
 Thames Wate r has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Risks 
 Land is in multiple ownership which may prevent comprehensive redevelopment. 
Piecemeal development may prevent the most efficient land use.  
 Potential for occupier s to want to remain towards the end or after the end of the Plan 
period.  
 
Design Principles  
 The site falls within the Tall Building Zone however  the proximity to the stadium 
means that the height of the development should respect this setting and provide a  
similar  solution  to that of  development on site SW03/04/05 on  further west along  
South Way, stepping up from the south/railway side and down towards the stadium from 
the eastern part of the site.  
 The proximity also encourages that design should be sensiti ve to the protected views of 
the stadium.  
 Active frontages should be created along South Way. ground floor business space may be 
able to provide this role, particularly if buildings are vertically mixed use . 
 Developments must take care to ensure they do no t compromise the ability of other sites 
within this allocation to make the most efficient use of land possible at a later date.  
 Where business  industrial premises are being provide on -site, the design should support 
the amenity of both residential and business uses to ensure their long term compatibility.  
 Where possible existing trees should be maintained and new trees should be planted 
within the new development.  
 The proximity to the national stadium and adjacent  coach/car parking means acceptable 
noise mitigation measures will be required to address event day activity.  
 The proximity to the railway will require appropriate attenuation measures to 
deal with vibration to create a suitable living environment.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Small parcels of land at the  on north ern parts  and south  of the allocation along South 
Way may be required for future road improvements.  
 Green and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and the 
development.  
 Thames Water has indicated the loca l water network capacity in this area is 
unlikely to be able to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the local wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to a gree a housing and 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure required essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The site is located at the edge of the Wembley area develo pment  current approved 
masterplan  for the land  around Wembley Stadium and provides a key opportunity to 
create a better environment around the stadium meeting housing needs, but also re -
providing quality employment  industrial  space for which there is a gre at need.  
 The site has a number of environmental challenges particularly related to potential noise 
which will need to be overcome . 
 The visibility of the development from significant distances away from the south means 
that a quality development is required  that does not conflict with protected views.  
 
MM21  
 
 5.1 Central Place   BCSA13,  
page 77  Allocated Use  
Mixed Use with maximum viable  a minimum of 0.65 plot ratio   B1 business use, light 
industrial/ research & development floorspace with the remainder being of main town 
centre uses or residential  
 
5.1 Central Place   BCSA14, 
page 77  Comments  
Re-provision of D1 community use, plus additional residential uses. Active frontage at ground 
floor.  
 
5.1 Central Place   BCSA15, 
page 77  Address  
Site W10 Wembley Masterplan  
Land west of multi storey car park on South Way west of the National Stadium  
 
Allocated use  
Retail or entertainment and leisure  at ground, upper floors  B1 office  or D2 entertainment  and 
leisure   
 
5.1 Central Place   BCSA16, 
page 77  Address  
Site NW04 Wembley Masterplan  
Land north of Engineers Way, between Brent Civic Centre and Olympic Way  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Allocated Use  
A1-A5, D1 ground, D1, B1/C1/D2 uppers  
Retail/food & drink/ medical or health services/ crèche, nursery or day centre/ 
Hotels and hos tels/ Learning and non -residential institutions/local 
community/cultural and leisure uses  
 
Comments  
Outline consent for  A1-A5 and B1/C1/D1  uses and development parameters granted through 
18/0968. Development must be consistent with the recommendations of the Brent 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 2.  
 
5.1 Central Place   BCSA17, 
page 77  Southway Motors/Fourway Supplies/  
Midnight Motors, South Way, HA9 0HB  
0.33 Repair garages and storage Business and residential  
60  
Re-provision of business floorspace at 0.65 plot  
ratio required. Ground floor active frontage along  
South Way.  
5.1 Central Place   BCSA18, 
page 77  Address  
Site W12 Wembley Park Boulevard, Wembley  
Land between Ibis and Premier Inn, South Way  
 
Allocated use  
A1-A4/B1/D1 and D2 uses. 
Retail/food and drink/offices/ medical or health services/ crèche, nursery or day 
centre/ Learning and non -residential institutions/local community   
 
5.1 Central Place   BCSA19, 
page 77   
Size (ha)  
0.34 
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM22  5.1 Central Place   BCSA20, 
insert new 
page Add new policy  
 
Site Plan  
 
 
 
 
Existing Use  
Disused railway sidings  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use residential -led development  
 
Indicative Capacity  
100 
 
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Timeframe for Delivery  
1-5 Years - 
6-10 Years  - 
11+ Years 100  
 
Address  
Wembley Park Station, Wembley, HA9 9AA  
 
Area  
0.72 ha  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site lies to the north of the rail line running through Wembley Park Station. The 
site comprises disused rail sidings. The main road access to the site comes from Forty 
Avenue. To the north t here is a nursing home and opposite the site on the other side 
of Forty Avenue is the Sattavis Patidar Centre. Across the railway line to the south are 
4 residential blocks ranging from 5 to 8 storeys.  
 
Ownership  
Site owned by TfL  
 
Planning History  
No relevant planning history.  
 
PTAL Rating  
4 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is located within the Wembley Opportunity Area and the Wembley 
Growth Area, making it suitable for residential, with the potential for mixed -use 
develop ment along the Forty Lane frontage.  
 Vehicular access to the site from Forty Avenue could be constrained due to 
limited visibility and proximity of other junctions.  This together with the site’s Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
accessibility to public transport may mean a car free develo pment will be 
desirable.  
 Consideration of the wildlife corridor on site and development should contribute 
positively to the existing ecology, biodiversity, improve access to nature and its 
recreational function.  
 Future development will mitigate potential noise and vibration from the nearby 
train tracks.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, 
development at this site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth 
Area  
 
Risks  
no significant risks identified  
 
Design Pri nciples  
 Consistent with the site’s identification as a wildlife corridor, the development 
is required to address existing ecology through good design.  
 Buildings should mediate between the taller buildings on Matthews Close and 
the character of development along Forty Avenue and further to the north, 
however the site is not suitable for tall buildings of a significant scale.  
 Sufficient set back from the railway lines will be required to assist in mitigating 
against potential adverse impacts of train movement s/engineering works.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Green/blue and sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development 
process and the development.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area may be 
unable to support the  demand anticipated from this development.  Upgrades to 
the wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be 
engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing 
plan to ensure essential infrastructure  is delivered prior to the development 
creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
Justification  
London Plan Policy H1 states that boroughs should optimise the potential for housing 
delivery on all suitable and available brownfield sites, in part icular through the 
redevelopment of sites around transport hubs.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Other recent developments opposite the railway sidings along Brook Avenue suggest 
that the site can be intensified to provide a mixed -use scheme with a significant 
number of new dwellings.  
The site has good access to public transport and local infrastructure including shops 
and green spaces.  
 
MM23  5.2 East  5.2.8 
Challenges 
and 
Opportuniti
es, after 
page 81  Insert after para 5.2.8, in table form:  
 
Challenges:  
 Limited accessibility to public  transport, in particular rail or underground services.  Low 
population density and layout means that opportunities to improve levels of service will 
only be along principal movement corridors where services already exist.  
 The North Circular Road and parts  of the A5 Edgware Road are a significant physical 
divider of communities e.g. Neasden as well bringing environmental issues associated 
with noise, air pollution and poor townscape, particularly around junctions.  
 The area has only one town centre, Neasden,  and a limited number of neighbourhood 
centres to act as focal points to bring communities together/ create a sense of place.  
Neasden effectively performs as a neighbourhood centre and faces increasing competition 
from competing centres in and out of the borough.  
 The employment areas are relatively low quality and have had limited investment over 
the years and from a developer perspective are more attractive for housing than new 
business space.  
 There is a very high proportion of private rented homes and Ho uses in Multiple 
Occupation in the Neasden area.  
 The southern parts particularly around Neasden are within the top 20% of deprived areas 
in the country, whilst areas around the North Circular perform only slightly better.  
 Most sites are in active use, so t here are limited obvious significant development 
opportunities to meet housing, employment and infrastructure needs.  
Opportunities:  
The opening of the Thameslink Brent Cross West station in 2022 and proposed creation of a 
West London Orbital passenger rou te on the Dudding Hill freight line will significantly 
improve public transport accessibility in the vicinity of Staples Corner and Neasden station.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
This and other development also can support improvements to the movement network to 
encourage more active t ravel in this place.  
 A large scale employment area at Staples Corner which is under -intensively used.  
Potential for a significant new mixed use community, or an extension to Brent Cross 
Opportunity Area in London Borough of Barnet as a gateway entrance to  Brent.  The size 
of the area provides the critical mass to provide associated site specific infrastructure.  
 Consolidate and improve the offer at Neasden town centre including townscape/ 
connectivity improvements across and around the North Circular Road/ new street 
market  
 Extensive areas of open space, popular and good quality suburban housing with local 
infrastructure providing a high quality of life which is attractive to families.  
 To improve the setting and attractiveness of the Welsh Harp as a recreati onal and wildlife 
asset.  
 Using the potential developer interest in residential to invest in and intensify employment 
premises as well as providing much needed homes and affordable housing.  
 Existing main public transport movement corridors, e.g. A5 Edgware Road and Neasden 
Lane/ Blackbird Hill which connect to Growth Areas offer opportunities for intensification.  
MM24  5.2 East  BP2, Page 
84 Amend part c) and part d) of ‘Character, Heritage and Design’ of the policy to read:  
 
c) Along the intensification corridors of A5 Edgware Road and A4088 Blackbird Hill/Neasden 
Lane/ Dudden Hill Lane heights typically of up to 15 metres (5 storeys) are likely to be 
acceptable. Within Neasden town centre this will be 6  5 storeys will also be 
appropriate .  
d) In other areas  not subject to site allocations  where designated heritage assets will 
not be adversely affected heights of buildings should go no higher than two storeys 
above the prevailing predominant heights.   
 
Amend part e) of ‘Homes’ of the policy to read:  
e) Minimum of 5,400 additional homes in the period to 2041,  the potential residential 
development for Staples Corner Growth Area (with around 2,200 dwellings)  and Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Neasden Stations’ Growth Area (with around 2,000 dwellings)  will be determined by 
their respective maste rplans, taking account of the need to support additional 
employment  industrial  space on site.  Depending on the capacity of these sites there 
may be specific requirements around different housing types, such as specialist (older 
people/ supported/ student)  housing and build to rent  
 
Add new part ji) to ‘Town Centres’ of the policy to read:  
j) Additional residential on upper floors or making efficient use of plots through 
redevelopment will be supported in these centres to increase local population 
catchments.  
ji) Provide up to 500 sqm comparison goods retail floorspace, and 200 sqm 
convenience foods retail floorspace by 2028. This should be directed toward 
Neasden town centre.  
 
Amend part k) of ‘Community and Cultural Facilities’ of the policy to read:  
k) Securing  sufficient physical and social Infrastructure on and off site to support the  
Meeting social infrastructure requirements by securing provision for needs 
arising from new housing development, especially the provision of new 
education, health, cultural and community facilities, notably at  Staples Corner and 
Neasden Stations’ Growth Areas , in particular  and ensuring the improvement of the 
Welsh Harp and its setting.  
l) Securing the retention of the area’s religious buildings  
 
Amend ‘Employment and Skills’ part o f the policy to read:  
Supporting the local economy by:  
m) Retaining and encouraging intensification of employment  light industrial, general 
industrial and storage and distribution  uses at Kingsbury Locally Significant 
Industrial Site.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
n) Supporting transformati onal change of Staples Corner and Neasden Stations  to provide 
co-location/ intensification and a wide range of new business premises fit for modern day 
occupiers in association with a new mixed use community.  
o) Retaining/ seeking re -provision of a variety of  small scale employment in association 
with new development and generally throughout the East Place.  
p) Supporting the relocation of College of North West London to a purpose built facility 
elsewhere in the borough through redevelopment of the existing Neasde n site.  
MM25  
 
 
 
  
 
5.2 East   
5.2.16, 
page 86   
 
Amend para 5.2.16 to read:  
 
The proposed Growth Areas of Staples Corner and Neasden Stations will provide the 
opportunities for new mixed use communities with a significant amount of 
employment industrial and residential floorspace.  A masterplanning exercise will be undertaken 
involving key stakeholders, landowners and developers to help shape the masterplan from 
conception to completion. This will to identify the appropriate mix of uses and form of 
developme nt with a view to improving employment opportunities as well as homes.  Such large 
scale areas are also likely to require some on site social infrastructure which will need to be 
identified, taking account of needs of the proposed population and capacity/ ability to meet 
needs in existing or extended facilities.  
5.2 East  5.2.17, 
page 86  Amend para 5.2.17 to read:  
 
 In these Growth Areas, land designated as SIL or LSIS in the previous Local Plan  will need to 
address the requirement to , at a minimum replace , but ideally  intensify employment 
industrial  uses too.  A range of employment space will need to be provided, although 
only a very limited focus on office space will be appropriate.  
 
5.2 East  5.2.18, 
page 86  Amend para 5.2.18 to read   
 
In advance of adoption of masterplan supplementary planning documents which will seek 
comprehensive solutions for the areas, small scale release of sites will be resisted, unless Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
it can be shown that it will not prejudice the delivery of a comprehensive masterplan 
under mine the outcomes of any likely adopted masterplan . 
MM26  5.2 East  BEGA1A 
Insert on 
page 88 
after 
paragraph 
5.1.30  Policy BEGA1A Neasden Stations Growth Area  
The area around the existing Neasden underground station and a potential West 
London Orbital overground station will be transformed. In addition to around 
2000 homes, the area will through co -location of industrial and other 
commercial floorspace, provide a major boost to business and employment 
opportunities . This will deliver a new varied supply  of neighbourhood friendly 
modern industrial premises, studios and managed workspaces for local business 
needs as well as other commercial space to support a mixed use community.  
Space will be provided for and the development will integrate with a potenti al 
new West London Orbital Station accommodated adjacent to Neasden Lane.  
Tall buildings will be located close to the stations and along the south of the 
underground line whilst reducing in scale towards its residential edges.  
All developments will achieve  the highest design standards.  Energy efficient buildings 
using renewable energy and a district heating system will be delivered. 
Development will be supported by associated infrastructure which will be 
further drawn out by a masterplanning exercise includ ing:  
 Improvements to the public realm, cycling and walking routes along Neasden 
Lane between the two stations and the Church End and Neasden town 
centres;  
 Provision of new public open spaces and improvements to the quality and 
accessibility of those existi ng such as on Dudden Hill Lane;  
 A series of play areas within new developments and open space;  
 Improvements to Neasden station’s accessibility and capacity.  
5.2.31  The area around Neasden station has a high level of public transport accessibility.  This 
could inc rease further with the provision of an additional station.  This potential station 
has been identified as part of the West London Orbital scheme, which is a TfL supported 
infrastructure project.  If successful in attaining funding, this will be delivered d uring the 
lifetime of the Local Plan.  The existing industrial sites around the station have relatively 
few landowners/ occupiers and are not as intensively used as their accessible location 
warrants.  There is the opportunity to improve efficiency of use through retaining an Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
industrial use with the provision of a range of replacement industrial premises co -located 
with residential properties consistent with London Plan policies.  The proposed relocation 
of the College of North West London to Wembley, provi des the opportunity for 
regeneration of a scale of area to be identified and planned as a Growth Area.  
5.2.32  The area will be subject to a comprehensive masterplan approach which will be led by 
the Council.  This will involve input from landowners, site occupier s, local residents and 
other relevant parties, such as TfL, at the appropriate time.  It will provide further detail 
on how development can address the wide variety of potentially competing needs, 
including: needing to provide sufficient industrial floorsp ace consistent with London Plan 
policies and Brent’s local needs to provide additional floorspace across the borough that 
can sit alongside a substantial amount of dwellings; creating a positive residential 
environment on sites in close proximity to railwa y infrastructure and main roads; 
providing suitable levels of greenspace and social infrastructure to meet residents’ needs 
and reflecting the gateway status of the area around the station, whilst providing a 
positive relationship with the lower scale subu rban residential surroundings that will 
remain.  
 
 
MM27  5.2 East  BEGA2A, 
insert after 
page 88 
and new 
BEGA1A 
main 
modificatio
n before 
site 
allocations.  Policy BEGA2A Staples Corner Growth Area  
 
The Staples Corner Strategic Industrial Location will be transformed. In addition to 
around 2,200 homes, the area will through industrial intensification together 
with co -location of industrial provide a major boost to business and 
employment opportunities through increased floorspace . This will deliver new 
varied supply of modern industrial premises, studios and managed workspaces 
for London’s strategic needs and local business needs as well as other 
commercial space and social infrastructure to support a mixed use residential 
community.   
 
Working closely with LB Barnet and the Greater London Authority, the Council will 
seek to as best possible link it with and complement the Brent Cross 
Opportunity Area.  It will also maximise the potential of the area to benefit from Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
improved public transport connectivity to C entral London and beyond provided 
by the new Brent Cross West Thameslink station and the potential West London 
Orbital.  
 
The potential for tall buildings will be considered taking account of the need to 
respect views from Golders Hill through to Harrow on the Hill and not have a 
detrimental impact on the Brent Reservoir Site of Special Scientific Interest, 
reducing in scale towards its residential and open space edges.  
 
All developments will achieve the highest design standards.  Energy efficient buildings 
using renewable energy and a district heating system will be delivered. 
Development will be supported by associated infrastructure which will be 
further drawn out by a masterplanning exercise including:  
 Improvements to the public realm, cycling and walking routes within Staples 
Corner as well as along and across the North Circular Road and the Edgware 
Road;  
 Provision of three pocket parks and a series of open spaces and 
improvements to the quality and accessibility of those existing such as 
Neasden recreatio n ground and the Brent Reservoir/Welsh Harp;  
 A series of play areas within new developments and open space.  
 
Add justification text after policy to read:  
 
5.2.33  Staples Corner is a Strategic Industrial Location that plays an important part in meeting 
for industrial needs, but could perform much better.  As a gateway to Brent from wider 
London, or those coming from further afield from the M1 in townscape terms it presents 
a poor initial impression of the borough.  Although there are some relatively modern f it 
for purpose premises, many are older poor quality buildings that have received little 
investment.  The area also includes many quasi -retail and other non -industrial uses that 
reasonably could be located elsewhere, allowing a focus on more strategic indu strial 
needs.  In addition, the strategic road network is heavily trafficked and engineered as an 
‘urban motorway’ forming a significant barrier to pedestrian and cyclist movements.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Positive recreational and ecological features such as Neasden Recreationa l Ground and 
the Welsh Harp/Brent reservoir Site of Special Scientific Interest are also hidden from 
view, with limited access points.    
5.2.34  On the other side of the Edgware Road in the London Borough of Barnet is the Brent 
Cross Opportunity Area.  ‘Brent Cross Town’ will be a mixed use area providing a 
residential community of around 6,700 homes with associated social infrastructure and 
other features such as 275,000 m2 of office floorspace, business facilities for 25,000 
employees, other commercial leisur e, 14,000m2 of indoor sports facilities and 20ha of 
parks.  
5.2.35 The opening of the new Brent Cross West Thameslink Station in 2022 will improve public 
transport connectivity to central London and beyond.  Potential West London Orbital 
services will further impr ove connections to west London and beyond.  Staples Corner 
which has similar characteristics to Brent Cross Opportunity Area shows that potential 
that exists as an employment area, but also to provide additional new homes to meet the 
Borough’s and London’s  needs.  
5.2.36  The area will be subject to a comprehensive masterplan approach which will be led by 
the Council.  This will involve input from landowners, site occupiers, local residents and 
other relevant parties, such as TfL, at the appropriate time.  It will a ddress how the area 
can better work in the future.  This will seek to improve the amount and quality of 
industrial floorspace through intensification of sites  consistent with London Plan and local 
plan policies , freeing up land for residential, but also po tentially through co -location of 
industrial and residential uses in a transitional zone between the two predominant uses.  
It will identify the amount and location of potential dwellings, together with where 
intensification of industrial uses and the types  of industrial uses, and the transition 
between the two will be considered as part of that process.   
5.2.37 The Council is identifying the location as a Growth Area due to the scale of the 
opportunity.  Given the need to maximise efficient use of land the area h as been 
identified as a Tall Buildings Zone.  This reflects the potential scale of development to 
create clusters and other characteristics of the area, plus the surrounding context of tall 
buildings being delivered to the north as part of the Hendon estat e redevelopment and 
also as part of Brent Cross.  The height and location of development will be considered as 
part of the masterplan taking into account local protected views from Golders Hill to 
Harrow on the Hill and seeking to not have an adverse impac t on the birds in particular 
that support the protected status ecological designations of the Welsh Harp/Brent 
Reservoir.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
5.2.38 As part of the masterplanning the amount of necessary social infrastructure together with 
other uses to support the new residential co mmunity will also be identified, as well as 
potential enhanced links to the new station, across the North Circular and Edgware Roads 
and access to and improvements to the extensive open spaces to the north.   
5.2.39  The size and complicated nature of the area plu s the need to engage with occupiers, 
landowners and other organisations with an interest in the area will mean an effective 
masterplan will require some time to finalise.  As such no reliance has been placed on the 
site in meeting housing needs in the firs t half of the plan period.  
 
MM28  
 5.2 East  BEGA1, 
page 90  Insert new Site Plan:  
 
  
 
 
Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Growth Area – Strategic Industrial Location and  Locally Significant Industrial Sites subject to 
co-location and intensification, new passenger railway line infrastructure and residential 
development.  
 
Indicative Capacity  
Not yet known,  Estimated to be 2000 dwellings subject to a masterplanning process which 
will provide additional clarity.  Estimated using standard densities.  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  65-10 Years  101+ Year s 
0121   735779  12651100  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site comprises Strategic Industrial Location and Locally Significant Industrial Sites, which 
incorporate light industry, storage,  waste processing and open storage.  It also includes a 
campus of the College of North West London which is relocating to a new site in Wembley.  In 
between is some two storey residential, semi -detached and terraced, some of which is a former 
council estat e.  It also includes the Neasden Underground Station, with associated land and 
land on the West London Orbital rail route.  To the south is a petrol station currently in use.  
 
PTAL Rating  
3-6a both for now and in  (Current and 2031 estimate ).  The potential  West London Orbital 
station at Neasden will increase PTAL levels further .  
 
Planning Considerations  
 A significant part of the site is Strategic Industrial Land/ Locally Significant Industrial Site  
(LSIS) .  The proximity of Neasden station means that consideration of this site for Co-
location/ intensification consistent with London Plan policies is appropriate.  The potential for 
a further station on the West London Orbital line in the area together with the relocation of 
the College of North West Lond on provide an opportunity for a much larger scale of 
development to be planned as a Growth Area.  
 Theis Growth Area  will be  is subject to a masterplan process to comprehensively identify 
how the area  it can best maintain and ideally  increase above a minimum  plot ratio of 0.65, 
for the current SIL and LSIS sites’  employment  industrial floorspace (predominantly light 
industrial, general  industrial and storage and distribution), plus relate to and provide Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
sufficient space to accommodate the new and existing tr ansport infrastructure as part of a 
new mixed use community.   
 The masterplanning exercise will be undertaken involving key stakeholders, 
landowners and developers to help shape its content from conception to 
completion.  
 Until a masterplan has been complet ed/ adopted by the council, no redevelopments, 
particularly to industrial sites will be permitted in the area . Developments of non -
industrial uses will not be permitted on LSIS until the council has approved a 
masterplan, which shows how intensification / co-location will achieve an increase 
in industrial floorspace. Piecemeal development which would prejudice the delivery 
of a comprehensive masterplan will not be permitted.  
 The disparate land ownership also means that the council will have to be content th at the 
necessary social and physical infrastructure to support the Growth Area’s comprehensive 
change can be provided.  This will either be through evidence of landowners working together 
and having mechanisms such as equalisation agreements in place, or t hat an alternative is 
available to the council of capturing sufficient contributions and the necessary land from 
proposed developments to deliver the infrastructure.  On sites where there are a number of 
ownerships a comprehensive redevelopment of the whol e site  will be expected, rather than a 
piecemeal approach to ensure the most effective and efficient use of the site.  
 In order to ensure a comprehensive approach to the masterplanning of the site, 
consideration will be given to the use of Compulsory Purcha se Powers where 
necessary.  
 It sits within an Air Quality Management Area. , as such  Development will have to  seek to  be 
air quality neutral  positive  and ensure occupants have an acceptable level of air quality.  
 The Dudding Hill Line and Jubilee/ Metropolitan Line corridors are Sites of Nature 
Conservation (SINC) Grade I. Development should not adversely affect their 
ecological status.  
 None of the site is within Flood Zone 3 for fluvial flooding.   Parts are however  in surface 
water  Flood Zone 3. for surface water  Much of this is highway land or the rail corridors, 
although it includes the industrial land south of Neasden station  is also susceptible .  As such 
a sequential approach to the location of uses and buildings will be required on these sites to 
ensure that the  no unacceptable risk of flooding on and off site  is not unacceptably 
increased . More detailed assessment will be required through a site specific flood risk 
assessment.  Development must be consistent with the recommendations of the 
Bren t Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 2.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site contains no recognised heritage assets.  A locally listed building Shortcroft Mead 
Court exists on the other side of Dudden Hill Lane.  
 Neasden Lane and Dudden Hill Lane are reasonably heavily trafficked.  They provide 
reasonable pedestrian routes, but could  environment should be improved to encourage 
greater active travel  through measures such as  wider pavements, tree planting and 
additional overlooking/ active frontages.  Regular bus services run along th ese roads and 
provide relatively good public transport accessibility to other locations in Brent.  The proposed 
West London Orbital station will provide wider connectivity with Brent Cross/ West 
Hampstead though to Hounslow and improve PTAL. High quality p edestrian and cycle 
links should be provided between the existing and new station.  Improvements 
should also be made to the connectivity with Church End and Neasden town centres.  
 It also contains waste facilities which need to be addressed in any developme nt, either off or 
on-site as there is a need to accommodate these types of facilities in the borough.   The site 
includes a West London Waste Plan protected site. This should be accommodated in 
the redevelopment, or suitable capacity for the waste function provided elsewhere.  
 Given current and historic industrial use there is a risk of contamination and a Preliminary 
Risk Assessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.   
 Potential noise associated with the roads and adjacent employment uses will h ave to be 
addressed in design of development.  
 As a transformational area it has been identified in the Tall Buildings Strategy with the 
area has  the potential for tall buildings of over 10 storeys and has been identified as such in 
the Tall Building Strate gy.  This potential including  Appropriate heights, extent and location of 
these will be identified in the masterplan and more detailed townscape/ views assessment.  
The proximity and essentially two storey suburban character of adjacent areas will however 
require heights to step down towards these edges.   
 The scale of development also means that a district energy/ heating system should be viable 
for delivery.  
 Apart from the railway corridors  there is very little of ecological value inside the area; 
inciden tal planting is limited.  There are a number of trees along the Neasden Lane and Denzil 
Road, a few are street trees, some form part of planting schemes associated with 
development and some are self -sown.  The trees do provide some visual amenity however, 
their Removal and replacement of trees along the Neasden Lane and Denzil Road with higher 
quality appropriate specimens of more appropriate trees  for the setting would be 
acceptable.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The existing open space along Dollis  Dudden Hill Lane should be enhanced,  or potentially 
incorporated in another location in the development if this provides better townscape and 
recreational outcomes.  
 There is a notifiable pipeline bordering the site that is allocated for the potential station and 
parts of the residential area s south west of the site.  
 The presence of an existing active rail aggregate depot to the west plus matters 
such as the proximity to operational railways and the need to re -provide industrial 
uses on site needs to be considered to ensure future development proposals do not 
place unreasonable restrictions on non -residential uses whilst creating a high 
quality residential environment.  
 Development around the existing or proposed rail stations and close to 
infrastructure should take account of operational requi rements and the potential 
need to provide mitigation for any impacts.  
 Masterplanning should consider the potential for a future bus/cycle/pedestrian link 
between Neasden Lane and Great Central Way and if possible allow sufficient space 
within layout to all ow this longer term aspiration to be delivered.  
 
Risks 
 Fragmented nature of land ownership could increase time taken to deliver and if not properly 
managed a piecemeal rather than comprehensive approach to redevelopment, resulting in a 
disjointed environment and inadequate infrastructure.  
 Non-delivery of the West London Orbital line/ associated station.  
 CPO of properties/ land to deliver the rail infrastructure/ station and regenerate existing 
housing sites or employment  industrial  sites.  
 GLA polic y in relation to acceptability of proposals on LSIS SIL. 
 
Design Principles  
To be fully drawn out in any future masterplan.  Key points to address will be :  
 ensuring successful co -location/ intensification to allow the area to prosper as an 
employment  industrial  location;  
 Integration of the new station and links between it and Neasden station within the new 
townscape;  
 Recognition of the gateway location of the area;  
 Providing higher quality public realm/ pedestrian/ cyclist environment particularly in 
allowing movement along Neasden Lane and Dollis  Dudden Hill Lane;  
 The edges of the development responding to the adjacent suburban housing context; and  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The significant noise constraints provided by the railway lines and potentially other non -
residential uses where the ‘agent of change’ principle will apply.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Social and physical infrastructure requirements to be fully drawn out in any future 
masterplan related to the residential capacity of the site in particular.   
 Neasden station has a constrained ticket hall and stairways. TfL has identified that 
there may be a need to consider station improvements to accommodate 
development related demand, with associated financial contributions.  
 Improved crossings/ street design/ public realm, green infrastructure, open space and space 
for proposed public transport improvements including the West London Orbital line and 
station with potential for platforms for up to 8 -car trains .  
 Religious buildings and youth facilities are particular current n eeds that need consideration 
as well as specialist housing needs.  The College site has sports facilities which Sport 
England have indicated should be retained/ replaced.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area may be unable to 
support the demand anticipated from this development and upgrades to the wastewater 
network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest 
opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure e ssential 
infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements. Local upgrades to the existing water network infrastructure may be required 
to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the dev elopment creating identified 
additional capacity requirements.    There are  Public sewers cross ing or are close to the site. 
The risk of damage during construction must be minimised. , and It must be ensured that 
development doesn't inhibit access for mainte nance or the services in any other way.  
 Prior to adoption of a Masterplan the Council will engage with TfL and Highways 
England in assessing impacts on the Strategic Road Network from the Growth Area 
as a whole. This will be based on an individual Transpor t Assessment using an 
appropriate method of modelling that will take account of any agreed updates to 
TfL strategic modelling. Where identified appropriate planning conditions, S106 
obligations and Community Infrastructure Levy to deliver measures to mitig ate 
significant impacts on the Strategic Road Network will be required.  
 
Justification  
 The site adjacent to Neasden Lane is currently mostly low intensity used Strategic Industrial 
Land and  Locally Significant Industrial Sites  LSIS that are adjacent to a s tation with very Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
high public transport accessibility.  This accessibility makes them from a planning 
perspective  a prime site for more intensive use of land.   
 Given Brent’s status as a ‘provide capacity’ borough for employment space in the London 
Plan, need to provide for additional industrial floorspace,  the SIL and  LSIS also 
provide s a vital role in meeting future employment  industrial needs. Site owners/ 
developers are showing interest in bringing sites forward.   
 The proposed West London Orbital rout e requires appropriate safeguarding of land, but also 
provides an opportunity to increase the area’s accessibility and potential for regeneration.   
 In addition a large potential development site is the College of North West London’s campus 
which is to be disposed of to fund a move to Wembley and improved facilities.   
 Taking these factors together there is an opportunity to properly plan a wider ‘Growth Area’.  
This can comprehensively reconsider the area’s role, to potentially increase its performance 
as an employment area, but also address other strategic needs, such as using land more 
effectively, providing new homes, ensure successful delivery of a key piece of transport 
infrastructure and improve the image of Brent on a gateway site.  It also will assi st in 
providing additional population to support Church End and Neasden town centres.  
  
MM29  
 5.2 East  BEGA2, 
page 93  Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Existing Use  
Primarily B1, B2, B8  Light Industrial, General Industrial, Storage and Distribution  and 
Sui Generis Employment Uses, trade counters and some retail, cash and carry, restaurants and 
residential.  
 
Indicative Capacity  
Not yet known,  Estimated to be 2,200 dwellings subject to a masterplanning process which 
will provide additional clarity  – estima te of numbers used at this stage . 
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  65-10 Years  101+ Years  
0  0  2200  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site covers a multiple of light industrial, heavier industrial and distribution uses, plus other 
uses such as wholesale  and trade counter  in differing types of buildings, from the relatively Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
modern fit for purpose industrial to the majority of older poor quality buildings that have 
received limited investment . a mixture of old and more modern premises of varying 
heights an d quality.   As the site is very visible from heavily trafficked roads there are also 
many wholesale, trade counter type/ showroom operations related to building/ home 
improvement and car sales, plus self -storage and a large Chinese supermarket with a 
distinctive landmark building.  Predominantly buildings are single storey, some contain two 
storey office elements.  There are a small number of three storey and four storey buildings.  
Exceptionally two former office buildings of 4 and 7 storeys have through permitted 
development been converted into flats.    
 
Some buildings face outwards, others present their backs to streets.  Multiple small site 
ownerships, plus the development of the area in a lot of cases before statutory town planning 
system came into eff ect has resulted on some sites in haphazard building placement, poor 
access arrangements and a poor public realm.  As a gateway to Brent and wider London for 
many people passing through, it gives an extremely poor initial impression.  
 
The site  It is bounde d on the north by the Welsh Harp /Brent Reservoir  and Neasden 
Recreation Ground open spaces.  To the east is the A5 Edgware Road, beyond that warehousing 
and the Brent Cross / Cricklewood  Opportunity Area in London Borough of Barnet.  To the south 
and east t here is residential development, principally semi -detached or terraced two storey 
dwellings and some very limited number of 3 -6 storey properties.  
 
The heavily trafficked North Circular Road cuts through the northern part of the area .  It is a 
very heavily  trafficked road.   This together  With the Edgware Road is essentially designed as 
urban motorway, elevated in part and  it present sing a very hostile ‘concrete jungle’  
pedestrian and cyclist environment , particularly for pedestrians and cyclists.  This most  
intense around the Staples Corner roundabout .  There are  A number of footbridges across the 
North Circular.  Direct vehicular access to and from these main roads is mostly limited , with 
more recent developments channelled towards minor roads  resulting in .  The dual carriageway 
with barriers means if turnings are missed,  longer vehicle journeys  diversions are required to 
return to that point by vehicle . 
 
PTAL Rating  
3 (Current and 2031 estimate)  principally along the North Circular Road, Edgware Road, 
Oxgate Lane and Humber Road and elsewhere 2 (Current and 2031 estimate ) away from 
these roads .  This is both currently and projected in 2031.   This does not currently factor in  The Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
potential improvements to public transport offered by the  West London Orbit al station at Brent 
Cross West will increase PTAL levels . 
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is Strategic Industrial Land and is proposed as a Growth Area and for co -location/ 
intensification consistent with London Plan policies.   
 It will be subject to a m asterplan process undertaken between Brent, Barnet and the 
GLA. This will to comprehensively identify how the area can best maintain and ideally 
increase useable employment  industrial  floorspace (predominantly light industrial, general 
industrial and stora ge and distribution).  This will  represent ing a minimum  0.65 plot ratio 
or replacement of the existing amount of employment  industrial floorspace, whichever is 
the greater, whilst potentially providing a new mixed use community.  
 Until a masterplan has been  completed/ adopted by the council no non -industrial/ residential 
will be permitted in the area.  Developments of non -industrial uses will not be 
permitted in the growth area until the council has approved a masterplan, which 
shows how intensification / co -location will achieve an increase in industrial 
floorspace. Piecemeal development which would prejudice the delivery of a 
comprehensive masterplan will not be permitted.  
 The disparate land ownership also means that the council will have to be content that the 
necessary social and physical infrastructure needed to support the Growth Area’s change can 
be provided.  This will either be through evidence of landowners working together and 
having mechanisms such as equalisation agreements in place, or that an alt ernative is 
available to the council of capturing sufficient contributions and the necessary land from 
proposed developments to deliver the infrastructure.  
 On sites where there are a number of ownerships a comprehensive redevelopment of the 
whole site  will be expected, rather than a piecemeal approach to ensure the most effective 
and efficient use of land.   
 If necessary and where it can be shown the existing landowners are effectively frustrating a 
comprehensive approach to an area’s development that would  frustrate the outcomes of the 
masterplan, the use of Compulsory Purchase will be considered.   
 Across the Edgware Road within the London Borough of Barnet the area is designated as the 
Brent Cross Opportunity Area and is subject to substantial growth of ho using, employment 
and retail floorspace.  Ideally  The masterplanning process will address this wider growth 
context being delivered in the Brent Cross Opportunity Area and seek to explore the 
extent to which Staples Corner Growth Area can seek to create a unified place/ townscape 
between the two.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 It sits within an Air Quality Management Area. , as such  Development will have to seek to  be 
air quality neutral  positive  and ensure occupants have an acceptable level of air quality.   
 The northern edge is adjace nt to Welsh Harp and Neasden Recreation Ground, these have a 
variety of designations including Metropolitan Open Space, Brent Reservoir Site of Special 
Scientific Interest, Site of Nature Conservation Grade I and Local Nature Reserve.  The Canal 
and River Trust have been working with the Brent Catchment Partnership on reducing 
pollution and invasive species and for it to become an attraction to Brent’s population of 
being by water.  Natural England have also identified, given the ecological status of 
the ar ea, the need to protect the SSSI particularly with regards to potential 
disturbance from visitor recreational activities. As such, the  Masterplanning also needs 
to consider the extent to which the potential of this area as a recreational and environmental 
asset can be enhanced in association with the Staples Corner Growth Area.  Natural England 
have indicated that the height and position of buildings should not adversely impact on the 
flightpaths and behaviours of breeding wetland birds.  
 None of the site is  When taking account of climate change a small part is  within fluvial  
Flood Zone 3 for fluvial flooding .  Parts are however  in surface water zone 3 for surface 
water , principally although not exclusively this is within highway land.  Appropriate site 
speci fic flood risk assessments will need to be undertaken in these locations to 
ensure no unacceptable risk of flooding on and off -site.  
 The site contains recognised heritage assets in the form of Sites of Archaeological Interest at 
Oxgate Field (north of North Circular) and is in close proximity to one at Oxgate Farm (Coles 
Green Road) which is also contains 2 Grade II* listed buildings.  Development in or adjacent 
to these areas will require the appropriate assessments to ensure the assets and their 
settings are preserved or enhanced.  It has no local views.  
 Potentially parts of the site could benefit from a high quality outlook across the Welsh Harp 
or if opened up allow better views from the North Circular to it.  Views from the Welsh Harp 
need consider ation in terms of design to improve its setting.  
 The North Circular Road managed by TfL as part of the strategic road network  is very 
heavily trafficked, the Edgware Road less so, but still busy.  They are managed by TfL as 
part of the strategic road netwo rk.  They are a significant barrier to pedestrian movements, 
which are enabled by foot bridges and traffic light controlled crossings.  The Edgware Road in 
particular at this point appears heavily over -engineered for the volume of traffic that uses it.  
Improving the pedestrian and cycling environment will be a particular challenge, especially to 
the carriageway both in terms of not adversely affecting capacity and cost to amending 
highway structures.  Regular bus services along these roads and others provi de relatively 
good public transport accessibility.  Brent Cross West Thameslink station will open in 2024 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
which could also be served by the West London Orbital in 2026.   Therefore wider connectivity 
with London and the south east is potentially very good i n the future from this station.  
Better pedestrian links across the A5 and North Circular Road should be provided.   The 
Council together with TfL will consider the extent to which the area can support 
car-free development and mitigate impacts through suita ble improvements to 
public transport, active travel and measures to not adversely impact on 
neighbours’ amenity of any potential parking displacement.  Brent Cross West 
Thameslink station will open in 2022 which could also be served by the West 
London Orbi tal in 2029. There is a need to work with TfL and Barnet Council to 
provide improved pedestrian and cycle links from the site across the A5 Edgware 
Road to the proposed new station and wider Brent Cross regeneration area. These 
are also required across the  North Circular Road which is managed by TfL as part of 
the strategic road network.  
 Given current and historic industrial use there is a risk of contamination and a Preliminary 
Risk Assessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.  Potential nois e associated 
with the roads and adjacent employment  industrial  uses will have to be addressed in design 
of development.  
 As a transformational area it has been identified in the Tall Buildings Strategy with the 
area has  the potential for tall buildings of o ver 10 storeys and has been identified as such in 
the Tall Building Strategy .  This potential including  Appropriate heights, extent and location 
of these will be identified in the masterplan and more detailed townscape/ views 
assessment .    LB Barnet  locally protected views from Golders Hill to Harrow on the 
Hill cross the site. Natural England have indicated for potential impact on the 
flightpaths and behaviours of breeding wetland birds. These matters should be 
considered in relation to positioning and lo cation of tall buildings.  The proximity and 
essentially two storey suburban character of adjacent areas together with the ecological 
status of the Brent reservoir will however  also require heights to step down towards 
these edges.  
 The scale of development also means that a district energy/ heating system should be 
delivered.  
 There is very little of ecological value inside the area as incidental planting is limited.  There 
are few trees, t he best examples being  street trees are on Oxgate Lane  and a bank of 
poplars on Coles Green Road, probably from the 1950s.  Whilst of significant visual amenity, 
the poplars due their age and increasing propensity for limbs to fail/fracture are unlikely to 
be suitable for long term retention in their current form .  These sho uld be retained and 
additional street trees and green infrastructure should be provided.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The Brent Open Space Study identified a need for 3 pocket parks and a series of open spaces 
to meet the needs of the anticipated increase in population in the Growth A rea. 
 
Design Principles  
 To be fully drawn out in any future masterplan.  Key points to address will be:  
 ensuring successful co -location/ intensification to allow the area to prosper as an 
employment  industrial  location;  
 Recognition of the gateway location of the area;  
 Providing higher quality public realm/ pedestrian/ cyclist environment particularly in 
allowing movement across roads and linking to Brent Cross West station/ adjacent 
Opportunity Area in London Borough of Barnet.  
 Opening up views to and enha ncing views from Welsh Harp and improved physical 
connections; and  
 The edges of the development responding to the adjacent suburban housing.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Social and physical infrastructure requirements to be fully drawn out in any future 
masterplan related to the residential capacity of the site in particular.   
 Improved crossings/ street design/ public realm, green infrastructure, open space and public 
transport accessibility.     
 Religious buildings and youth facilities are particular cu rrent needs that need consideration 
as well as specialist housing needs.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area may be unable to 
support the demand anticipated from this development.  , and  Upgrades to the wastewater 
netwo rk are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest 
opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential 
infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capaci ty 
requirements. Local upgrades to the existing water network infrastructure may be required to 
ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified 
additional capacity requirements.    There are  Public sewers cross ing or are close to the site. 
The risk of damage during construction must be minimised. , and  It must be ensured that 
development doesn't inhibit access for maintenance or the services in any other way.  
 Highways England has identified that development should not  significantly impact on the 
operation of the M1 motorway.  
 Prior to adoption of a Masterplan the Council will engage with TfL and Highways 
England in assessing impacts on the Strategic Road Network from the Growth Area Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
as a Provide sufficient clarity on po tential infrastructure requirements to mitigate 
against significant adverse whole. This will be based on an individual Transport 
Assessment using an appropriate method of modelling that will take account of any  
agreed updates to TfL strategic modelling. Where identified appropriate planning 
conditions, S106 obligations and Community Infrastructure Levy to deliver 
measures to mitigate significant impacts on the Strategic Road Network will be 
required.  
 
 
Justification  
 The site is the largest piece of Strate gic Industrial Land that falls within the Local Plan 
boundary.  Given the need within the borough to provide additional industrial 
floorspace capacity  Brent’s status as a ‘provide capacity’ borough in the London Plan,  it 
will perform a vital role in meetin g future employment industrial needs.  
 Currently although vacancy is low, it is not intensively used, contains many old buildings that 
have had very limited investment, includes many non -business uses which could be 
accommodated outside dedicated employment areas and is an overall poor quality 
environment in a gateway location.   
 Close proximity to  The development of the Brent Cross Opportunity Area across the 
Edgware Road in LB Barnet with its associated planned extension of Brent Cross shopping 
centre, prov ision of office development, residential  and the opening of  Brent Cross West 
Thameslink station and potentially the West London Orbital rail route will change the local 
environment and the area’s accessibility.  It provides an opportunity to reconsider the  area’s 
role, to potentially increase its performance as an employment area, but also address other 
strategic needs, such as providing new homes, improving the image of Brent on a gateway 
site, increasing the visibility and relevance of Welsh Harp as an en vironmental asset and 
addressing significant physical barriers to pedestrian and cycle movement across the 
borough.  
MM30  
 5.2 East  BESA1, 
page 97  Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed use development including on the ground floor and upper floors if needed to 
accommodate the required floorspace, replacement of the existing employment B1 -B8 light 
industrial and storage and distribution  floorspace and on the McDonalds site A1-A5 retail Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
or takeaway and/or light industrial and storage and distribution B1-B8 employment  uses, 
with the remainder being residential on the upper floors.  
 
Indicative Capacity  
3886 sqm light industrial and storage and distribution B1-B8 on the existing local 
employment sites (0.5 plot ratio)  and 400 sqm retail or takeaway A1-A5 uses/  light 
industrial and storage and distribution B1-B8 on the McDonalds site (replacement of 
existing floorspace, with potential for more employment), plus 194 dwellings.  
 
 
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  65-10 Years  101+ Years  
42  37  117 
 
PTAL Rating  
3 existing and forecast to  (Current and 2031 estimate) .  
 
Planning Considerations  
The site has no designated heritage assets.  
 The Neasden Conservation Area is located to its south east approximately 30 metres away at 
its closest.  The sit e is bisected by Coombe Road which provides access to Roger Stone 
Court.  Regular bus services provide links to Wembley and Neasden underground stations.   
 Given current and historic industrial use there is a risk of contamination and a Preliminary 
Risk As sessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.  
 Parts of the site fall within fluvial flood zone 3. It also is  All the site has a residual risk of 
reservoir flooding should a defence failure occur.  A site specific Flood Risk Assessment will 
be required and a sequential approach to the local location of uses followed.  Development 
must be consistent with the recommendations of the Brent Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment Level 2.  
 There is limited green infrastructure on site.  There is some minor recent landscaping on the 
McDonalds site.  There is  A semi mature Ash tree along Coombe Road which  will need to be 
kept.  
 There are also some trees adjacent along the  River Brent and Brent Canal Feeder ; both of 
these  corridors are also Sites of Nature Conse rvation Value Grade 2.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Provision of industrial floorspace as part of a mixed use development should be maximised 
through a design led approach and viability testing.  At the very least a replacement of the 
existing floorspace on individual sites that come forward, or a plot ratio of 0.65 whichever is 
the greatest will be required.  
 Replacement of the existing McDonalds or provision of alternative town centre uses 
on this part of the site consistent with the size and role of the retail parade, will be 
suppor ted. 
 
Design Principles  
 Development of up to 5/6 storeys (with the upper storey set back so as not to be visible 
from the adjacent pavement ) with a step down to four storeys (top storey set back) on the 
edges of the will be acceptable on the Neasden Lane f rontage.  On Coombe Road up to 5 
storeys will be acceptable with a set -back on the upper storey and reduction down to 4 
storey on the edges.  Within the remainder of the site up to 5 storeys will be acceptable.  
 A contemporary design will be supported, part icularly where development takes influence 
from the positive characteristics of the surrounding buildings and structures, for example in 
breaking up the facades in a manner consistent with the plot width/ rhythm of the terraces 
along Neasden Lane.  
 Active f rontages will be maximised at ground floor on Neasden Lane and Coombe Road.  
Ideally these will be principally provided by the employment/ commercial elements.  
 The areas adjacent to the River Brent and Brent Canal Feeder should be set back from the 
boundar y, appropriately landscaped and include a footpath to allow for potential future public 
pedestrian routes adjacent to the watercourses.   
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Delivery of the waterside pedestrian routes and their future potential to be made available 
for public use attaching to future additions will be sought through a S106.  
 A financial contribution towards real time information being provided at the bus stop on the 
opposite side of the road will be sought.  
 Thames Water has indicated the that local water network capacity in this area may be 
unable to support the demand anticipated from this development, and  upgrades to the 
wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the 
earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential 
infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements. Local upgrades to the existing water network infrastructure may be required Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
to ensure ess ential infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified 
additional capacity requirements . 
 
Justification  
 The site is a poor piece of townscape and could be used more intensely given its 
used to a relatively low intensity given its p osition adjacent to a main movement corridor.  
The McDonalds in particular is a poor piece of townscape inconsistent with the small set back 
from the edge of pavement/ strong building line along the rest of the road.  Other recent 
developments along Neasde n Lane indicates that sites can be used more intensively to 
provide mixed use schemes that provide employment opportunities/ services as well as 
adding to the dwelling stock.  The site has good  access to public transport and local 
infrastructure including shops and open spaces.  
 The council needs to ensure Continued provision of employment  industrial  space is 
required to meet needs , so will seek its retention of employment uses on site .   
 The existing  Replacement McDonalds /retail  is a draw that  helps the vitality and viability of 
the parade.  Its replacement or provision of alternative town centre uses on this part of the 
site, if consistent with the size and role of the retail parade, will be supported.   
 The sites are in close proximity to watercourses a nd partly at  Risk of flooding .  The location 
of buildings and their design will have to ensure that there is no unacceptable risk to building 
occupants, or property and people elsewhere as a result of any proposed development. 
needs to be properly addresse d.    
 Setting back buildings from the watercourse provides an opportunity for their enhancement 
and also potential future public access along pedestrian routes.  
 
MM31  
 5.2 East  BESA2, 
page 99  Allocated Use  
 
Mixed use development to include replacement or relocation of  bus depot in lower ground 
floor and upper floors (offices on Edgware Road frontage if needed )  to accommodate the 
required floorspace with the remainder being residential on the upper floors  
Indicative Capacity  
10,000 sqm Sui Generis based on the existing employment  industrial  site’s floorspace 
required to replace bus depot/ create suitable residential environment above, plus 202 
dwellings.  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
01-5 Years  65-10 Years  101+ Years  
0  0  202 
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site comprises two separate land ownerships, the majority by Transport for London 
Metroline . A part single storey and three (+ basement) bus depot fronting Edgware Road to 
the east, with associated bus parking across the majority of the site.  In addition there is a 
single storey café on the south eastern corner along Edgware Road.  The site drops away from 
Edgware Road.  It is bounded on the east by the Edgware Road.  On the opposite side of 
Edgware Road are a mixture of industrial/ self - storage and retai l premises, forming part of the 
Colindale Area Action Plan boundary in London Borough of Barnet.  The north and south are 
bounded by railway lines which is elevated on the south and at grade on the north.  There is 
two storey residential to the north and a  mixture of single storey retail/ three storey residential 
to the south.   
 
Ownership  
Public and  Private Sector  
 
PTAL Rating  
1b and 3 existing and forecast to  (Current and 2031 estimate) . 
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site has no designated heritage assets and there are none in close proximity.  Six 
regular bus services provide links north and south along the Edgware Road to Alperton, 
Brent Cross, Brent Park, Edgware, Golders Green, Hammersmith, Kilburn, Paddington, 
Victoria and White City.  
 Given current an d historic industrial use there is a risk of contamination and a Preliminary 
Risk Assessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.  
 Parts of the site towards its western end fall within surface water flood zone 3. A site specific 
Flood Risk Assess ment will be required and a sequential approach to the local location of 
uses/ buildings  followed to ensure that the development does not create an 
unacceptable on or off -site flood risk . 
 There is very limited green infrastructure on site.  The majority is  Adjoining in the  railway 
land which  is a Site of Important Nature Conservation Grade 1, forming part of a wider 
corridor , which includes trees and scrub .  Development should not undermine these  this Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
designation s. There is a semi mature and two newly plant ed London Plane street trees on 
Edgware Road which will need to be kept.  
 The site is a Locally Significant Industrial Site.  Any proposal must ensure the replacement of 
the bus depot, or if  An operational bus garage of equivalent capacity needs to be 
retai ned/re -provided on the site unless TfL confirms that it is no longer 
operationally required, or a suitable replacement can be provided elsewhere. If  
operationally this is not required, provision of industrial floorspace as part of a mixed use 
development should be maximised through a design led approach and viability testing.  
 At the very least a  A minimum 0.65 plot ratio or  replacement of the existing industrial  
floorspace total,  or a plot ratio of 0.65  whichever is the greatest will be required.  
 Commerc ial development along Edgware Road at ground floor level may also be appropriate 
if the minimum employment  industrial  floorspace is provided.  Residential will be 
appropriate on the upper floors of any redevelopment if it can be shown to not undermine 
the bus depot/ future employment uses.  
 
Risks 
 The main risk is the Site availability of the site for development  in the context of Transport 
for London  operational requirements from Transport for London . Increasing importance of 
public transport, plus land pressures mean sites to relocate to will be scarce, whilst 
redevelopment may well prove difficult whilst the site remains operational.  
 
Design Principles  
 Development of up to 6 storeys (with the upper storey set back so as not to be visible from 
the adjace nt pavement ) along Edgware Road with a step down to five storeys (top storey set 
back) on the edges of the will be acceptable.  
 A contemporary design will be supported, particularly where development takes influence 
from the positive characteristics of the surrounding buildings and structures, for example in 
breaking up the facades in a manner consistent with the plot width/ rhythm of the traditional 
terraces along Edgware Road.  
 Active frontages will be maximised at ground floor on Edgware Road.  Ideally the se will be 
principally provided by the employment industrial /commercial elements and residential 
entrances.  
 Setting back buildings from the railway lines provides an opportunity to enhance 
the wildlife corridors.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Additional veh icular entrance for the residential that does not conflict with the bus 
movements/ pedestrian crossing.  
 A financial contribution will be sought to additional street tree planting along Edgware Road 
outside the site.  
 Thames Water has indicated the that local water network capacity in this area may be 
unable to support the demand anticipated from this development, and  upgrades to the 
wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the 
earliest opportunity to agree a housi ng and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential 
infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements. Local upgrades to the existing water network infrastructure may be required 
to ensure essentia l infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified 
additional capacity requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The site is used to a relatively low intensity in terms of its building occupancy given its 
position adjacent to a main public tran sport movement corridor.   
 It forms a poor piece of townscape along much of its length inconsistent with the edge of 
pavement/ small set back from the edge of pavement/ strong building line along the more 
traditional parts of the road.   
 Other  Recent devel opments along this road indicate s that sites can be used more intensively 
to provide mixed use schemes that provide employment opportunities/ services as well as 
adding to the dwelling stock.   
 The site has the  Potential to deck over the bus garage use and  provide an acceptable 
residential environment above.   
 It has good access to public transport and local infrastructure including shops, open spaces 
and schools.  
 The council needs to ensure continued provision of employment  industrial space, so will 
seek the retention of the bus depot or replacement employment space on this site .  In 
addition there might be some scope for provision of town centre uses along the Edgware 
Road frontage, if consistent with the size and role of a retail parade, will be supporte d.  The 
site due to its fall and location below elevated rail corridors appears to be at risk of surface 
water flooding.  The location of buildings and their design will have to ensure that there is no 
unacceptable risk to building occupants, or property a nd people elsewhere as a result of any 
proposed development.  Setting back buildings from the railway lines provides an 
opportunity to enhance the wildlife corridors.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site allows for taller buildings than currently exist on site, but is not within a ta ll 
buildings zone a location regarded as acceptable for taller buildings than those set out in 
the design principles . 
MM32  5.2 East  BESA3, 
page 102  Allocated Use  
D1 Medical or health service, crèche nursery or day centre, learning and non -
residential institutions or local community use and residential  
 
Indicative homes  
3057 
 
Comments  
Replacement D1/ to address potential loss of community  floorspace required.  
MM33  
 5.3 North  
 BP3, Page 
110 Amend part b) of ‘Character, Heritage and Design’ of policy to  read:  
 
Maintain and enhance local character and distinctiveness by:  
b) Respecting the predominantly suburban low rise character of the area. Tall buildings of 
30 metres or more will be directed to the Burnt Oak and Colindale Growth Areas, in town 
centres around 18 metres (6 storeys)  and intensification corridors around 15 metres (5 
storeys) could be appropriate. In these areas development should be stepped down to 
form a comfortable relationship with adjacent areas.  
 
Amend part d) of ‘Homes’ of policy to read:  
 
d) Minimum of 2,800 additional homes in the period to 2041, principally through 
the continued residential development within the Burnt Oak and Colindale Growth Area 
(around 2,100 homes ). The potential residential development for the extension of the 
Burnt Oak and Colindale Growth Area, referred to as Capitol Valley, will be determined by 
a masterplan, taking into account the need to intensify employment industrial  use on 
the site.  
 
Amend part j) and part k) of ‘Town Centres’ of policy to read:  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
j) Establi sh clear identities for the Colindale/ The Hyde and Burnt Oak through 
implementing public realm, building upgrades and shop facade improvements.  
k) Provide up to  4,400 sqm of net comparison goods floorspace, up to 3,600 sqm 1,600 
sqm of net convenience foods retail  floorspace, up to 5200 sqm class A3 cafe/ 
restaurant  floorspace and 2100 sqm class A4 drinking establishment  floorspace by 
2028. This floorspace should be directed towards the three town centres.  
 
Amend part m) of ‘Community and Cultural Facilities’ of policy to read:  
 
m) Meeting social infrastructure requirements by securing provision for needs 
arising from new housing development, especially the provision of new 
education, health, cultural and community facilities, notably at  Secure sufficient 
physical  and social infrastructure on and off site to support an increase in population at  
Burnt Oak and Colindale  
n) Explore opportunities for additional secondary school provision within this place.  
 
Amend part s) of ‘Community and Cultural Facilities’ of policy to read:  
 
s) Supporting new and improved employment industrial  premises as part of a wider site 
development with Morrison’s at Honeypot Lane (Lowther Road).  
MM34  
 5.3 North  BNGA1, 
Page 116  Amend second paragraph of the policy to read:  
 
The existing Locally Significant Industrial Sites will be subject to masterplanning with a view to 
its regeneration to re -provide updated employment industrial  floorspace that meets 
employers existing and future needs, through co -location with other uses.  
Burnt Oak/ Colindale Growth Area will deliver over 2, 0100 new homes to 2041, supported by 
social and physical infrastructure to include:  
 Improvements to the quality and accessibility of existing local open spaces  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 A series of play areas within new developments and open space , including a 0.2ha 
pocket park, and improvements to existing open space  
 The creation of informal recreation and good quality public realm  
 Improved cycle infrastructure along the A5  
 
MM35  
 5.3 North  BNSA1, 
Page 118  Existing use  
Locally significant industrial site containing a range of uses, such as car repairs, car show 
rooms, warehouses and distribution parks. Outside the LSIS there are a mix of non -
industrial uses including a large retail superstore in the south eastern corner of the site, and 
a petrol station, an MOT shop and large car dealership with associated car parking/ storage in 
the north eastern corner.  
 
Allocated use  
Mixed -use development comprising areas of employment industrial  intensification and co -
location with other uses, retention of superstore of same size, or less, residential development 
and any associated required social infrastructure.  
 
Indicative capacity  
A future masterplanning process involving site owners/ occupiers and other stakeholders  
will provide clarity.  
 
Timeframe f or delivery  
01-5 years 5    6-10 Years   1 01+ Years  
14201             300              686599  
 
Description of existing site  
 Capitol Way  Colindale  Locally Significant Industrial Land  – The LSIS consists of  A number 
of Predominantly small scale, 2 storey industrial units that are generally no taller than 
two storeys in height . The majority of units which form the LSIS are small, with only a small 
number of larger units.  The majority of the se larger units are located within the western part 
of the LSIS. Located to the east of the LSIS within the site allocation  within the eastern 
part is a car dealership and associated servicing workshops,  parking/ storage land. A 
petrol station forms the north western eastern  corner.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 ASDA Superstore  - Located in the south e astern corner of the site is one large superstore 
(ASDA) with a two -storey car park at the rear.  
 To the south of the site is Grove Park, social infrastructure (health centre, place of worship), 
residential development, Morrisons and Bang Bang Oriental Foo d Hall. To the west of the 
development is Stag Lane and residential development which is predominantly two storey in 
character. To the north of the site is residential development along Homstall Avenue and to 
the east is the A5 and new flatted residential development known as TNQ.  
Planning history  
 The ASDA superstore formed part of the previous Site Specific Allocation BC/1 in 2011. The 
allocation, which included the former Oriental City site, was identified for mixed use 
development which included residen tial, retail, food and drink, community facilities and 
leisure and the re -provision of Chinese and Far -Eastern commercial and community 
floorspace.  
 Within the Capitol Way LSIS , permission (17/0837) has been granted for the “Demolition of 
the existing buil dings and redevelopment of the site to provide six buildings ranging 
between four to nine storeys and eight three storey mews houses, and the erection of a two 
storey commercial building, providing a total of 4,051m of flexible commercial floorspace 
across  the site and 414 residential units” at 1-8 Capitol Way.  
PTAL rating  
The PTAL rating of the site ranges from 1b -3. 1b-3 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning considerations  
 The site is included within the amended boundary of the Burnt Oak and Colindale Gr owth 
Area which has the potential to accommodate significant growth . 
 A significant portion of the site is designated as a Locally Significant Industrial Site. The 
Council considers it appropriate for co -location which will be delivered consistent 
with Lond on Plan policy E7.  
 The whole site will be subject to a masterplan process to comprehensively identify how it 
can increase useable employment industrial  floorspace ( resulting in a minimum 0.65 
plot ratio or the existing industrial floorspace total, whichever  is the greater), 
whilst contributing to the Council’s vision for the Burnt Oak and Colindale area of creating ‘ a 
mixed, vital, accessible and pleasant district’. Until a masterplan for the site has been Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
agreed/ adopted by the council, no redevelopments (a part from 17/0837 that already 
consented) will be permitted within this area. Developments of non -industrial uses will 
not be permitted on LSIS until the council has approved a masterplan, which 
shows how intensification / co -location will achieve an incre ase in industrial 
floorspace. Piecemeal development which would prejudice the delivery of a 
comprehensive masterplan will not be permitted.  
 In order to ensure a comprehensive approach to the masterplanning of the site, 
consideration will be given to the u se of Compulsory Purchase Powers where 
necessary.  
 
 To the east of the site in the London Borough of Barnet is the Burnt Oak and Colindale 
Opportunity Area, with a regeneration and growth programme to deliver 10,000 new homes, 
a new neighbourhood centre and  improved public transport services.  The masterplanning 
process for this site should take into consideration the growth adjoining  in the Burnt Oak 
and Colindale Opportunity Area , and seek to  ensur eing that development contributes to 
creating a shared sense  ofcoherent  townscape / landscape . 
 Located in the south eastern corner of the site is a large retail superstore. The retail 
superstore is within an ‘out -of-town centre’ location. The store is well established and 
trading well. No alternative sites have been  identified that could accommodate it in nearby 
Brent town centres. As such it’s retention is sought In recognition of its successful 
trading and the lack of local alternative sites, a supermarket should be retained , 
although an increase in floorspace is n ot required . Any additional retail floorspace will be 
subject to the Sequential Test and an impact assessment. Similarly the retention of a 
retail car dealership function on the Mercedes site is also considered appropriate if 
required as part of an intensi fication of floorspace and provision of other allocated 
uses on that site.  
 The site currently contributes little to the frontage along Edgware Road. Any proposed 
Development will need to address this through creatinge an active frontage along itsthe 
length  of Edgware Road.  
 The site is located on a historical industrial site. A Preliminary Contamination Risk 
Assessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Furthermore,  The areas of the site which directly adjoin the A5 are  is located within an Ai r 
Quality Management Area. As such, development at this site  should be air quality positive as 
it is within a Growth Area . 
 Noise associated with the adjoining roads and continued industrial/ employment uses on site 
will need to be addressed in the design o f the development.  
 There is some potential for tall buildings, subject to stepping down towards the surrounding 
residential areas.  The appropriate height, extent and location of buildings will be identified 
within a masterplan for the site. The site is lo cated within a Tall Buildings Zone.  
 The site is in close proximity to Grove Park, a local park which also contains a Grade II SINC 
site. The impacts of development on the integrity of the SINC through increased patronage 
of the park will need to be conside red and if necessary appropriate mitigation provided.  
 None of the site is within Flood Zone 3 for fluvial flooding, however there are  Parts of the 
site are  within  surface water flood  zone 3 for surface water. These  which are 
principally , although not exclusively,  within highway land. The site is located within an area 
which is susceptible to groundwater flooding.  
 Edgware Road, which adjoins the site to the east, is relatively busy. The site is in an area of 
low PTAL and is located approximately a 12 -minute walk from Colindale Tube Station.  
Development proposals will need to consider the impact that additional cars may have on 
the Edgware Road, and the surrounding road network.  
 Due to a relatively low PTAL score, some car parking spaces to serve the de velopment are 
likely to be required. These should be designed to ensure that they do not have a 
detrimental impact on the streetscape of the development.  
 There is a bus stop which serves the site.  
Risks 
 Fragmented nature of landownership could increase ti me taken to deliver. Furthermore,  This 
landownership  could result in a piecemeal , rather than a comprehensive approach to  
redevelopment of the site, which could create a disjointed environment and inadequate 
provision on infrastructure.  
 Potential for a la ck of co -ordination with the London Borough of Barnet related to the 
cumulative impacts of the Burnt Oak/ Colindale Opportunity Area.  
Design principles  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Key issues for any future masterplan to include:  
 Ensuring successful co -location/ intensification to al low the area to successfully retain, and 
enhance its industrial/ employment function. Factors to be considered include dedicated 
parking and services facilities.  
 Tall buildings on this site should respond to the height of the surrounding residential 
charac ter and ensure that there is a stepping down towards 2 -storey character to the north, 
west and part of the east.  
 Providing high quality public realm, which improves pedestrian and cycle movement and 
complements the work being undertaken in the Burnt Oak/ Colindale Opportunity Area.  
 Access to the site to be considered carefully to ensure no conflict is created between 
different users and the potential for north -south and east -west pedestrian and cycle 
connections in particular between Stag Lane and Edgware Road to be enhanced in 
number and quality  
 Interface between residential and industrial uses  
 Improving access to Grove Park  (which contains a Grade II listed SINC) , whilst 
ensuring the current green and open space on the site is maintained and enhanced. 
Additional green infrastructure is likely to be required to support development on site.  
 Creating an active frontage around the sites edges along streets and in particular along the 
Edgware Road frontage  
 Providing tree planting along the Edgware Road fronta ge to address air quality/ Healthy 
Streets agenda  
 The masterplan for the site will also need to take  Taking into consideration the ‘Burnt Oak 
and Colindale Placemaking Plan’.  
 
 
Infrastructure requirements  
 Due to the low PTAL score of the site, some car parking will need to be provided.  
 Retention and enhancement of undesignated existing green space and additional green 
infrastructure should be incorporated.  
 Improvements to the public realm should also be addressed.  
 Increased traffic at site could requi re some junction improvements, which will need to be 
determined through a transport assessment.  
 Social and physical infrastructure requirements to be fully drawn out in future masterplan 
work on the site.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of developme nt is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to being required to meet additional demands created through the 
development.  
 
Justification  
This site incorporates land within the Burnt Oak and Colindale Growth Area, and land which 
adjoins it. This area has previously been identified as a suitable location to accommodate 
growth,  as well as providing an opportunity to boost business and employment opportunities 
within the borough. Furthermore,  provides an opportunity to create a new mixed use 
area providing many homes whilst the intensification/ co -location of the LSIS will contri bute 
to meeting the ‘provide capacity’ status given to Brent within the London Plan strategic 
industrial floorspace requirements . Currently, although the vacancy rates are low, the site 
is not intensively used and contains a number of two storey buildings that vary in condition. 
The LSIS It also has good access to services and amenities which will support intensification/ 
co-location.  
MM36  5.3 North  BNSA2, 
page 121  Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed use development to include residential, retail and employment replacement industrial 
and office space /affordable workspace . 
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 years    56-10 Years   1 01+ Years  
0                   200100          300400  
 
Description of Existing Site  
 The multi -storey car park is approximately 5 storeys in height and contains a car showroom 
on the ground floor . Adjoining and to the front of the multi -storey car park is a small area of 
hard and soft landscaping, which is being used to store cars associated with the dealershi p.  
 Southon House, an office block which forms the site’s south eastern corner, is approximately 
6 storeys in height. There is an area of green space which sets the building back from the A5 
road, which it adjoins to the east.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Set back from the A5 is Coli ndale Retail Park, which consists of six retail units, which are in 
a horseshoe configuration with associated car parking. The retail units are two storeys in 
height, and are large and bulky in form.  
 Forming the southern part of the site is a car dealersh ip, servicing centre/workshop  and 
associated car parking. There are a number of structures located on this part, which are no 
taller than 3 storeys in height. The site is set back from the A5 by areas of green space and 
hardstanding that is being used to d isplay cars. There is also an area of hardstanding to the 
west of the main building which is used as a staff car park. There are variations in site 
levels, decreasing in level from west to east.  
 The site is set back from the adjacent Edgware Road by areas  of hard and soft 
landscaping.  
 To the north of the site is recently redeveloped residential properties, a primary school and 
mixed use buildings. To the east of the site is the A5, a 7 -16 storey residential building and 
fast food outlet. To the south of t he site is Colindale Town Centre, and to the west is  2 
storey  residential terrace development , where the predominant character is 2 storey 
terraced .  
Relevant Planning History  
Some of the site formed part of the previous Site Specific Allocation B/C2. The allocation, was 
identified for ‘ Mixed used development to include residential and workspace, a proportion of 
which to be managed affordable workspace’. None relevant  
 
PTAL Rating  
The PTAL rating of the site varies from 2 -34. The majority of the northern an d southern part is 
within PTAL rating 2, with the central part achieving PTAL rating 3 -4 2-4 (current and 2031 
estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is located within the boundary of the Burnt Oak and Colindale Growth Area , which 
has been identified by the council as an area which has the capacity to accommodate 
significant growth . 
 Due to the site’s location within a Tall Buildings Zone  transformational area , there is some 
potential for tall buildings, subject to stepping down towards the 2 storey cha racter to the 
west of the site, and 2 to 3 storey character to the south east of the site .  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site currently has a poor quality frontage along Edgware Road, with most buildings set 
back from historic building lines. The council has a desire to create act ive frontage between 
the two centres of Burnt Oak and Colindale.  Redevelopment at this site should ensure that  
building lines are brought closer to Edgware Road to provide an appropriate sense 
of enclosure, and that active frontages at ground floor level a re provided this is 
achieved .  
 There are a number of trees fronting onto Edgware Road and along Hay Lane. Where 
possible, these trees should be retained and additional trees provided.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As it is wit hin a Growth Area 
such development at this site  should be air quality positive.  
 Due to the site’s location on a historic industrial site there is risk of contamination; a 
Preliminary Risk Assessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.  
 Potenti al noise associated with the adjoining road will have to be addressed in the design of 
the development.  
 The site adjoins the A5, with access to the retail park via a signalised junction. Access to the 
large car showroom is via Hay Lane.  Due to the relativ ely low PTAL levels across this site, 
some car parking facilities will need to be provided .  The council will encourage the use of 
lower parking provision, in line with London policy . The site allocation seeks to introduce a 
residential element to this sit e, whilst retaining its commercial and retail elements.  To 
understand the likely impacts that this will have on local road networks As such , A transport 
assessment  for this site will be required. This assessment,and  should inform any  potential 
transport inf rastructure  improvements  that may be needed to support the redevelopment 
of this site . 
 The site contains some existing Local Employment Sites in the form of industrial 
floorspace related to the servicing of vehicles as part of the car dealership and the 
office provision of Southon House. Industrial floorspace should be replaced in line 
with London Plan policy E7. The office space will be subject to Brent policy BE3. As 
it is out of centre, the site is not a priority location for retail in terms of the 
seque ntial test. Nevertheless, the Council is aware that the retail element appears 
to be trading well, so is likely (subject to other London Plan and Local Plan retail 
policies) to be receptive to re -provision of some retail if it is necessary from a 
viability  perspective to encourage the site’s more intensive development that 
makes for a more efficient use of land.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site is in close proximity to Beis Yaakov Primary School and Nursery, which is a locally 
listed building. Development at this site should avoid  having any detrimental impact on the 
setting of this building.   
 The site is located within an area which is susceptible to groundwater flooding. There are 
also small areas within the site which are susceptible to surface water flooding. The majority 
of the site is located within an area which is susceptible to sewer flooding. A flood risk 
assessment will need to address how development satisfactorily addresses these matters.  
 There are some variations in the site levels, especially within the southern part , which will 
need to be taken into consideration, particularly when considering heights for development.  
Risks 
 Multiple land ownership at this site could increase time taken to deliver . Furthermore, 
landownership , and  could result in  a piecemeal development coming forward , rather than a 
comprehensive approach to the  redevelopment of the site.  
 Impact on the A5, and A5150 intersection as a result of introducing residential development 
at this site. This may increase costs affecting viability or slow  down delivery.  
 Potential for lack of co -ordination with the London Borough of Barnet in relation to the 
cumulative impacts of the Burnt Oak/ Colindale Opportunity Area.  
Design Principles  
Key issues for any future masterplan to include:  
 Residential development along Evelyn Avenue, which adjoins the site to the west, is 
predominantly two -storeys in character.  The western edge of the development should 
respond to the suburban nature of this area by ensuring there is a step down in height.  
 Layout of th e site should improve permeability, and ensure that there are links to the 
footpaths created as part of the adjoining site formerly occupied by Sarena House.  
 Enhance and create active frontage along Edgware Road between Burnt Oak and Colindale 
Town Centres .  
 Provide tree planting along the Edgware Road frontage to address air quality/ Healthy 
Streets agenda.  
 Provision of higher quality public realm, which improves pedestrian and cycle movement, 
and complements the work being undertaken in adjoining Colinda le Growth Area.  
 Development at this site will need to take into consideration the ‘Burnt Oak and Colindale 
Placemaking Plan’.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 
 Increased traffic at site , as a result of residential development s associated parking,  may 
require the current traffic light junction vehicular access to be reconsidered. Due to 
relatively low PTAL rating of this site, some car parking facilities may be required, in addition 
to improvement to the existing traffic light junction including pedestrian cros sing points as 
well as improvements to bus services/ bus stops   
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to 
agree a housing  and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to being required to meet additional demands created through the 
development.  
MM37  
 5.3 North  BNSA3, 
Page 124  Amend policy name to read:  
 
POLICY BNSA3 – HONEYPOT LANE QUEENSBURY  LSIS AND MORRISONS  
 
Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed use development – intensification at Honeypot Lane/ Westmoreland Road  LSIS, co -
location at Lowther Lane  Honeypot Lane/ Lowther Road  LSIS. Redevelopment of the 
superstore site at Honeypot Lane, to include residential and retail floorspace.  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 years  56-10 Years  101+ Years  
194   190   193189  
 
Description of Existing Site  
There are three main areas which form this site allocation  
 Honeypot  Lane LSIS (Westmoreland Road)  - Consists of a number of industrial units that 
range in size and are predominantly 2 storey and surrounded by poor quality public realm.  
 Morrisons Superstore  - a single storey large supermarket and petrol station, with exte nsive 
surface car parking.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Honeypot Lane LSIS (Lowther Road)  – the majority of the  western portion of this LSIS site 
consists of two large units (B&Q and Selco) and associated car parking/ storage areas. The 
buildings take the form of warehouses, which are  at least 8 metres tall. To the north and 
east in the site are smaller units, predominantly 2 storeys in height.  
 The Jubilee Line borders the site to the east. To the north and west of the site is Honeypot 
Lane, and suburban residential properties within the adjacent London Borough of Harrow , as 
well as to the north .To the south is the NHS Trust Kingswood Centre, the White Garden 
SINC site and residential and commercial development.  
Planning History  
 The Morrisons supermarket was previously identified as a  site allocation (SSA 16) for ‘ Use of 
north and eastern section of car park for residential development including family sized 
accommodation. Alternatively, a mixed use development including residential and retail floor 
space’.  
 Planning permission (16/059 5) has been granted for the ‘ Demolition of existing single storey 
temple building and erection of a new 5 storey temple with a shikhar (tower), basement 
level for storage and plant equipment, ancillary library and educational use, priest 
accommodation, and  a function room’ at 6 Bowman’s Trading Estate.  
 Planning permission (18/2183) has been granted for the car park north east of Morrisons for 
the ‘Erection of three buildings at 4, 5, and 7 storeys providing 194 residential units (76 x 1 
bed, 75 x 2 bed and 43 x 3 bed), 60 car parking spaces (including disabled parking spaces), 
private and communal landscaped amenity areas, landscaped podium deck, secure cycle 
parking, recycling and refuse stores, access improvement and other associated 
developments’, subject  to the signing of a S106 agreement.   
PTAL Rating  
The majority of the site is located within PTAL rating 3, with the Westmoreland Road LSIS 
within either PTAL 2 or PTAL 1a. 1a-3 (current), 2 -3 (2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The Morrisons is in an  out of centre location and trading well. There are no sequentially 
preferable locations available in Brent’s town centres locally that could accommodate the 
store. Therefor the retention of a supermarket of similar size on site would be sought. As an 
out of centre site, sequentially it is not the preferred location for additional retail space/ 
town centre uses. In recognition of its successful trading, and the lack of alternative Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
sites within the area, the supermarket should be retained although an increas e in 
floorspace is not required.  Any such additional space will need to pass the sequential test 
and an impact assessment.  
 The site contains two Locally Significant Industrial Sites. The intensification and co -location 
of these sites will be consistent wi th London plan policy E7 ies, which has identified Brent as 
a ‘provide capacity’ borough.  and result in a minimum 0.65 plot ratio or the existing 
industrial floorspace total, whichever is the greater. No permissions for non -
employment uses within the LSIS w ill be allowed in advance of masterplans being approved 
which show how intensification/ co -location will work in practice/ be achieved to result in an 
increase in industrial floorspace. Developments of non -industrial uses will not be 
permitted on LSIS unti l the council has approved a masterplan, which shows how 
intensification / co -location will achieve an increase in industrial floorspace. 
Piecemeal development which would prejudice the delivery of a comprehensive 
masterplan will not be permitted.  
 In orde r to ensure a comprehensive approach to the masterplanning of the site, 
consideration will be given to the use of Compulsory Purchase Powers where 
necessary.  
 
 The site is in proximity to a number of green spaces. Adjoining to the east is a wildlife 
corridor. To the north is the White Garden which is a Grade I SINC of borough importance. 
In close proximity to the east is Queensbury Circle.  Development at this site should seek to 
enhance these green spaces and not disrupt the movement of wildlife. To complement these 
features, the inclusion of green infrastructure should be designed into the site.  MM?  
 A significant proportion of the site is susceptible to groundwater flooding. There are also 
areas of the site which are at risk of surface water flooding , however these areas are  being 
principally within , but not exclusively , highways and areas associated within  car parking  
land.  
 The site is located on a historical industrial site. A Preliminary Risk Assessment for 
contamination will be required, and if n ecessary remediation.  
  Noise associated with the continued industrial use, or intensification of 
employment industrial  uses on site will need to be addressed in the design of the 
development.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The use of the road to the rear of Morrisons as a TfL bus layov er will also need be taken into 
account.  
 There is some potential for taller buildings within this site boundary (around 6 storeys), but 
there should be a stepping down towards the neighbouring residential uses, which are 
predominantly two storeys in charac ter.  
 To the left of the site is Honeypot Lane, which is a London Distributor road. A transport 
assessment for the site will be required to determine the impact that development at this 
site will have on the road network.  
 Development close to the rail sta tion and rail infrastructure will need to take into 
account operational requirements and the potential need to provide mitigation for 
any impacts.  
 
Design Principles  
The design and layout of the area should be determined through the Masterplanning process.  
Key points that will need to be addressed within the masterplan include:  
 Building heights should be around 6 storeys and should step down towards the adjacent 
residential that will remain.  
 Ensuring there is successful co -location/ intensification on the LSIS sites to ensure the area 
continues to prosper as an employment industrial  location.  
 The site adjoins the Kingswood Centre which is an NHS building that provides a therapeutic 
environment of green space for patients. Development should ensure that the re is not 
detrimental impact on its setting.  
 Incorporating green infrastructure throughout the design, which contributes to the 
conservation and enhancement of the adjoining and nearby green spaces.  
 Proposals should seek to promote walking and cycling, i ncluding making provision for a cycle 
route along Cumberland Road.  
 Improvements to public transport, improving pedestrian connections to Queensbury Station 
and creating an additional bus stand on Westmoreland Road.  
 Active frontage along Honeypot Lane, Cumb erland Road and Lowther Road, ideally using 
innovative design to reduce or remove any inactive frontage associated with the 
supermarket.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Social and physical infrastructure requirements for this site to be fully drawn out in any  
future masterplan related to the residential capacity of the area . 
 Retention of space for the 5 storey temple building on site.  
 Improvements to public realm, incorporation of green infrastructure and improvements to 
public transport accessibility.  
 Thame s Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network.  Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to 
agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure i s 
delivered prior to being required to meet additional demands created through the 
development.  
 
Justification  
Within the boundary of the site are two areas of locally significant industrial sites, which are not 
intensively used and contain buildings which  are in poor condition. Given Brent’s status as a 
‘provide capacity’ borough in the London Plan, The proposed intensification and co -location at 
these sites will contribute towards meeting future employment industrial  needs. Furthermore, 
London Plan policy encourages the comprehensive redevelopment of low -density supermarket 
sites. The site is also located in an area of higher PTAL, in relation to the surrounding area.  
MM38  
 5.3 North  BNSA4, 
Page 127  Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Residential, community use, and employment space. , some residential development.  
 
Indicative Capacity  
Unknown – will require detailed assessment as part of planning application. 50 dwellings  
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5 Years  56-10 Years  101+ Years  
50 
 
Descr iption of Existing Site  
The site contains a Grade II Listed purpose built inter -War 2000 -seat cinema and associated 
front of house areas , and is a good example of a relatively unaltered super -cinema from 
this era . It was converted into a bingo hall in the 1960s and closed on bingo use in 2014. The 
building height ranges between two to three storeys. The main entrance of the building is 
located in the north eastern corner of the site.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
To the north of the site is new residential development which is to conta in a 7 storey residential 
block with retail units on the ground floor. To the south of the site is a number of shops, with 
residential uses above. To the east of the site is residential development within the Barnet 
administrative area, which is largely 3 storeys in height. To the west is a residential area, which 
is predominately 2 storey in character.  
 
PTAL Rating  
The PTAL rating of the site ranges from  4-5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is located within the town centre boundary of Burnt Oak. As such, the council would 
like to see active frontage created on this site, where considered appropriate.  
 Furthermore,the site is within the boundaries of the Burnt Oak and Colindale Growth Area, 
being a sustainable location to acc ommodate growth .  
 The former cinema on this site is Grade II listed and is a ‘Building at Risk’ contained on 
Historic England’s Heritage at Risk Register. The cinema was constructed in 1938 and is a 
good example of a relatively unaltered large suburban nei ghbourhood super -cinema of the 
1930s.  Development at this site should ensure that proposals do not adversely affect its 
character as a building of special architectural or historic interest.  
 In comparison to other areas within Burnt Oak and Colindale, this site has relatively The site 
has a  high PTAL level s. Therefore, development at this site  should be car -free.  
 There are six trees within proximity to the site. Development at this site should not result in 
the loss of these trees.  
 
Infrastructure Requ irements  
 Improvements to the public realm along Edgware Road to encourage the uptake of active 
travel.  
 Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree an 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential water infrastructure is del ivered 
prior to being required to meet additional demands created through the 
development.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM39  5.3 North  BNSA8 
(comments)
Page 129  Active frontage sought along ground floor of Turner Road . Development must be 
consistent with the recommendations of the Brent Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment Level 2.  
MM40  
 5.4 North West  BP4, Page 
137 Amend part d) of ‘Homes’ of the policy to read:  
 
d) Minimum of 2,285 additional homes in the period to 2041, principally through  
the Providing approximately 2,600 new homes as part of  development within 
the Northwick Park Growth Area (around 1,600 net additional homes) , including 
specialist accommodation to meet identified demand.  
e) Delivering mixed -use development on the Sainsbury’s Kenton Road site  
 
Amend part f) of ‘Town Cent res’ of the policy to read:  
 
f) Supporting the creation of new Provide up to 900 sqm comparison goods retail 
floorspace, 500 sqm  convenience  goods retail  floorspace , 100 sqm café and 
restaurant floorspace, and 100 sqm of drinking establishment floorspace. Thi s 
should be directed toward  within  Preston Road and Kenton town centres providing 
that they are of an appropriate scale, to support their local function by 2028  
g) Managing the likely overall reduction in length of the Preston Road and Kenton Town 
Centres  
 
 
Amend ‘Community and Cultural Facilities’ of the policy to read:  
 
h) Protecting and enhancing playing pitchfield provision at Northwick Park, JFS School, 
Claremont High School , John Billam Playing Fields  and Tenterden Sports Ground  
i) Encouraging community use of Bryon Court Primary School’s sports facility  
 
Meeting social infrastructure requirements by securing provision for needs arising 
from new housing development, especially the provision of new education, health, 
cultural and community facilities, notably  at As part of the development within the 
Northwick Park Growth Area where the following improvements to community and cultural 
facilities should be achieved:  
j) Redeveloped and/or enhanced university hospital  
k) Redeveloped and/or enhanced university facilities  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
l) Enhancements to Northwick Park Sports Pavilion  
m) Improved setting of and better integration of open space within the site to Northwick 
Park 
MM41  5.4 North West  BNWGA1A, 
after page 
140 Insert new policy after para 5.4.43 to read:  
 
Policy BNWGA1A  Northwick Park Growth Area  
The Northwick Park site will undergo major regeneration, making the best use 
of land in this highly sustainable location. This will provide a mix of uses, 
helping to create a self -sustaining community with a sense of place, incl uding 
around 1,900 new homes (net addition around 1,600 homes). Development will 
maximise the delivery of affordable housing, and will see the existing key 
workers rehoused on site in more suitable and modern dwellings. Delivery will 
include a high proport ion of family dwellings in addition to purpose built 
student accommodation in association with the on -site university facilities.  
Although subject to transformational change, the scale of development will 
need to respond positively to its surrounding cont ext, particularly with regards 
to building heights. Development will integrate strongly with the adjacent 
Metropolitan Open Land, providing green fingers which help to bring the park 
into the development.  
Funding generated as a result of the development w ill be reinvested into the 
existing on -site infrastructure, including the Northwick Park Hospital, and the 
University of Westminster Harrow campus. This will serve to enhance existing 
facilities through renewal, and the addition of complementary uses such as new 
medical, community and sporting facilities. Access to the site will be improved, 
through a new Watford Road junction and the adjacent Northwick Park London 
Underground station being made more prominent and accessible to all users. 
Supporting infrast ructure associated with new housing development will be 
drawn up in a forthcoming masterplan, and as a minimum will include:  
 A new flexible retail offer adjacent to Northwick Park station which will serve 
to meet local needs;  
 A new nursery capable of meeti ng existing needs, and those arising from 
new development;  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 A range of multi -purpose green spaces which seek to enhance the 
biodiversity of the surrounding area whilst providing new play space for 
children, including 2 new 0.2ha pocket parks;  
 Improvements t o site accessibility, prioritising funding toward the most 
sustainable modes of transport;  
 On site combined heat and power centre which will provide a network for 
surrounding major development, including potentially those at Harrow -on-
the-Hill; 
 And enhance ments to existing on -site infrastructure which serves the wider 
area and that of Greater London.  
5.4.44 The Northwick Park Growth Area is coming forward under the Governments One Public 
Estate (OPE) scheme, via the Northwick Park Partnership which includes all l andowners, 
including the Council, Network Homes, National Health Service (HNS), and the 
University of Westminster. Together under the OPE scheme, the site will see the greater 
utilisation of land for residential development. This will help support the furt her delivery 
of essential large scale on -site infrastructures, including those which support and 
enhance the hospital and university functions.  
5.4.45  The site is well connected, being adjacent to a range of public transport facilities, 
achieving a peak PTAL rat ing of 6a to 2031. This includes immediate proximity to 
Northwick Park LUL which includes the Metropolitan line to central London, Watford and 
west London, and Kenton LUL (a 5 minute walk) which includes the Bakerloo and 
Overground lines. There are also a number of buses which pass through the site, 
providing access in and around the local residential areas and serve access to the 
hospital. This strong public transport network will need to be supported by 
improvements to the public realm, encouraging more active modes of transport such as 
walking and cycling, enabling the linking of multi modal trips.  
 
5.4.46 The site is also adjacent to a significant amount of green infrastructure, including 
Northwick Park Metropolitan Open Land, Ducker Pool, Northwick Park golf  course, and 
Harrow School playing fields. These areas include a number of Sites of Importance for 
Nature Conservation (SINC), and provide the opportunity to enhance these areas for 
both nature and recreation harmoniously.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
5.4.47 The site is within close proximi ty to Kenton town centre which will enable residents to 
meet their wider needs. The site is somewhat detached from this area, and should 
therefore have on -site provision which will better enable occupants to meet their day -to-
day needs using sustainable tr ansport modes. The range of needs addressed on site will 
need to reflect the scale of development, and the types of residents (such as families 
and students), which are likely to occupy the site as a result of the housing delivered 
and its location.  
5.4.48 Devel opment will need to have strong consideration of development in the adjacent 
London Borough of Harrow. In particular, this will involve the potential linkages with the 
major development generated within the Harrow and Wealdstone Opportunity Area to 
the nor th, which has been identified in the London Plan as having the potential to 
delivery 5,000 new homes, and 1,000 new jobs. Specifically, development of any on -site 
energy centre will need to assess the potential for connection with this opportunity area.  
MM42  
 5.4 North West  BNWGA1, 
page 142  Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Growth Area - the site has been allocated for m Mixed used development ., including a small 
amount of commercial floorspace and Additional  residential development to enable 
upgrades/ refurbishment to the existing and retained Northwick Park Hospital and University of 
Westminster facilities. A replacement sports pavilion, small amount of commercial floorspace, 
and possibly new small -scale non -acute medical facilities to  also be provided on site.  
 
Indicative Capacity  
Capacity for circa 3,600 1,920  units, of which 2,600 1,585 net additional , development 
capacity will be better identified through a more detailed masterplan process.  
 
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
10-5 Years:  650218 (net 390)      
56-10 Years: 1950 (net 910) 1,702 (1,367 net)       
101+ Years:  
  
Description of Existing Site  
The site is located off Watford Road close to the boundary with the London Borough of Harrow. 
It is formed of five main areas: Northwick Park Dis trict Park, Northwick Park Hospital, Northwick Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Park Tube Station, Northwick Park Hospital Residential Accommodation and the University of 
Westminster. Within the site is a part of the one -way road system (also referred to as a ‘ring 
road’) that comes off o f Watford Road, the main vehicular access for the site . Adjoining the 
northern boundary of the site is the Northwick Park underground station and tracks.  
 
The site consists of a mixed building stock of generally low quality, and is dominated 
by hospital b uildings which range up to 8 storeys in height. The residential buildings 
on site provide accommodation for key workers and students.  
 
Northwick Park Station  is a small, suburban station which has two platforms. The platforms are 
above the level of the sur rounding area, and can be accessed by a flight of stairs from the 
ticket hall. The pedestrian connection from the station to Northwick Park is through a narrow 
tunnel. Access to Northwick Avenue is relatively open from the ticket hall, past a small shop.  
 
Northwick Park Hospital residential accommodation  forms  the eastern, and part of the southern 
part of the Growth Area. It consists of a number of affordable homes provided by Network 
Homes, some occupied by hospital employees. These are terrace homes and flats, 
predominantly 2 to 4 storeys.  All housing is set back from the road behind either grass verges, 
hard landscaping or car parking spaces.  
 
Northwick Park Hospital Campus consists of a number of buildings varying in height between 
two and eight store ys, mixed in quality and age. Large portions of the hospital campus are 
dedicated to at grade car parks. A multi -storey is located in the west. Northwick Park hospital 
provides a full range of services, which includes neurology, cardiology and elderly care  
medicine. It also has a 24/7 A&E service and Urgent Care Centre. It is one of the eight Hyper 
Acute Stroke Units within London. There are a number of trees located along the eastern 
boundary which provide a visual screen to Northwick Park.  
 
University of  Westminster  comprises a number of buildings  forms  the western part of the 
Growth Area. Between these there are some areas of open/ communal space. Halls of residence 
are located within its northern part with an associated green space, not currently public ly 
accessible. This green space has a variation in site levels and a number of trees. Trees line the 
southern boundary of the university site, acting as a visual break between it and the Northwick 
Park Hospital.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Northwick Park sports pavilion provides cha nging rooms and facilities to support recreation on 
the park. The facility is tired, needing significant investment to enhance its quality to allow the 
sports pitches to be used to their potential.  
 
Ownership  
The London Borough of Brent, London North West University Healthcare NHS Trust, the 
University of Westminster and Network Homes are the key landowners , who come together 
to form the Northwick Park Partnership which will develop the site under the  They 
have committed to work in partnership through a mem orandum of understanding to promote 
the redevelopment of land at Northwick Park in a comprehensive manner through joint -working 
as part of the One Public Estate programme .  Transport for London own Northwick Park 
station and adjacent railway land.  
 
Relevan t Planning History  
There have been numerous applications for the hospital site including new buildings, 
extensions, creation of multi -storey car park, ancillary services/infrastructure and facilities to 
support the functioning of the hospital.  
 
Applicatio ns for redevelopment of the site under the Northwick Park Partnership 
include:  
Permission (19/4272) has been granted for the ‘ Erection of a multi -storey car park on 
5 levels for staff only, a separate plant/energy facility and associated works to access 
road at Northwick Park Hospital’  
 
Permission (20/0677) has been granted for ‘ Full planning permission for junction 
improvement works to the A404 (Watford Road), and the widening of the existing 
Northwick Park Hospital spine road to allow two -way traffic; pedestrian and cycle 
improvements and associated landscaping and public realm works, and associated 
changes to access, and subject to a Deed of Agreement dated 4 December 2020 under 
Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, as amended’  
 
Permis sion (20/0701) has been granted for ‘Full planning permission for demolition 
of existing buildings and structures on the site, all site preparation works for a 
residential led mixed -use development comprising 654 new homes, associated car 
and cycle spaces,  a replacement nursery, retail space, associated highways 
improvements, open space, hard and soft landscaping and public realm works.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
PTAL Rating  
The site has a mixed PTAL rating. Around the University of Westminster campus, the PTAL 
ranges from 4 to 5. It then decreases to PTAL 3 and 4 around the Northwick Park Hospital, 
dropping to 2 at Northwick Park Hospital Residential Accommodation and Northwick Park sports 
pavilion.  
2-5 (current), 2 -6a (2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 Adjoining the Growth Area to the east and south is Northwick Park . Designated as  
Metropolitan Open Land (MOL), which  it is afforded the same protection as Green Belt in 
Policy G3 of the London Plan. Located within the boundary of Northwick Park is a sports 
pavilion. It is prop osed that the sports pavilion is relocated, possibly to create an active 
frontage between the station and hospital, but the location could vary. This will also create a 
more open feeling across the park. Any MOL land swap as part of the relocation of the s ports 
pavilion should ensure that there is no net loss of MOL area. The value of the land 
designated as MOL should also be improved, having regard to all criteria in Part B of London 
Plan Policy G3.  
 London Plan Policy H10 does not allow loss of existing a ffordable housing unless replaced by 
equivalent or better quality accommodation that is of equivalent floorspace and price to 
occupiers.  
 Policy H5 requires public sector land development to deliver at least 50 per cent affordable 
housing.  
 There is potent ial for some tall buildings, subject to being a high quality design. These 
should respond to the height of the existing hospital buildings , generally  stepping down 
towards the MOL and areas to the north. Consideration should also be given to impact on 
the locally protected views as identified in the Harrow Local Plan s of Harrow (Country 
Park at Wood Farm setting corridor) and Barnet (Golders Hill Park toward Harrow 
on the Hill) . The appropriate height, extent and location of buildings will be identified 
within a masterplan for the site. Consideration will need to be given to the site’s location 
next to MOL to ensure that there is no inappropriate impact on its setting. Part of the site 
also falls within the Ministry of Defence (MOD) safeguarding zone for RAF  Northolt, in which 
the MOD will need to be consulted if development is over a certain height – 45.7m for 
development that occurs within the boundaries of the University of Westminster Campus and 
the majority of the hospital campus, and 91.4m for the land owned by Network Homes 
which includes the hospital’s eastern car parks and residential accommodation.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Furthermore, there is an area of The green space located to the rear of the student 
accommodation, which has an open space designation.  Whilst it might b e appropriate 
through the masterplanning and development process to relocate or disaggregate this open 
space, overall n No net loss of open space will be acceptable. This will be in addition to 
satisfying the urban greening requirements and providing suffic ient children’s play space, in 
line with London Plan policies G5 and S4.  
 A ball strike assessment will be required  and any necessary ball stop mitigation 
implemented prior to the development's impact  to ensure that new development does 
not compromise the role of the MOL in terms of sports provision.  
 Running adjacent to the site’s southern boundary is the Capital Ring leisure route. 
Development should not impact upon the functionality of the  adjacent  Capital Ring, and 
should seek its enhancement wherever p ossible.  
 Adjoining the site to the south west is Ducker Pool, a Site of Importance for Nature 
Conservation (SINC) (Grade I), also subject to a group Tree Preservation Order. The Growth 
Area’s increase in residents could add to its recreational use as a nature conservation asset. 
Mitigation measures to address potential adverse impacts should be identified as part of the 
masterplanning process and ideally improvements to biodiversity implemented to enhance 
its SINC status. Impacts of development upon the SINC should be mitigated, with 
enhancements to its biodiversity value sought, including consideration toward its 
recreational use as a nature conservation asset.  
 The western part of the site is within an Air Quality Management Area. As such as a Growth 
Area development should be air quality positive.  
 Vehicular access to the site is from Watford Road. This is often congested with traffic moving 
between Harrow and Wembley areas. Development should not exacerbate this the 
congestion on Watford Road,  and ideal ly new junction solutions will improve it.  
 Within the site is a ‘ring road’. This provides emergency services access to the A&E 
department. Development must ensure satisfactory vehicle (including emergency) 
movement is maintained.  
 South Kenton has poor pe destrian access to the site. Furthermore, Northwick Park station’s 
access is via a narrow brick tunnel.  Pedestrian access to the site from South Kenton in 
particular should be enhanced, including from Northwick Park Station which will 
need  No step free acc ess is currently  available to all platforms. Development should seek to 
address these issues.  
 An interchange incorporating a suitable bus turning point, stand and associated driver 
facilities will need to be incorporated into the development . This will  to improve the Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
connection between the underground and buses and potentially transfer bus routes from the 
surrounding road network north of Northwick Park Station .  
 None of the site is within Flood Zone 3 for fluvial flooding.  Parts of the site are however  in 
surface water flood zone  3 for surface water flooding , the majority being highway land. In 
the south of the site, flooding from potential  reservoir failure exists.  Some northern parts 
are susceptible to sewer flooding. More detailed assessment will be re quired through a site 
specific flood risk assessment.  
 
Risks 
 A number of infrastructure requirements are necessary to support the delivery of the 
scheme. The costs of these could result in delays to delivery.  The site’s access road 
needs improvements for w hich the site has been awarded a  £9.9 million Housing 
Infrastructure Fund (subject to contract), which will assist with its delivery. Subsequent 
delivery will need to meet short deadlines.  
 Continued operation of hospital functions during construction phase . Prior to the 
redevelopment of operational land, existing uses will need to be decanted to other areas. 
Therefore, re -provision of these uses on other land (i.e. hospital facilities, staff car parks, 
student accommodation or Trust accommodation) will be n eeded, which places greater need 
on the phasing of this development to be considered carefully. requiring careful 
consideration of phasing.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
Social and physical infrastructure requirements to be fully drawn out in any future ma sterplan 
related to the residential capacity of the site.  
 Upgrades to the junction at Watford Road will be needed to support development at this 
site.  
 Improvements to the capacity of, and pedestrian accessibility to, and within  Northwick 
Park Station, including step free access to all platforms .   
 Improved sports and leisure facilities as part of the MOL land swap , green infrastructure and 
public realm throughout the site.  
 A site wide energy network.  
 An infrastructure agreement will be drawn up and signe d by all four key partners.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to 
agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to  ensure essential infrastructure is Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
delivered prior to being required to meet additional demands created through the 
development.  
MM43  
  5.4 North West  BNWSA1, 
page 146  Amend parts of the policy to read:  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
10-5 Years  56-10 Years  101+ Years  
                        150100  50 
 
Ownership  
Private and small part public ownership  
 
PTAL Rating  
The sites PTAL rating ranges from 4 -5; PTAL rating of 5 is in the northern region of the site, 
covering the majority of the supermarket building.  4-5 (current), 5 -6a (2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site forms part of the primary frontage of Kenton Town Centre, and as an anchor the 
supermarket is a significant draw. As such its retention, or a replacement of equivalent size 
is sought. Th e supermarket’s relationship to the town centre ideally  needs to be greatly  
improved through the positioning of its entrance and creation of active frontage along its 
northern and eastern boundary . This will ensure it makes a stronger and wider contributio n 
to the vitality and viability of Kenton Town Centre.  
 If parking is provided it should be made publicly available and be designed to 
serve the wider town centre.  
 The streetscape , particularly the mini -roundabout on Nash Way is an insensitive over -
enginee red solution that  to the north and east provides a poor townscape and pedestrian 
environment . and needs to be  improv inged this needs to be part of a development 
solution .  
 There is an area of undesignated green space to the east of the site.  Improvements to this 
area of the green space to the east of the site  should be sought as part of any 
redevelopment.  
 Development close to the rail station and rail infrastructure will need to take into 
account operational requirements and the potential need to provide m itigation for 
any impacts.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The location next to the West Coast Mainline/ Overground and Underground lines to the 
west will require appropriate mitigation to ensure occupants of any development are not 
adversely impacted by noise and vibration.  The railway is also a designated wildlife corridor. 
Development should not adversely impact upon this.  Urban greening elements should be 
included within the development to enhance and complement this feature.  
 The site is susceptible to sewer and groundwater flooding. A small area of the north western 
corner is susceptible to surface water flooding. A flood risk assessment will need to be 
submitted which demonstrates how the development will mitigate against flood risk.  
 A transport assessment will be required to determ ine the impact that residential 
development may have on this site.  
 
Design Principles  
 The entrance to the store should have a greater focus on addressing Kenton town centre.  
 Active frontage should be created along the northern and eastern edges along Nas h Way 
and Draycott Avenue.  
 The site’s visibility from Kenton Road requires a high quality/ landmark design for the 
northern edge of the site.  
 The general character of the surrounding residential area is 2 storeys. 3 storey buildings are 
located to the no rth along Kenton Road.  The large site, together with its proximity to a town 
centre and public transport accessibility will allow for some greater height than existing of 
around 5 storeys in parts, subject to appropriate step down/ relationships to homes a long 
Draycott Avenue.  
 Development should incorporate green infrastructure, particularly adjacent to the wildlife 
corridor. This should enhance the natural and ecological value of this area but also help 
mitigate poor air quality.   
 
Infrastructure Requireme nts 
 An appropriate amount of car parking spaces will need to be retained for the superstore.  
 Improved access arrangements/ public realm should be informed by design and access 
statement/ transport assessment.  
 Incorporation of green infrastructure on the site.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network.  Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to 
agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infr astructure if 
required  is delivered prior to being required to meet additional demands created through 
the development.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM44  5.5 South Place  Opportuniti
es, page 
152  Amend second point in opportunities to read:  
 Improve Stonebridge Park gateway through redevelopment of the Argenta 
House/Wembley Point and Unisys/Bridge Park sites.  Unisys/Bridge Park 
presents the potential for a comprehensive redevelopment to include a   including 
the reuse of the redundant tall buildings next to the North Circular for 
alternative purposes and provide a scale of enabling development to support 
provision of  a modern leisure centre  with swimming pool . 
MM45  
 5.5 South Place  BP5, page 
154-155 
 Amend part e) and part g) of ‘Homes’ of policy to read:  
 
e) A minimum of 4,900 additional homes in the period to 2041.  Church End Growth 
Area, providing over 1,300 new homes,  will be extended to include adjoining 
industrial sites and a masterplan produced to guide its improvement to a mixed use 
neighbourhood.  
f) The final phases of Ston ebridge Park will be completed.  
g) The Harlesden Neighbourhood Plan provides policies and guidance on sites for housing 
and mixed -use development in the Harlesden Neighbourhood Area.  A minimum 797 
dwellings should be provided in the Harlesden Neighbourhood P lan Area in the 
period to 2041.  
 
Amend part h) of ‘Town Centres’ of policy to read:  
 
h) Harlesden town centre’s retail and evening economy offer will be protected and 
enhanced. New convenience and In the period to 2028 provide up to 4,800sqm of 
net comparison retail floorspace, and 900sqm convenience foods  retail floorspace . 
This will should be directed to wards Church End and  Harlesden town centre s. 
i) Church End town centre will provide convenience retail for local communities, including a 
market.  
 
Amend part j), part k) and part l) of ‘Employment and Skills’ of policy to read:  
 
Supporting the local economy through:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
j) Co-location of employment industrial and residential uses at Church End Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites, subject to the requirements in policy BE2.  
k) Retaining and encouraging intensification of employment industrial uses at Brentfield 
Locally Significant Industrial Site.  
l) Supporting the research into a ‘Creative Cluster’ and  establishment of a Creative 
Enterprise Zone within  Quarters at  Harlesden ., in accordance with London Plan 
Policy HC5 ‘Supporting London’s Culture and Creative Industries’.  Within Creative 
Clusters  Quarters  proposals to redevelop local employment sites will be required to re -
provide high quality affordable workspace o n site in accordance with policy BE3.  
 
Add new part m)(i) and amend ‘Community and Cultural Facilities’ of policy to read:  
 
      m)(i) Meeting social infrastructure requirements by securing provision for needs 
arising from new housing development, especia lly the provision of new 
education, health, cultural and community facilities.  
m) A new high quality indoor leisure facility with swimming pool provision will be secured on 
the Unisys Bridge Park site.  
n) Protect playing pitch facilities at Tokyngton and Gibbons  Recreation Ground.  
o) A new 6 form of entry secondary school and college will be secured on the Chancel House 
site. 
p) A new space within Church End Growth Area to serve as an employment, community and 
health hub. Through masterplanned development within the C hurch End Growth 
Area, built space accommodating workspace, a multi -use community centre, 
and a primary care health centre (subject to needs assessed in collaboration 
with the borough Clinical Commissioning Group) will be secured.  
MM46  
 5.5 South Place  5.5.21, 
page 157  Amend last sentence to read:  
 
Increased population will give rise to the need for a multi-use community centre and health hub 
a primary care health centre (subject to needs assessed in collaboration with the borough 
Clinical Commissioning Group)  in Church End Growth Area.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM47  5.5 South Place  BSGA1, pg. 
159  Amend second paragraph of policy to read:  
The redevelopment of industrial sites for co -location will secure investment in new 
employment industrial  floorspace and improve environmental quality.  
Amend fourth paragraph of policy to read:  
The West London Orbital will improve the connectivity of Church End to the wider borough and 
Central London.  
Church End Growth Area will deliver 1,040 over 1300  new homes to 2041, supported by social 
and physical infrastructure to include:  
 A new space to serve as workspace  employment , multi -use community centre, and 
health hub a primary care health centre . 
 A new 6 form of entry secondary school and college on the Chancel House site  
 New play facilities wit hin developments  
 Enhancements to Church End Open Space and Willesden Jewish Cemetery  
 Increased greening through tree planting and the creation of new open space 
within site allocations  
MM48  
 5.5 South Place  BSSA1, 
page 162 - 
163 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Allocated Use:  
Mixed -use residential, employment industrial  and supporting community facilities  
 
Indicative Capacity:  
380414  
 
Timeframe for Delivery:  
0-5   1-5 Years 34 
5-10  6-10 Years 120  
10+ 11+ Years 380260  
 
PTAL Rating:  
3/4 3-4 (current and  2031 estimate). West London Orbital could uplift by 1.  
 
Planning Considerations:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Whilst the west of the site was in 2011 allocated for mixed -use light industrial/managed 
affordable workspace and residential, the eThe premises west of Dalmeyer Road are a 
local employment site, and the e ast of this site all of this allocation  is now designated as 
a Locally Significant Industrial Site (LSIS) . Redevelopment will be consistent with London 
Plan policy E7 and Brent Local Plan policy BE2 and BE3.  It will be subj ect to a masterplan -
led approach, demonstrating comprehensive development will result in a net increase in 
employment overall industrial floorspace totalling the maximum viable that can be 
achieved from the existing local employment site, and from the LSIS  a minimum 
0.65 plot ratio or the existing industrial floorspace total, whichever is the greater.  
 Developments of non -industrial uses will not be permitted until the council has 
approved a masterplan, which shows how intensification / co -location will ach ieve 
an increase in industrial floorspace across the site. Piecemeal development which 
would prejudice the delivery of a comprehensive masterplan will not be permitted.  
 If necessary and where it can be shown the existing landowners are effectively 
frustra ting a comprehensive approach to an area’s development that would 
frustrate the outcomes of the masterplan, the use of Compulsory Purchase will be 
considered.  
 It will result in development of a high quality design that effectively manages and mitigates 
any potential conflict between uses and a high standard of amenity achieved.  
 Given the land ownership t There is potential for the Asiatic Carpets site to come forward as 
a first phase. This would be subject to it being demonstrated it would not prejudice th e 
delivery of a comprehensive masterplan for the site allocation or the operation of Cygnus 
Business Park. It would need to be demonstrated the Asiatic Carpets site in isolation would 
meet policy requirements, including an increase in industrial floorspace .  
 The site is bounded by soft landscaping to the west, including a number of mature trees.  
 The site itself comprises expanses of impermeable surfaces, which contributes to surface 
water flooding.  
 There are areas surrounding the warehouse within flood zon e 3a due to surface water 
flooding. A Flood Risk Assessment and appropriate mitigation will be required.    
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located w Within an Air Quality Management Area; 
Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 A health, community and enterprise hub will be needed to meet the needs of the population 
as set out in policy BSGA1 Church End Growth Area.  
 The site has a PTAL of 3 -4, but this could increase on implementation of the West London 
Orbital, giving the potential for car free development . The closest station is Neasden 
Station less than 400m away, and regular bus services stop on the site boundary.  
 The south west corner of the site lies within an Area of Archaeological Interest. Any 
propos als at this location should be accompanied by the appropriate assessments in order to 
identify the archaeological potential and the significance of the likely archaeological impact.  
Design Principles:  
 Development must be subject to a comprehensive masterplan -led approach.  
 Piecemeal development which would prejudice the delivery of a wider masterplan will be 
refused.  
 The masterplan must demonstrate a  Demonstration of high quality of design and 
amenity, and  that any potential conflicts between uses can be mitigated  and a high 
standard of amenity achieved . 
 Development should on its edges successfully  relate to the scale of existing residential 
development to the north and west, with a setback and active frontage introduced to 
the west facing Chapel Cl ose.  
 withAppropriate heights and density will be  determined through a masterplanning exercise . 
 The warehouse currently presents a blank façade to housing on Chapel Close. To be 
sensitive to the adjoining residential, development should be set back from Ch apel Close and 
provide an active frontage.  
 Mature trees to the west should be retained and soft landscaping reinforced.  
 Sustainable Drainage Systems will be required to help mitigate surface water flooding.  
Infrastructure Requirements:  
 The location of the  primary health care centre , community centre and workspace  as set 
out in BSGA1 will be determined through the masterplanning exercise.  
 Thames Water has indicated the water supply and wastewater  network capacity in this 
area may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development. Local 
upgrades to the existing water network infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
capacity is brought forward  prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements .  The devel oper is encouraged to work with Thames Water early on in the 
planning process.  
Justification  
 The site is located in a high PTAL location. The West London Orbital will further improve the 
PTAL of this area further and its connectivity to Central London.  
 Currently the site is underutilised. Given its accessibility and proximity to facilities at Church 
End Town Centre it is a sustainable location for higher density mixed -use development 
that provides for new residential dwellings and appropriate amounts of hi gh 
quality industrial space to meet needs .  
 For development to be in conformity with London Plan policy, including the requirement for 
Brent to provide increased employment capacity mixed -use development will be subject to a 
net increase in employment floo rspace in addition to other criteria outlined in E7, BE2 and 
BE3.  
MM49  5.5 South Place  BSSA2, 
page 164 -
165 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Allocated Use:  
Housing, employment  industrial  and supporting community facilities  
 
Indicative Capacity:  
 
Timeframe for Delivery:  
0-5   1-5 Years  
5-10  6-10 Years  
10+ 11+ Years 160  
 
PTAL Rating:  
2/42-4 (current and 2031 estimate).  West London Orbital could uplift by 1  
 
 
 
Planning Considerations:  
 Designated a Locally Significant Industrial Site, consistent with London Plan policy E7 and 
Brent Local Plan policy BE2 redevelopment will be subject to a masterplan -led approach . Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
This will  demonstrat eing comprehensive development will result in a minimum 0.65 plot 
ratio or the existing industrial floorspace total, whichever is the greater. a net 
increase in employment floorspace, development of a high quality design and that any 
potential conflict between uses can be managed and mitigated and a high standard of 
amenity achieved . 
 Developments of non -industrial uses w ill not be permitted on the LSIS until the 
council has approved a masterplan, which shows how intensification / co -location 
will achieve an increase in industrial floorspace. Piecemeal development which 
would prejudice the delivery of a comprehensive maste rplan will not be permitted.  
 If necessary and where it can be shown the existing landowners are effectively 
frustrating a comprehensive approach to an area’s development that would 
frustrate the outcomes of the masterplan, the use of Compulsory Purchase w ill be 
considered.  
 The Jewish Cemetery to the south of the site is Grade II Listed.  
 The north west corner of the site lies within an Area of Archaeological Interest. Any 
proposals at this location should be accompanied by the appropriate assessments in o rder to 
identify the archaeological potential and the significance of the likely archaeological impact.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located w Within an Air Quality Management Area; 
Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site itself comprises expanses of impermeable surfaces, which contributes to surface 
water flooding. Parts of the road network are within flood zone 3a due to surface water 
flooding. A Flood Risk Assessment and appropriate mitigation  will be required.    
 A health, community and enterprise hub will be needed to meet the needs of the population 
as set out in policy BSGA1 Church End Growth Area.  
 The site has a PTAL of 2 -4, but this could increase on implementation of the West London 
Orbital, giving the potential for car free development . The closest stations are Dollis Hill 
and Neasden Stations less than 500m away, and regular bus services run from the High 
Road.  
 A number of mature trees are located along Cobbold Road and in the B&M sup ermarket car 
park.  
Design Principles:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Development must be subject to a comprehensive masterplan -led approach.    
 Piecemeal development which would prejudice the delivery of a wider masterplan will be 
refused.    
 The masterplan must demonstrate a  Demonstrati on of high quality of design and 
amenity, and  that any potential conflicts between uses can be mitigated  and a high 
standard of amenity achieved . 
 Development should successfully relate to the scale of existing residential development to 
the east ., with a set back and active frontage introduced where there is currently a 
blank wall, in Cobbold Road.  
 Appropriate heights and density will be determined through a masterplanning exercise.  
 Development should be sensitive to the setting of the Grade II Listed Jew ish Cemetery. 
Heights will need to be informed by an assessment of impact on views from the cemetery.  
 The development currently presents a blank wall along Cobbold Road. To be sensitive to the 
adjoining housing, development should be set back from Cobbold Road and provide an 
active frontage.  
 Mature trees located along Cobbold Road and in the B&M supermarket car park 
should where possible be retained and soft landscaping reinforced.   
 Sustainable Drainage Systems will be required to help mitigate surface wat er 
flooding.  
Infrastructure Requirements:  
 The location of the primary health care centre , community centre and workspace  as set 
out in BSGA1 will be determined through the masterplanning exercise.  
 Thames Water has indicated the water  supply  network capaci ty in this area may be unable 
to support the demand anticipated from this development. Local upgrades to the existing 
water network infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capacity is brought 
forward prior to the development creating identified  additional capacity requirements.  The 
developer is encouraged to work with Thames Water early on in the planning process.    
Justification  
 The site is located in a high PTAL location. The West London Orbital will further improve the 
PTAL of this area furt her and its connectivity to Central London.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Currently the site is underutilised. Given its accessibility and proximity to facilities at Church 
End Town Centre it is a sustainable location for higher density mixed -use development 
that provides for new resi dential dwellings and appropriate amounts of high 
quality industrial space to meet needs .  
 For development to be in conformity with London Plan policy, including the requirement for 
Brent to provide increased employment capacity mixed -use development will be subject to a 
net increase in employment floorspace in addition to other criteria outlined in E7, and BE2.  
MM50  
 5.5 South Place  BSSA3, 
page 166 -
167 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Timeframe for Delivery:  
0-5   1-5 Years 99  
5-10  6-10 Years  
10+ 11+ Years 96  
 
Address:  
Church Road, NW10 2ET9NP  
 
PTAL Rating:  
2/3 2-3 (current and 2031 estimate). West London Orbital could uplift by 1  
 
Planning Considerations:  
 The parade is designated secondary frontage. Redevelopment will need to retain active 
frontages  at ground floor . As secondary frontage , there is flexibility on the range of uses  
which could include retail, leisure, community and employment.  
 Workspace will be sought as part of any redevelopment.  
 Provision of a new market should be in accordance wit h the requirements of policy 
BE8 – Markets and Car Boot Sales.  
 The parade includes a dentist which is needed to meet local healthcare needs. Space for a 
dentist will need to be retained unless re -provision in suitable alternative premises within 
walking di stance occurs.  
 A health, community and enterprise hub will be needed to meet the demands of the new 
population as set out in policy BSGA1 Church End Growth Area.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Church Road and Eric Road are within flood zone 3a due to surface water flooding. 
Development  should seek to reduce surface water runoff by maximising planting and 
through SuDS. A Flood Risk Assessment and appropriate mitigation will be required.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located w Within an Air Quality Management Area; 
Major devel opments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site has a PTAL of 2/3, but this could increase on implementation of the West London 
Orbital. The closest stations are Dollis Hill and Neasden Stations less than 500m away, and 
regula r bus services run from the High Road.  
 St Mary’s Church to the north is a Grade II Listed building. The church hall and cottages are 
locally listed.  
 The site lies within an Area Priority Area and the eastern corner of the site within a Site of 
Archaeologic al of Importance. Any proposals at this location should be accompanied by the 
appropriate assessments in order to identify the archaeological potential and the significance 
of the likely archaeological impact.  
Design Principles:  
 Development should create a n active frontage on to Church Road.  
 Building heights should complement the southern parade which is predominantly 3 storeys 
in height and adjacent developments such as Canaletto Court which is 6 storeys . 
There is potential for higher development of up to  6 storeys at corner sites .  
 Given Church End Town Centres heavily urbanised character the open space to the west of 
the parade should be enhanced and planting increased there and elsewhere through 
measures such as reducing surface water through SuDS.  
 Currently buildings turn their back on Church End Open Space and St Mary’s Church. There 
is an opportunity to create a stronger frontage with views towards the church.  
 Development should be sympathetic to the setting of Grade II listed St Mary’s Church and 
the associated locally listed buildings.  
Infrastructure Requirements:  
 The location of the primary health care centre , community centre and workspace  as set 
out in BSGA1 will be determined through the masterplanning exercise  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indicated the water supply network capacity in this area may be 
unable to support the demand anticipated from this development. Local upgrades 
to the existing water network infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient 
capacity is brought forward prior to the deve lopment creating identified additional 
capacity requirements. The developer is encouraged to work with Thames Water 
early on in the planning process.  
 
Justification  
 The site is located in a high PTAL location.  The West London Orbital will further improve  the 
PTAL of this area  and its connectivity to Central London.  
 Currently the site is underutilised, and given its accessibility it  is a sustainable location for 
higher density development.  
 A new market, commercial space and housing will help to revitalise the centre, as will 
environmental improvement.  
MM51  
 5.5 South Place  BSSA4, 
page 168 -
169 Allocated Use:  
Mixed -use housing, employment industrial  and supporting community facilities  
 
Indicative Capacity:  
200300  
 
Timeframe for Delivery:  
0-5   1-5 Years  
5-10  6-10 Years 200  
10+ 11+ Years 200 100  
 
PTAL Rating:  
4/-5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations:  
 The site is a designated Locally Significant Industrial Site. Consistent with London Plan policy 
E7 and Brent Local Plan policy BE2 redevel opment will be subject to a masterplan -led 
approach, demonstrating comprehensive development will result in a minimum 0.65 plot 
ratio or the existing industrial floorspace total, whichever is the greater. a net Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
increase in employment floorspace, developmen t of a high quality design and that any 
potential conflict between uses can be managed and mitigated and a high standard of 
amenity achieved .  
 Developments of non -industrial uses will not be permitted in the LSIS until the 
council has approved a masterplan, which shows how intensification / co -location 
will achieve an increase in industrial floorspace. Piecemeal development which 
would prejudice the delivery of a comprehensive masterplan will not be permitted.  
 If necessary and where it can be sho wn the existing landowners are effectively 
frustrating a comprehensive approach to an area’s development that would 
frustrate the outcomes of the masterplan, the use of Compulsory Purchase will be 
considered.  
 The site itself comprises includes expanses of impermeable surfaces and lacks soft 
landscaping, which contributes to surface water flooding. Parts of the road network and open 
storage are within flood zone 3a due to surface water flooding. A Flood Risk Assessment and 
appropriate mitigation will be requ ired.    
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located w Within an Air Quality Management Area; 
Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 A health, community and enterprise hub will be needed to meet the needs of t he population 
as set out in policy BSGA1 Church End Growth Area.  
 The site has a  PTAL of 4 / to 5, but this could increase on implementation of the West 
London Orbital, giving the potential for car free development . Dollis Hill Station is less 
than 300m to the east, and Neasden Station less than 600m to the north. Regular bus 
services run from the High Road and Dudden Hill Lane.  
Design Principles:  
 Development must be subject to a comprehensive masterplan -led approach.    
 Piecemeal development which would prej udice the delivery of a wider masterplan will be 
refused.    
 The masterplan must demonstrate a  Demonstration of high quality of design and 
amenity, and  that any potential conflicts between uses can be mitigated  and a high 
standard of amenity achieved .  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site is bounded by two storey housing.  Development will need to consider be sensitive 
to impacting on the amenity of surrounding 2-storey properties and successfully relate to 
their scale. Appropriate heights and density will be determined through a master planning 
exercise.  
 The development currently presents a blank frontage to Colin Road and Dudden Hill Lane, 
whilst vehicle repair businesses utilise Colin Road and contribute to a cluttered environment.  
There is an opportunity for development to significantly improve the quality of the 
environment by creating an active frontage s to Colin Road and Dudden Hill Lane . 
 Development should increase soft landscaping and increase tree planting along Dudden Hill 
Lane.  
Infrastructure Requirements:  
 The locat ion of the primary health care centre , community centre and workspace  as set 
out in BSGA1 will be determined through the masterplanning exercise.  
 Thames Water has indicated the water network capacity in this area may be unable to 
support the demand antici pated from this development. Local upgrades to the existing water 
network infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capacity is  brought forward prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  The developer is 
encour aged to work with Thames Water early on in the planning process.  
Justification  
 The site is currently of a low quality townscape. It presents a blank frontage on to Dudden 
Hill Lane which makes the area feel unsafe. Whilst garages to the south contribute to  street 
clutter and congestion on Colin Road. There is an opportunity to improve the quality of the 
environment in this location through development.  
 The site is located in a high PTAL location. The West London Orbital will further improve the 
PTAL of thi s area and its connectivity to Central London.  
 Currently the site is underutilised. Given its accessibility and proximity to facilities at Church 
End Town Centre it is a sustainable location for higher density mixed -use development 
that provides for new r esidential dwellings and appropriate amounts of high 
quality industrial space to meet needs .  
 For development to be in conformity with London Plan policy, including the requirement for 
Brent to provide increased employment capacity mixed -use development wi ll be subject to a 
net increase in employment floorspace in addition to other criteria outlined in E7, and BE2.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM52  
  5.5 South Place  BSSA5, 
page 170 -
171 Amend parts of policy to read:   
 
Allocated Use:   
Re-provision of bus depot and public house or employment  industrial  uses with residential 
above.  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 56  
5-10  6-10 Years 110+  
10+ 11+ Years  
  
Ownership:  
Public/ Private  
 
PTAL Rating:  
5 to 6 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations:  
 An operational bus garage of equivalent capacity needs to be retained/re -
provided on the site, unless TfL confirms that it is no longer operationally 
required, or a suitable replacement can be provided elsewhere.  
 As a Local Employment Site maximum re -provision of floorspace to include 
research and development, light industrial and storage and distribution will be 
required if there is no need for a bus depot on site.  
 The site itself includes an Edwardian entrance incorporating a war memorial and The 
Crown Public House (335 Hig h Road) which is a non -designated heritage asset. To the 
west of the site is the Grade II Listed Willesden Jewish Cemetery, This has recently been 
awarded Heritage Lottery Funding to restore key features and open a visitor’s centre. 
There are views from th e site into the Jewish Cemetery from upper floors. The locally 
listed Willesden Seventh -Day Adventist Church is located to the north east of the site. 
There are also a number of other non -designated heritage assets in the surrounding area 
which make a posi tive contribution to local character, including Willesden Deeper Life 
Christian Centre (344 High Road), a single storey ragstone chapel, and No.8 Public House 
(305 High Road).  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Policy BHC5 of the Local Plan protects public houses and would apply to The Crow n Public 
House. Should the loss of the public house use be justified under policy BHC5, the 
preferred alternative use is employment  light industrial maker floorspace , with the 
potential for some residential above. This would contribute to the existing work space 
cluster in the area and complement the town centre uses on the high road.  
 The site is accessible via Pound Lane and from the High Road via Churchmead Road.   
The site has high PTAL which means development should be car free.  It is well 
served by public transport. Regular bus services operate from the High Road and Pound 
Lane, and Dollis Hill Tube Station on the Jubilee Line is less than a 10 -minute walk away.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located w  Within an Air Quality Management 
Area; Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 Given current and historic industrial use there is a risk of contamination and a 
Preliminary Risk Assessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.  
 Part of the site falls within flood zone 3a due to surface water flooding. A Flood Risk 
Assessment will be required.  
 There are four mature trees located along the northern and eastern boundary of the site.  
 
Design Principles   
 Development should respond to the predominant c haracter of the area, which is two to 
four storeys in height, and  Development should on it’s  the south  edge should  
successfully relate to the scale of  existing  adjacent two storey terraced housing to the 
south , whilst there are opportunities for taller ele ments fronting the High Road and 
Pound Lane.  
 Demonstration of high quality of design and amenity, and that any potential 
conflicts between uses can be mitigated.  
 Development should also take account of  Positively addressing the site’s heritage 
assets including the locally listed Edwardian bus depot entrance incorporating a 
war memorial and The Crown Public House and those  surrounding heritage assets  
including the Grade II listed Jewish cemetery, and the locally listed Willesden 
Seventh -Day Adventist Ch urch, Willesden Deeper Life Christian Centre (344 
High Road) and No.8 Public House (305 High Road) and  the effect on their special 
architectural and historic interest.  A heritage statement will be  required.  necessary and 
although the site has potential fo r taller, well -designed buildings, this will need to take 
account of the setting of the listed cemetery as well as the general streetscene.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The development should take influence from the positive characteristics of the 
surrounding buildings and structures.  In particular, the retention and consideration of the 
Edwardian Bus Depot entrance, war memorial and The Crown Public House is 
encouraged.   
 Tree planting along the northern and eastern boundary of the site should be 
retained and reinforced.  
 
Infrastructur e Requirements   
 No site specific infrastructure requirements, beyond retention of the bus depot and 
associated vehicular access.  
 Thames Water have indicated that currently there are no significant concerns 
with regards to water supply or waste water capaci ty for this site. Nevertheless, 
liaison is encouraged with Thames Water prior to any application to identify 
whether any upgrades are required as a result of development.  
 
Justification  
 The site is located in an area of high public transport accessibility with good access to 
local services, making it a sustainable location for residential development.  
 There is an opportunity to enhance the character of the area, including the setting of the 
Grade II listed cemetery and optimise the use of the site through a mixed -use 
development comprising residential and a re -provided bus depot or a range of 
industrial uses . 
 Crown Public House is a long -term vacant building which is in a poor state of repair and 
detracts from the streetscene.  
MM53  
 5.5 South Place  BSSA6, 
page 172 -
173  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Allocated Use:  
Residential, with potential for affordable workspace, supporting community and cultural uses 
and small scale retail.  
 
Indicative Capacity  
540569  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 440 569  
56-10 Years 100  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
110+ Years  
 
Planning History:  
Prior approval to convert Wembley Point to 439 residential units (18/3125)  
Prior approval Wembley Point (17/0729)  
Prior approval Wembley Point (16/4944)  
Planning applications permissions  to clad Wembley Point. (18/4535 & 17/3244)  
Planning permission application  to develop 130 residential units on Argenta House site. 
(18/4847)  
 
PTAL Rating  
4 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is directly adjacent to the North Circular Road, a major sour ce of air and noise 
pollution.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is l Located within an Air Quality Management Area. As 
a minimum development is to be Air Quality Neutral.  
 Wembley Brook and River Brent are potential sources of flooding and the majorit y  of the 
site is within Flood Zone 3  Part of the site is within  including extensive flood zone 3b 
(functional floodplain). Development, other than water compatible uses, will not be 
acceptable within functional floodplain.  Any flood modelling from applic ants which 
seeks to justify a revision to the functional floodplain boundary will need to be 
agreed by the Environment Agency.  
 More vulnerable uses should be restricted to areas of lowest flood risk and on upper floors. 
Ground floors should be designed to be resistant and resilient to flood risk. Basement 
dwellings will not be acceptable on the site. Development must be informed by a detail 
Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy, reduce flood risk overall and not 
increase the risk of flooding on adjoin ing sites. Development must be consistent 
with the recommendations of the Brent Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Level 2.  
 The area is heavily built up. Lack of landscaping, large expanses of car parking and the 
North Circular Road contribute to low permeabi lity and accumulated surface water build up.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The railway trackside and Wembley Brook adjacent the site forms part of a wildlife corridor 
and Grade I Site of Importance for Nature Conservation. There is an opportunity to help 
reinforce the wildlife corrido r through soft landscaping to the site.  
 The site has a PTAL of 4 being directly adjacent the Stonebridge Park Station and a bus 
stop. Car free development should be the starting point for development  will be 
encouraged, subject to a Controlled Parking Zone  being  achieved . 
 Due to its current and historic industrial use there is potential for contamination and a 
preliminary risk assessment will be required, and if necessary site investigations.  
 The site was until recently predominantly in employment use. contains a light 
industrial units.  Re-provision of affordable workspace will be required to mitigate the loss of 
this unit. The London Plan identifies Brent as a 'provide capacity' borough in terms of 
industrial employment floorspace and as As such an incr ease in  provision of some 
employment floorspace including affordable workspace will be sought  encouraged on 
site, as part of the potential uses associated with a new mixed use community.  
 The site is adjacent to an existing local shopping parade at Harrow Road.  Small scale 
complementary retail uses may be appropriate providing they support the vitality and 
viability of the existing nearby parade at Harrow Road . Given the scale of development 
community and cultural uses will be needed to serve the new commun ity and promote social 
interaction.  
 The development will be heavily reliant on Stonebridge Park station which currently acts as 
an interchange for bus and rail travel.  It has a poor public realm which needs to be 
improved ., subject to agreement being reac hed between the Council and  
landowners.                 
 Site is of sufficient size to incorporate BH3 Build to Rent and BH8 Specialist Older People’s 
Housing policy requirements.  
Design Principles  
 The site is in a prominent location, highly visible from t he North Circular and Stonebridge 
Park Station. Given its prominence Therefore,  the highest architectural quality will be 
required.  
 Development must mediate, in scale and layout, between the A cluster of taller 
buildings is located in this location,  including the 7 storey Unisys buildings and 21 storey 
Wembley Point building ,. and the However, to the north the site is bounded by two-storey Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
housing  to the north ., and The scale and layout must mediate between Wembley Point 
building and the surrounding low-rise buildings and mitigate any potential impacts.  
 It is considered that this area  The site is within a Tall Buildings Zone  and is suitable for 
tall buildings, subject to achieving  development integrati onng well with the surrounding 
context  and charac ter, and being of a  high quality design  and respecting local character . 
 Development must be informed by a detail Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy. 
Development, other than water compatible uses, will not be acceptable within the functional 
flood plain.  
 Development elsewhere in the site will be subject to the Flood Risk Assessment 
demonstrating, through works to the Wembley Brook and other mitigation, development 
would be resistant and resilient to all relevant sources of flooding, reduce flood ri sk overall 
and not increase the risk of flooding on adjoining sites.  
 The Wembley Brook should become a feature which contributes to the character of the site 
and provides natural Sustainable Urban Drainage.  Proposals should seek to naturalise the 
Wembley Brook to improve its ecological and landscape value whilst also providing 
sustainable urban drainage.  
 Tree planting and soft landscaping will be required to mitigate air quality impacts from the 
North Circular and increase permeability.  
 Development should  create a strong pedestrian connection between Harrow Road and 
Stonebridge Park Station, through active frontage and public realm enhancements.  
 Should Argenta House and Wembley Point come forward separately, it will need to be 
demonstrated through a maste rplan approach this will not prejudice comprehensive 
development and the achievement of all policy requirements.   
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Flood mitigation.   
 Improvements of the public realm/ interchange facilities at Stonebridge Park station and 
step-free access . 
 The development will need to mitigate impacts upon rail infrastructure, and 
contributions toward capacity and step free access improvements at Stonebridge 
Park station will be sought.  
 
Justification  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site benefits from good public transport access with a PTAL rating of 4.  
 In its current state the s Site is of a poor environmental quality, with dated buildings. 
Redevelopment would improve the environmental quality of the area, help reduce flood risk 
and create an attractive gateway to the borough and Stonebridge.  
 Draft London Plan policy requires Brent to provide additional employment floorspace 
capacity. Consistent with this Brent’s Local Plan policies allow redevelopment of Local 
Employment Sites such as Argenta House, subject to r eprovision of employment floorspace 
as affordable workspace. An increase in employment floorspace will be sought.  
 The development will introduce a significant level of high density residential development to 
the area. As such supporting c Community and cult ural facilities will be required as part of 
any development, to meet need and create opportunities for social interaction and 
integration.  
 The indicative capacity takes into account that the majority of the site is within functional 
floodplain and therefo re not suitable for development. Should flood risk modelling approved 
by the Environment Agency result in changes to the extent of the functional floodplain, a 
higher level of development may be achievable. In such a scenario the design principles and 
policy considerations outlined would still apply.  
MM54  
 5.5 South Place  BSSA7, 
page 175 -
176 Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Timeframe for Delivery:  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years 275  
110+ Years 230  
 
PTAL Rating:  
PTAL 3 and 4 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The provision of a new leisure centre on the site is required , to meet the need for indoor 
sports facilities in the borough, as set out in the Brent Indoor Sports and Leisure Needs 
Assessment.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Small scale commercial and community uses will be acceptable where they meet the needs 
of the new community.  
 The railway tracks to the south of the site are designated as a Wildlife Corridor and the 
trackside to the north of the tracks is a Grade I Site of Importance for Nature Conservation 
(SINC) (Ha rlesden to Wembley Central including Wembley Brook). Development of the site 
should seek to protect and enhance these sites.  
 There are numerous Trees on which align the front of the site and currently form the 
perimeter of the leisure centre’s car park, a ll of which should be retained if possible.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is l Located within an Air Quality Management Area. 
The adjacent North Circular Road is a major source of air and noise pollution. As a minimum 
development is to be Air Qual ity Neutral.  
 The east section of the site , which is currently occupied by both the leisure centre and the 
former Sperry Univac building,  was previously a bus station . and therefore has historical 
industrial use. In this case c Contamination testing should b e undertaken along with any 
necessary remediation works.  
 The whole s Site is designated as Flood Zone 3a (surface water).  and Large expanses are 
designated as Flood Zone 3a (fluvial and tidal) . The fluvial and tidal flooding concerns are  
due to the proximi ty to Brent river and its tributary Wembley Brook.  
 This is further exacerbated by the low permeability of the area which is also why the area is 
considered a surface water flood risk. The area is heavily built up with the North Circular 
Road and its juncti on with the A404, Stonebridge Park Station and numerous industrial 
areas all contributing to low permeability , and accumulated surface water build up.  
 It must be demonstrated that the development will be resistant and resilient to all relevant 
sources of flooding including surface water. The design and layout of proposals requiring a 
Flood Risk Assessment must contribute to flood risk management and reduction. 
Development must be consistent with the recommendations of the Brent Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessm ent Level 2.  
 With a PTAL of 3-4 4/3, the site is located within a 6 -minute walk of Stonebridge Park 
Station, which is served by the overground and underground and within a 5 -minute walk of 
3 bus stops, each serviced by one bus.  car free development will b e encouraged , subject to 
a Controlled Parking Zone being achieved . Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Site is of sufficient size to incorporate BH3 Build to Rent and BH8 Specialist Older People’s 
Housing policy requirements.  
 
Design Principles  
 A cluster of taller buildings is located on the  western edge of the site, including the 8 storey 
Unisys buildings and, on the other side of the North Circular, the 21 storey Wembley Point 
building.  
 The site has been identified as part of a Tall Buildings Zone.   In this context higher 
density development of is appropriate, subject to being of high architectural quality , and 
providing a high standard of amenity . and respecting local character.  
 Development will need to successfully mediate between the taller el ements and scale of the 
south eastern border where it adjoins 2 storey residential housing on First Drive.  
 The layout of development must will need to be informed by flood risk management and 
reduction, directing development to the areas at lower flood ri sk.  
 Incorporating the theme of flooding mitigation, the site’s Landscap eing should be enhanced, 
increasing greenery , and in the process, permeability  whilst reducing risk of flooding . 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 The development will need to mitigate impac ts upon rail infrastructure, and 
contributions toward capacity and step free access improvements at Stonebridge 
Park station will be sought.  
 Improvements to the bus network may be required to increase PTAL and enable car free or 
car light residential devel opment .  
 Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) and flood mitigation will be required informed 
by the Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network.  Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to 
agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
Justification  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site benefits from good public transport access , with a PTAL rating of both 3 and 4. and 
has In its current state the site is of a poor environmental quality, with dated buildings and 
the long -term vacant Unisys buildings.  
 It contrasts with  the attractive environment created elsewhere in Stonebridge through 
modern development.  
 Redevelopment would improve the environmental quality of the area and create an 
attractive gateway to the borough and Stonebridge.  
 Comprehensive mixed -use development  is needed to help facilitate a new leisure centre and 
to bring the Unisys buildings back in use.  
 This site and the surrounding area would benefit greatly from redevelopment in terms of 
flood mitigation.  
MM55  5.5 South Place  BSSA8, 
page 177  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Allocated Use:  
Residential and employment  industrial  
 
Comments:  
Consistent with policy BE3 an increase in  employment  the maximum viable amount of  
industrial  floorspace will be sought as part of any redevelopment.  
5.5 South Place  BSSA9,  
page 177  Amend ‘comments’ of the policy to read:  
Comments:  
Consistent with policy BE3 an increase in  employment  the maximum viable amount of  
industrial  floorspace will be sought as part of any redevelopment.  Development should also 
take account of the surrounding heritage assets and the effect on their special architectural and 
historic interest. A heritage statement will be necessary. The retention of the Willesden 
Seventh -Day Adventist Church building and the former constitutional club is encouraged.  
5.5 South Place  BSSA13, 
page 177  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative housing capacity:  
1526 
MM56  
  5.6 South East  BP6, page 
184-185 Amend part d) and add new part d) (i) to ‘Homes’ of the policy to read:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
d) Minimum of 5,100 additional homes in the period to 2041, with an important 
component being  South Kilburn Growth Area, which  will deliver approximately  3,400  
over 2,100 new high quality homes  (or, a minimum of 800 net additional homes 
once demolitions are taken into account) , with a target of 50% affordable including 
social rented for existing secure tenants of South Kilburn estate . 
d i)Deliver a minimum of 348 new homes in the Kilburn Neighbourhood Forum area 
in the period to 2041.  
e) Kilburn Square as part of a mixed -use development including re -provision of the market 
and a new public square  
 
Amend part j) of ‘Town Centres’ of the policy to read:  
 
i) Enhance and protect Kilburn Town Centre’s evening economy and comparison retail offer, 
including the creation of a food and drink cluster around the Kiln  Theatre. Redevelopment 
of Kilburn Square is to provide a new market, retail floorspace and public square to act 
as a focal point for the centre.  
j) In the period to 2028 provide up to 7,200 sqm net comparison retail floorspace, 
to be directed to Kilburn town  centre in the first instance. Provide up to 7,500 
sqm net convenience retail floorspace, 600 sqm café and restaurant floorspace, 
and 300 sqm drinking establishment floorspace across the town centres of  
Cricklewood, Willesden Green, Queen’s Park and Kensal  Rise. will provide convenience 
retail for local communities in addition to a restaurant and café offer. New convenience 
retail floorspace of over 500sqm will be in the first instance directed to Willesden Green 
and Cricklewood.  
 
Amend part k), Part l) and add new part l) (i) to ‘ Community and Cultural Facilities ’ of the 
policy to read:  
 
k) Meeting social infrastructure requirements by securing provision for needs 
arising from new housing development especially the provision of new 
education, health, cultur al and community facilities notably Securing 
infrastructure in South Kilburn.  to include a new community space, 3 form of entry 
primary school and nursery and other community uses.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
l) Enhance and protect playing pitches fields  at Gladstone Park and leisure pr ovision at 
Willesden Green Sports Centre.  
I i) Promoting increased cultural and community use of the Gaumont State 
Cinema.  
 
Amend ‘ Employment and Skills’ of the policy to read:  
 
Supporting the local economy by:  
m) Protecting and enhancing Queen’s Park Creative Cluster  Quarter  and South Kilburn 
Enterprise Hub.  
n) Supporting the establishment of new Creative Clusters  Quarters  at Kilburn and 
Willesden Green.  
o) Within Creative Quarters  Clusters  proposals to redevelop local employment sites will be 
required to re -provide high quality affordable workspace on site in accordance with policy 
BE3.  
p) The conversion of vehicle repair premises on Hassop Road to employment industrial  
uses which improve amenity for neighbouring residential units will be supported.  
MM57  5.6 South  
East Place  BSEGA1, 
page 189  Amend last paragraph of policy to read:  
South Kilburn Growth Area will deliver approximately 3,400  over 2,100  new homes  (or a 
minimum 800 net additional homes once demolitions are taken into account ) to 
2041, supported by  social and physical infrastructure to include:  
MM58  
 5.6 South East 
Place  BSESA1, 
page 192 -
193 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 99  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1 -167 Austen House, Cambridge Road , NW6 5YL  
 
PTAL Rating  
5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to  be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking distance of 
Kilburn Park and Kilburn High Road Station mean a car free development should be the 
starting point . 
 
Design Principles  
 Austen will be  a perimeter block courtyard building ranging from 4 -6 storeys. It will provide 
frontage to Cambridge Road, the extension of Percy Road, Stafford Road and the public 
realm between it and the new Blake Court development to the south.  
 The scale and  form of the development should seek to prevent north facing single aspect 
units.  
 It should maximise sunlight and daylight to the courtyard and adjacent northern property 
through the lower storey heights being on the southern and northern sides of the perimeter 
blocks. 
 It is proposed that  The existing uses of Catholic Church and Community Centre should be 
being incorporated into the redevelopment ., in relation to the Church this can be by the 
building remaining in situ or provision of a new building that incorporate s these church and 
community  uses.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Thames Water has indicated the water network capacity in this area may be unable to 
support the demand anticipated from this development, and  upgrades to the wastewater 
network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest 
opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential 
infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The block is of poor construction that it is not viable nor desirable to refurbish, The blocks sit  
within a poor quality landscape .of disparate open space and garages which can be replaced 
by  
 Capacity for more dwellings along sound urban de sign principles that create a better 
environment and provide better connectivity through introduction of new streets . Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM59  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA2, 
page 194 -
195 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 121  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1-72 Blake Court, Malvern Road , NW6 5PW  
 
PTAL Rating  
3-5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Manage ment Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 A terrace of locally listed buildings are located to the west of the site along Malvern Road.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels , being in walking distance of 
Queen’s Park Station mean a car free development should be the starting point .  
 
Design Principles  
 Blake will be a perimeter block building ranging in height from 4 -8 storeys.  It will provide 
active  frontages to Cambridge Road, the extension to Percy Road and between the Dickens 
site to the north and McDonald House/Hampton Close site to the south.  
 A new public pedestrian link will be provided on the southern frontage.  
 The development should positively address the setting o f the terrace of locally 
listed buildings located to the west of the site along Malvern Road.  
 Taller elements up to 8 storeys to be integrated at key prominent frontages/corners on 
Malvern Road and Cambridge Road to indicate the new neighbourhood entrance s. 
 The scale and form of the development should seek to  prevent north facing single aspect 
unit and maximise sunlight and daylight to the courtyard.  
 
Justification  
 Blake House redevelopment sites suffer from inherent internal design problems and the 
relationships between buildings, streets and spaces are also poor and indeterminate . Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The block is of poor construction that it is not viable nor desirable to refurbish, The blocks sit  
within a poor quality landscape. of disparate open space and garages whi ch can be replaced 
by  
 Capacity for more dwellings along sound urban design principles that create a better 
environment and provide better connectivity through introduction of new streets . 
MM60  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA3, 
page 196 -
197 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 116  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
113-128 Carlton House and Carlton Hall, Denmark Road , NW6 5DX  
 
PTAL Rating  
5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels,  being in walking distance of 
Queen’s Park Station mean a car free development should be the starting point . 
 
Justification  
 The removal of another Carlton House block in association with the Peel development 
creates an  opportunity to reinstate the traditio nal street pattern and clearly define street 
frontages .  
 To give greater clarity about  better identify and improve both  private and public 
outdoor spaces and improve tenants shared private space and .  
 Higher density development of currently underutilised make better use of  land. which is 
developed to low densities.   
 A new dedicated community hub is provided at Carlton and Granville Centre as part of the 
wider masterplan.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM61  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA4, 
page 198 -
199 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 62  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
Carlton Vale Infant School, Malvern Place , NW6 5PX  
 
PTAL Rating  
2 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site is  Currently occupied by a school , However, the school is  to be relocated to another 
site within the Growth Area.  
 
Design Principles  
 A frontage will be reinstated along Malvern Road that provides a transition in set -back 
distance from 121 Malvern Road and 17 -32 Kilburn House, Malvern Place.  
 This active frontage which will play a strong role in providing overlooking of South Kilburn 
Park will also turn the corner with and along Malvern Place.  
 Building heights will range between 4 and 6 storeys.  
 Malvern Road will be reinstated with sufficient space provided to ensure vehicles can turn 
into it from Malvern Place. This will form the principal vehicular route as it is proposed to 
close vehicular access between Malvern Road and Carlton Vale.  
 Ideally no or very limited car parking shall be provided between the new building frontages 
and the h ighway and landscaping and planting should be improved If it is , greater 
attention should be paid to both softening its impact on  in the street scene. incorporating 
better quality planting than exhibited at Nexus Court . 
 
Infrastructure Requirements  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indicated the water network capacity in this area may be unable to 
support the demand anticipated from this development, and  upgrades to the wastewater 
network are likely to be required. The site is only served by foul sewers. Local upgrades to 
the existing water network infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capacity is 
brought forward.  Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree 
a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructur e is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The site will become available f ollowing completion of the move of the school to its new 
site on the Wordsworth and Masefield the site will allowin g it to be  predominantly be 
developed for residential purposes.  
 In addition what was F ormer ly Malvern Road highway land will be improved as a pedestrian 
and cycleway to form a continuation of the street that links up with Malvern Place.  
MM62  
 5.6 South East 
Place BSESA5, 
page 200 -
201 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative Capacity  
120-50 net (121 gross)  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 20-121  
56-10 Years 10071  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1-167 Dickens House, Malvern Road 1-78 Craik Court, Carlton Vale, NW6 5HN  
 
PTAL Rating  
5 increasing to 6a in 2031 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major develo pments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking distance of 
Queen’s Park Station mean a car free development should be the starting point .  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Design Prin ciples  
 Create a s Strong frontage s along Carlton Vale, with active ground floor uses if viable, and 
frontage along  Canterbury Road and Neville Close.  
 aActive ground floor uses if viable, with sufficient space for tree planting on 
Carlton Vale.   
 To rRespond  to the gateway context and heights of William Dunbar House / Peel and the 
land mark Canterbury Road/Carlton Vale corner position by creating a tall building up to 14 
storeys . 
 whilst d Dropping in height towards Peel to 4 storeys to provide variety on towns cape and 
facilitate daylight/sunlight to the buildings that will run along the Canterbury Road frontage.  
If commercial frontage is provided this will be expected to be on the pavement edge, but 
sufficient space must be provided to facilitate tree planting defining Carlton Vale’s boulevard 
status/typology.  
 
Justification  
 Poor quality residential block which it is neither viable nor desirable to refurbish.  
 The o Opportunity exists to create a stronger corner which will act  as a gateway to South 
Kilburn . 
 to cContinu eation of   a commercial ground floor use from Queen’s Park to Peel (if viable) .  
 whilst continuing the step change in Improving the quality of mixed use and mixed tenure 
residential  accommodation.  
MM63  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA6, 
page 202 -
203 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 45  
56-10 Years 100  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1-85 Crone Court, Denmark Road, NW6 5BX and 1-10 Zangwill House Rupert Road Carlton 
Vale, NW6 5BY , Canterbury Road  
 
Description of Existing Site  
A more t Traditional,  but poor quality, 1950s residential  block s of 12 and 4 storeys, facing 
onto a communal private/ semi -public space.  in poor quality. Crane is a 12 storey block of Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
85 dwellings and Zangwill is a four storey block of ten dwellings.  Crone Court an d Zangwill are 
separated from Woodhouse Urban Park by Denmark Road.  
Both blocks have historically had a l Lack of clarity about what is the front or back of the 
buildings property,  and between public and private space . , although Zangwill more recently 
has m ade this more apparent by incorporating a 6 -foot close boarded fence along Rupert Road.  
The e Entrances to both are set in a public realm principally  dominated by car parking with a 
limited amount of  green space . at one of its entrances. Both blocks face on  to a communal 
private/semi -public space.   
 
PTAL Rating  
4/ to 5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
 
 
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management  Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking distance of 
Queen’s Park Station mean a car free development should be the start ing point .  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
Thames Water has indicated the water supply and wastewater  network capacity in this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development, and upgrades to the 
wastewater network are likely to be  required. Local upgrades to the existing water network 
infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capacity is brought forward. Thames Water 
will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating 
identified additional capacity requirements. There are public sewers crossing or close to the 
site. The risk of damage during construction must be minimised, and it must be ensu red that 
development doesn't inhibit access for maintenance or the services in any other way.  
 
Justification  
 Current buildings The accommodation is are not viable to maintain or bring up to modern 
day standards.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Redevelopment provides an opportunity to create a stronger frontage onto Woodhouse 
Urban Park  and better integrate the site with adjacent streets including Canterbury Road 
where there is currently no defined frontage and better integrate the site  into the wider 
development.  
 whilst continuing the step change in Improvement in the quality of mixed use and mixed 
tenure residential  accommodation.  
MM64  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA7, 
page 204 -
205 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 40  
56-10 Years 22  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1-167 Dickens House, Malvern Road , NW6 5YP  
 
PTAL Rating  
3 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 A terrace of locally listed buildings are located to the west of the site along Malvern Road.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking distance of 
Queen’s Park Station mean a car free development should be the starting point .  
 
Design Principles  
 Dickens will be a perimeter block building ranging from 4 -7 storeys. It will provide frontage 
to Malvern Road and the extension of Percy Road.  
 The development should positively address the setting of the terrace of locally 
listed buildings located to the west of the site along Malvern Road.  
 Taller elements up to 7 storeys to be integrated at key prominent corners to indicate the 
new neighbourhoo d entrances.  
 The Dickens development will be d Design ed and orientat ioned to avoid overlooking issues 
with the neighbouring school.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The scale and  form of the development should seek to  prevent north facing single aspect 
units.  
 It should maximise sunlight and daylight to the adjacent school through the lower storey 
heights being on the south western side of the perimeter block.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Thames Water has indicated the water supply and wastewater  network capacity in this 
area may be unable  to support the demand anticipated from this development, and 
upgrades to the wastewater network are likely to be required. This site is very sensitive to 
foul water flows. Local upgrades to the existing water network infrastructure may be 
required to ensu re sufficient capacity is brought forward. Thames Water will need to be 
engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a drainage strategy and a housing and 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the 
development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The block s are is of poor construction that it is not viable nor desirable to refurbish, The 
blocks sit  within a poor quality landscape . of disparate open space and garages which can be 
replaced by  
 Capacity for more dwellings along sound urban design principles that create a better 
environment and provide better connectivity through introduction of new streets . 
MM65  
 
 5.6 South East 
Place BSESA8, 
page 206 -
207 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative Capacity  
20296 net (250 gross)  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 20296 
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1-124 Hereford House , Carlton Vale, NW6 5QH  and 1 -32 Exeter Court , Cambridge Road, 
NW6 5AJ  Carlton Vale  
 
PTAL Rating  
6a (current and 203 1 estimate)  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 South Kilburn Conservation Area is to the north of the site. A locally listed building 71 
Cambridge Road is located adjacent the site to the north east.  
 The site benefits from a High public transport accessibility level, being in walking distanc e of 
Kilburn Park and Kilburn High Road Stations  mean a car free development should be the 
starting point . 
 Development must be consistent with the recommendations of the Brent Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment Level 2.  
 
 
 
Design Principles  
 The creation of tThe new Granville Park, on the west of the site, will improve access to open 
space in the area and also create an overlooked public route from Carlton Vale to Granville 
Road. It will complement South Kilburn open space by providing a more intimate space, w ith 
a high -quality hard paved area to encourage use in all seasons.  
 To the east residential perimeter blocks arranged around a courtyard should range in height 
from 4 to 12 storeys and positively address all external frontages providing overlooking and 
appropriate set -backs for residents’ privacy and sufficient planting space.  
 South Kilburn Conservation Area is to the north of the site. A locally listed building 
71 Cambridge Road is located adjacent the site to the north east. The scale height, 
massing, des ign and detailing of the proposed buildings should preserve and 
enhance the settings of adjoining heritage assets.  Lower storey elements are to be 
located to the north towards the conservation area  these heritage assets , with taller 
elements fronting Carlt on Vale. A variety of heights along the southern, eastern and western 
frontages will both add interest and provide the opportunity for sunlight/ daylight to 
penetrate into the internal space and dwellings. The scale height, massing, design and 
detailing of the proposed buildings should be such that they do not undermine the need to 
preserve and enhance the settings of adjoining heritage assets.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Open space to be relocated from the north of Granville Road.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indicat ed the water network capacity in this area may be unable to 
support the demand anticipated from this development, and upgrades to the wastewater 
network are likely to be required. The site is only served by foul sewers. Local upgrades to 
the existing water  network infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capacity is 
brought forward. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree 
a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered  prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements . There are public 
sewers crossing or close to the site. The risk of damage during construction must be 
minimised, and it must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access for  maintenance 
or the services in any other way.  
 
Justification  
 The existing buildings are of poor design and construction, creating poor housing conditions 
and potential for anti -social behaviour in communal spaces , which cannot be remedied cost 
efficiently  through refurbishment.  
 The opportunity exists to provide  Provision of better housing along sound urban design 
principles , creating a human scale environment that integrates with the surrounding area 
and is  more sympathetic in scale to the conservation area.  
 It will be at a dDensity  that reflects the PTAL rating and reinforces the street hierarchy.  
and setting of Carlton Vale in particular, subject to the council being able to ensure  
 Granville Road is reopened between this site and the Carlton and Gran ville Centres which 
subsequently will result in the existing  Replacement of the  Granville Open Space which is 
being developed for housing , (see site allocation BSESA11) with a this site will 
incorporate its replacement open space. This will provide a  better quality open space with 
greater opportunity for  better sunlight penetration, overlooking/sense of security and more  
due to its prominent ce is more likely to be used by the surrounding population.  position, 
which will increase usage.  
MM66  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA9, 
page 208 -
209 Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 0  
56-10 Years 0  
110+ Years 0 
 
PTAL Rating  
5 increasing to 6a in (current and 2031 estimate)  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking distance of 
Queen’s Pa rk Station mean a car free development should be the starting point .  
 
Justification  
 The existing school will be transferred to the Wordsworth House/Masefield House site which 
also incorporates some of the existing South Kilburn Open Space.  
 There will be no net loss of open space. The use of open space for  this site will be of 
significant benefit. It will  create a more regular shaped open space that can be put to better 
use and feel more secure.  
 It will r Raisinge of the profile of the space  in the public’ s consciousness  and its impact on 
townscape by opening up views into the park when arriving from Queen’s Park/Kilburn Lane.  
MM67  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA10, 
page  210 -
211 Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 148  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1-8 Neville House , Denmark Road  NW6 5BT,  and 1 -64 Winterleys,  Albert Road, NW6 5DR  
 
PTAL Rating  
4/ to 5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive . 
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking distance of 
Queen’s Park Station mean a car free develop ment should be the starting point .  
 
Design Principles  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Development should take influence from the Albert Road and Bond developments and 
integrate into the new layout.  
 An active building frontage should be provided along Woodhouse Urban Park and Denmark 
Road.  
 Heights should range from 2 to 9 storeys, with taller elements fronting Woodhouse Urban 
Park. Building are to be arranged around a courtyard with breaks in height to allow 
maximise daylight and sunlight into the heart of the buildings . 
 
Infrastructure  Requirements  
 Thames Water has indicated the water supply and wastewater  network capacity in this 
area may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development, and 
upgrades to the wastewater network are likely to be required. Local upgrades t o the existing 
water network infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capacity is brought 
forward. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a 
housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastruc ture is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The blocks are in a poor state of repair and represent a poor overall use of the space.  
 There is an opportunity to provide more dwellings of a better design which are more 
integrated with the surrounding environment.  in a better environment which better 
addresses streets and integrates with the new development to the north and east. It will 
also create a stronger relationship with Woodhouse Urban  Park. In addition, t  
 The creation of a courtyard will give residents access to more useable private space.  
 This will contribute to the continued step change Improvement in the quality of mixed use 
and mixed tenure residential  accommodation and public spa ce. 
MM68  
 5.6 South East 
Place BSESA11, 
page 212 -
213 Indicative Capacity  
1020 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years 020 
56-10 Years 10 
110+ Years 0  
 
Description of Existing Site  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
aA small public open space essentially of seating areas and forming  within a typically 
functional municipal landscape created in the early phases of the South Kilburn estate’s 
regeneration. The site is currently  a public connection between the two parts of Granville Road , 
which was severed by extension of the grounds of the Iranian  school over public highway. It 
also incorporates  The space is poorly overlooked with no adjacent frontage development and 
backs on to rear boundary fences of villas on Princess Road, increasing their risk of being 
subject to crime.  
 
PTAL Rating  
5 (current  and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and an Air Quality Management Area 
where major developments are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 South Kilburn Conservation Area adjoins the site on its northern boundary.  
 The site comprises open space.  Compensatory open space of equivalent quality  quantity and 
higher quality will be provided as part of the Hereford House and  Exeter Court (BSESA8)  
site development.   
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located within an Air Quality Management Area.  
 Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from a h High public transport accessibility level, being in walking distance 
of Kilburn Park and Kilburn Hi gh Road Stations. mean a car free development should be 
the starting point . A bus stop is adjacent to the site on Carlton Vale.  
 
Design Principles  
 To essentially r Replicat ion of the character of the adjacent buildings. by  
 creating buildings of a m Modest height (typically 4 storeys with opportunities to vary by one 
storey as has occurred on the adjacent sites).  
 The buildings will f Frontage to  the street and be set  back from the pavement edge in a 
similar manner to that of 21 -53 Granville Road , to give This will provide sufficient room for 
a defensible space .to ensure residents’ privacy whilst   
 for incorporation of s Sufficient landscaping to enhance the street setting.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indicated the water network capacity in this  area may be unable to 
support the demand anticipated from this development, and upgrades to the wastewater 
network are likely to be required.  that local upgrades to the existing  waste water network 
infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capac ity is brought forward . Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered ahead of 
development prior to the development creating identified ad ditional capacity requirements. 
There are public sewers crossing or close to the site. The risk of damage during construction 
must be minimised, and it must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access for 
maintenance or the services in any other way . 
 
Justification  
 Public consultation identified that this space is not widely used or known. due to its 
limited visibility and lack of attractions is essentially unknown to the majority of the 
surrounding population.  
 tThe redevelopment of the site is not dependent upon the  reopening of Granville Road 
currently incorporated into the Iranian school , although this would be preferable.   might 
improve its accessibility and raise public awareness there is no certainty that its inherent 
potential weakness; a lack  of natural surveillance will be satisfactorily addressed.   
As such it is considered that there is merit in transferring the   
 Equivalent open space will be provided within to the Hereford House and Exeter House 
development, which  
This site would then be redeveloped for residential purposes. It is recognised that this is likely 
to reduce the amount of dwellings delivered in South Kilburn; the Hereford/Exeter site which 
would incorporate the new open space  can be developed at a higher density. Nevertheless,  the 
reintroduction of the historic building line, likely reduction in the potential for crime and anti -
social behaviour within the public realm and greater likely use of the alternative open space 
merit this approach.  
MM69  
 5.6 South East 
Place BSESA12, 
page 214 -
215 Indicative Capacity  
Unknown  -40 net  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years -40 
110+ Years  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Address  
1-29 Wordsworth House NW6 5YT,  and 1 -11 Masefield House , NW6 5YU , both Stafford Road  
 
PTAL Rating  
3/to 4 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and As with the majority of Brent the site 
is located within  an Air Quality Management Area where major developments  within Growth 
Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 Part of the site is open space.  Reprovision of open space of the same quantity and 
improved quality will need to be reprovided as part of the reconfiguration of the Kilburn Park 
Junior School Site.  
 Retention of There are a number of  mature trees on the site. which should be retained.  
 Reprovision of the existing Multi -use Games Area (MUGA) which is present at the 
Kilburn Park Junior School site, together with a community use agreement 
covering this, and other spaces such as halls, within the school.  
 
Design Principles  
 The t Three storey school building (with potential ly with for additional  modest height 
increase s to accommodate residential development, should this be provided to meet staff 
needs )  
 with clearly d Defined and animated frontages  
 will provide a A perimeter block on Stafford Road and Percy Road, plus public realm to the 
south  between it .  
 To the west the school’s grounds will extend to include some of the current South Kilburn 
open space as a dual -purpose This amenity and learning space . 
  will retain  theRetention of  maturing trees and provide a more clearly defined boundary to 
the remaining open space.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 New 3FE school building  
 When further information on the scale of development is available Thames Water will need 
to be en gaged to establish impact on water supply network and water treatment 
infrastructure.  at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered ahead of development Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
prior to the developme nt creating identified additional capacity requirements. There 
are public sewers crossing or close to the site. The risk of damage during construction must 
be minimised, and it must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access for 
maintenance or the s ervices in any other way.  
MM70  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA13, 
page 216 -
217 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years 35-29 
110+ Years  
 
PTAL Rating  
4 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within  the South Kilburn Growth Area and an Air Quality Management Area 
where major developments are required to be Air Quality Positive .  
 Part of the west portion of the site which is currently serving as a car park has flood zone 3a 
(surface water) concerns, a s does the adjacent Chippenham Gardens road, in particular its 
junction with Malvern Road. This site is only served by foul sewers and has limited access to 
the Ranelagh Trunk Sewer (in Kilburn Park Road). SuDS should be utilised and the surface 
water disp osal hierarchy will need to be clearly demonstrated to determine the most 
appropriate discharge location.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. 
Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air  Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking 
distance of  links with a PTAL rating of 4, being within a 12 -minute walk of 3 bus stops and  
Queens Park, Kilburn Park and Westbourne Park Underground St ations mean a car free 
development should be the starting point . 
 
Risks 
Relocation of current residents and their opposing. Need to decant existing residents.  
 
Design Principles  
 The frontage is to activate the street and interact with the new Chippenham Gardens 
development.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The new building should be 5 to 7 storeys and complement the heights of new developments 
along Malvern and Kilburn Park Road.  
 The development should extend  to the plot boundaries, to provide for the incorporation of a 
useable amenity space to the rear for residents.  
 The layout will have to positively address the massing concerns and interaction with Malvern 
Place; overcoming the potential for a  blank wall, and undefined space to be a product of the 
regenerated site . 
 
Infrastructure Req uirements  
 Green space.  
 Cycle parking.  
 Thames Water has indicated the water network capacity in this area may be unable to 
support the demand anticipated from this development, and upgrades to the wastewater 
network are likely to be required.  that local u pgrades to the existing  waste water network 
infrastructure may be  are likely to be required to ensure sufficient capacity is brought 
forward . Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a 
housing and infrastructure phasing pla n to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered ahead 
of development prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements. There are public sewers crossing or close to the site. The risk of damage 
during construction must be mini mised, and it must be ensured that development doesn't 
inhibit access for maintenance or the services in any other way.  
MM71  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA14, 
page  218 -
219 Indicative Capacity  
213 gross (66 net dwellings taking account of demolition)  
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years -147  
56-10 Years 213  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
1-74 William Dunbar House, Albert Road,  NW6 5DE,  and 1 -74 William Saville House, Denmark 
Road, NW6 5D GE 
 
PTAL Rating  
5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Planning Considerations  
 The site  is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and an Air Quality Management Area 
where major developments are required to be Air Quality Positive . 
 West Kilburn Baptist Church to the south of the site is a Local Heritage Asset.  
 The perimeter of the site is line d with numerous trees which should be retained.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located within an Air Quality Management Area.  
  Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 A small section of the site to the north east has a history of industrial usage and will 
therefore require testing for contamination, with potential remediation works  being carried 
out.  
 The site benefits from g Good public transport accessibility levels  links with a PTAL rating 
of 5, being with a 5 -minute walk of 2 bus stops and  in walking distance of  Queen’s Park 
train station . mean a car free development should be the starting point .  
 
Design Principles  
 Development is to create a strong active frontage along Carlton Vale, comprising ground  
floor commercial uses.  
 Buildings should generally range in height from 5 to 9 storeys.  As a gateway to South 
Kilburn there is also an opportunity for a taller element of up to 17 storeys to create a sense 
of arrival.  
 The demolition of William Saville H ouse offers the potential of for a pedestrian link to 
Carlton Vale which should  to be provided and development provided along this  active 
frontage to create overlooking and improve s afety. environment.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Cycle parking.  
 Thames Wa ter has indicated the water supply and wastewater  network capacity in this 
area may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development, and 
upgrades to the wastewater network are likely to be required. Local upgrades to the existing 
water ne twork infrastructure may be required to ensure sufficient capacity is brought 
forward. The site is only served by foul sewers. Thames Water will need to be engaged at 
the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure 
essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the development creating identified additional 
capacity requirements . There are public sewers crossing or close to the site. The risk of 
damage during construction must be minimised, and it must be ensured that d evelopment 
doesn't inhibit access for maintenance or the services in any other way.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Justification  
 The site is in a prominent gateway location and the current development does not capitalise 
on this.  
 There is an opportunity for development to create a sense of arrival and present a stronger 
active frontage along Carlton Vale, brought to life  with commercial units at ground floor to 
strengthen connections between Queen’s Park station/Salusbury Road and the Peel 
development which will provide a key health  facility destination . 
 In addition, opening up the Denmark Road to pedestrian movement will allow improved 
connections from the South Kilburn estate into the wider area.  
MM72  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA15, 
page 220 -
221 Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
PTAL Rating  
5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and an Air Quality Management Area 
where major developments are required to be Air Quality Positive . 
 The community facility is meeting a local need and is to be retained as part of any 
redevelopment of the site.  
 South Kilburn Conservation Area lies to the east of the site, but is not visible from the site 
due to Peel Precinct.  
 The West Kilburn Baptist church which adj oins the site is a locally listed  building . A detailed 
analysis will be required of the potential impact on the church and its context ,. 
 The site has h Historic ally been in  industrial use, therefore and a preliminary risk 
assessment for contamination  will be required , and to identify if there is potential for 
contamination. I if necessary, further investigations and remediation . will be required . 
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located within an Air Quality Management Area.  
Major developments with in Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels  links with a PTAL rating of 
4, being in walking distance of with a 5 minute walk of 2 bus stops and  Queens Park train 
station  mean a car free development should be the starting point .  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Design Principles  
 To create an active ground floor use that extends the proposed frontage linking with 
Queen’s Park and Peel.  
 The opportunity exists to create A corner landmark building rising to 6 stor eys, and possibly 
higher if incorporating the Baptist Church car park, depending ifon relationship with other 
nearby  adjacent existing or proposed  buildings . produces a successful solution in terms of 
sympathetic relationship/overlooking/overshadowing of o ther buildings.  
 The West Kilburn Baptist Church is to be retained and its setting enhanced.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 When further information on the scale of development is available Thames Water will need 
to be engaged to establish impact on water sup ply network and water treatment 
infrastructure  at the earliest opportunity to agree if required a housing and 
infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to 
the development creating identified additional capacity requi rements . 
 
Justification  
 The premises are a Currently  poor piece of  townscape at a very  low density, presenting 
blank walls to adjoining public realm.   
 given the Good  PTAL rate and higher density emerging context. potential heights of 
adjacent developments  such as Craik House. The building currently presents essentially 
blank facades to the adjoining public realm.  
 The Opportunity exists to develop at  a much  higher density, particularly if incorporating the 
adjacent West Kilburn Baptist Church  car park, whi lst maintaining and improving the 
existing community use.  
MM73  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA16, 
page 222 -
223 Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Address  
The Oxford Kilburn (OK) Club Neville Road , NW6 5BT  and Christian Holt House , 45 Denmark 
Road, NW6 5BP  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
PTAL Rating  
4 to 5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the South Kilburn Growth Area and an Air Quality Management Area 
where major developments  are required to be Air Quality Positive .  
 The community facility is meeting a local need and is to be retained, as part of any 
redevelopment of the site .   
 There are no flood zones within the site, but potential for surface water flooding on the 
adjacent Neville Road.  
 There are mature trees on the we stern boundary of the site which will need to be retained 
and protected during construction works.  
 South Kilburn Conservation Area lies to the east of the site, but is not visible from the site 
due to Peel Precinct.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. 
Major developments within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive.  
 The site benefits from Good public transport accessibility levels, being in walking 
distance of  links with a PTAL rating of 4,  being with in a 5 minute walk of 2 bus stops and  
Queens Park train station mean a car free development should be the starting point . 
 
Design Principles  
 A perimeter block on three sides that provides the community use on the ground/lower 
floors and has acti ve frontages and a positive relationship with the adjacent highways of 
Denmark Road, Canterbury Road and Neville Road.   
 Consideration should be given to limiting impacts on the development capacity of the 
adjacent Crone and Zangwill site s, as set out in th is SPD ., with a view to not undermining its 
identified development capacity .  
 The heights of proposed buildings should be up to 6 storeys to reflect the scale of the street, 
and in  particular the other side of Neville Road as proposed in the Peel developme nt. 
 Ideally the Dylan Kirby memorial wall should be kept in situ, or appropriately incorporated 
into the new building.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Replacement of the community facilities of sufficient size and quality either on or off -site, or 
in very close vicinity , to be able to serve South Kilburn’s needs.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development could require upgrades to 
water supply capacity and is likely to require upgrades to the wastewater network. 
Thames Water will need to be engaged  at the earliest opportunity to agree a 
housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The Trust has approached the council regarding the potential Regeneration of the site 
whilst providing to better support its activities in contemporary premises fit for sustaining 
the charity’s activities and  long term purpose , and improving outcomes for young people.  
 Ideally the com munity use will remain on site , however  with re -provision occurring in new 
buildings. Nevertheless, in the context of planning policy,  off-site re -provision may be 
possible, as long as it can be justified to show providing there would be  nil detriment in 
terms of meeting any local community needs compared to the existing premises.  
 Although in the context of South Kilburn,  some of the buildings are older than their 
surroundings, they are not considered to be of such historic or architectural  significance th at 
their they should necessarily be retained if high quality  replacement s with higher quality 
buildings would be unacceptable.  are proposed.   
 The Dylan Kirby memorial is clearly well regarded by the local community and its 
sympathetic incorporation into an y regeneration needs to be considered . 
MM74  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA17, 
page 224 -
225 Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years 200  
110+ Years 180 
 
PTAL Rating  
3/ to 4 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The north of the site backs onto the Proximity to  railway , and includes the railway 
trackside which is  designated as both a wildlife corridor and a Grade 1 Site of Importance for 
Nature Conservation (Dudding Hill Loop between Cricklewood and Harlesden BI06C). Care 
should therefore be  taken so as not to disturb this valued ecosystem.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The car parks are verged with vegetation of varying quality, including bushes and trees.   
There are also  3 trees on the path along Cricklewood Broadway should not be adversely 
affected by the development . 
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located with  In an Air Quality Management Area 
where major developments within Growth Areas  are required to be Air Quality Positive  
neutral . 
 Significant areas of car parking and parts of Longley Way are within Flo od Zone 3a due to 
surface water flooding. This is associated with the large areas of impermeable paving and 
lack of vegetation.  It will need to be demonstrated through a Flood Risk Assessment how 
surface water flooding will be mitigated and development not increase flood risk  will be 
made flood resilient . 
 The site has a Histori c y of industrial use and will therefore require s testing for 
contamination, with any potential remediation works being carried out.  
 
Design Principles  
 The d Development should relate be sympathetic to the general character and scale of the 
high quality residential area to the south along Temple Road and on the opposite side of 
Edgware Road.  
 Along Edgware Road, in recognition of the variation in heights along its length from Kilburn 
in the south up to this point, and its identification as an intensification corridor towards the 
north it is considered that heights of up to 5 storeys will be appropriate.  
 Along Temple Road and the west of the site that adjoins two storey dwellings, develop ment 
should successfully relate to the scale of these.  
 Due to the proximity to the wildlife corridor and SINC and to help address issue with 
surface water flooding, and poor air quality along the A5 the development should include 
significant green infrastructure, particularly along its edges , incorporating nature and 
enhancing it in the process.  The introduction of greenspace will the site and in the process 
increase ground permeability, reducing any flooding concerns .  
 Given the poor air quality al ong the A5 and surface water flooding, it will be important for 
development to seek to increase soft landscaping and reinforce tree planting along the 
highway.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Potentially parking.  
 Green infrastructure.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Thames Water has indica ted the water supply and wastewater  network capacity in this 
area may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  Thames 
Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to ensure essential infrastructure 
is delivered prior  to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements . 
There are public sewers crossing or close to the site. The risk of damage during construction 
must be minimised, and it must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access for 
maintenance or the services in any other way.  
 
Justification  
 This is a large site which is currently being used for very low intensity purposes, and would 
be much better utilised Opportunity to optimise the density of the site for the 
development of homes.  
 Currently having low aesthetic and ecological value, the site could be developed to 
incorporate nature, creating a vibrant and relaxing place for people to live.  
 Due to the size of the site it should be feasible to include high density elements increasing  
the site’s utility.  
MM75  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA18, 
page 226 -
227 BSESA18  245 –289 CRICKLEWOOD BROADWAY AND HASSOP ROAD  
 
Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years 40  
110+ Years 40 
 
Address  
2435 289 Cricklewood Broadway and Hassop Road, London, NW2 6NX  
Area 
0.695ha 
 
PTAL Rating  
5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site forms part of Cricklewood Town Centre’s secondary shopping frontage. 
Developments should therefore be in keeping with the lo cal character and retain ground 
floor commercial frontages.  
 This site is adjacent the Cricklewood Railway Terrace Conservation Area which lies on the 
opposite side of the Edgware Road in Barnet.  
 As the site has a high PTAL and a Controlled Parking Zone is in place car free development 
will be required.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located Within an Air Quality Management Area 
where . major developments  within Growth Areas are required to be Air Quality Positive 
neutral .  
 The majority of the s ite has historical industrial usage and will therefore require testing for 
contamination, with any potential remediation works being carried out.  
 There are two trees along Cricklewood Broadway, adjacent to the site, which should be 
retained and planting r einforced.  
 Hassop Road includes industrial businesses which are negatively impacting on the amenity 
of neighbouring residents. Policy BP6(q) promotes the conversion of premises on Hassop 
Road to employment industrial  uses which improve amenity for neighbo uring residential 
units. 
 Draft London Plan policy E4 identifies Brent as a borough which is to provide additional 
industrial capacity.  As such ,  
As a Local Employment Site, the maximum viable amount of an increase in 
employment industrial floorspace will be  sought  required as part of any redevelopment, in 
accordance with policy BE3 .  
 With a PTAL rating of 5 the site is well provided for with 2 bus stops, serviced by numerous 
buses, and Cricklewood train station within a 10 minute walk of the site.  
 
Design Pr inciples  
 Constituting part of the Cricklewood Town Centre secondary frontage, development should 
retain a ground floor commercial frontage.  
 Cricklewood Railway Terrace Conservation Area is opposite on Edgware Road in 
Barnet.   Development should respond to  the height and proportions of adjoining 3 storey  
development and be of a quality which complements local character . 
 Given the poor air quality along the A5 and surface water flooding it will be important 
development seeks to increase soft landscaping and reinforce tree planting along the 
highway.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a 
housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure if 
required is delivered prior to  the development creating identified additional 
capacity requirements.  
 
Justification  
 The Current building s currently occupying the site is  are of little aesthetic value , and is 
being composed primarily of materials such as concrete and corrugated iron. This is  not in 
keeping with local character and, if redeveloped, could become more harmonious with this 
character . 
 The site is in an area of high PTAL and currently underutilised as low density commercial 
uses.  
 A mixed use development including housing wo uld help support the vitality of the town 
centre.    
 The public domain in front of the site is quite spacious and would benefit from the 
introduction of more green infrastructure.  
 Draft London Plan Policy E7 requires development proposals on all categories  of industrial 
land to intensify businesses industrial  uses in Use Classes E(g)B1c, B2 and B8. As such an 
increase in employmentindustrial floorspace will be sought . There is a need for additional 
industrial space in Brent, a redevelopment of old industrial  premises allows the 
opportunity to re -provide better quality space.  
 Existing vehicle repair garages are negatively impacting on the amenity of adjoining 
residents. Replacement with lighter industrial uses would help reduce amenity impacts.     
MM76  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA19, 
page 228 -
229 Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years  
110+ Years  
 
Description of Existing Site  
Part of the building is currently used as a church . The site is adjoined by car parking. Gaumont 
State cinema is a Grade II* listed Art Deco movie palace designed by George Coles. 
Opened in 1937, it had the greatest audience capacity of any English cinema (4,004 
seats). It also had a fully equipped stage for theatre use including workshops and Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
dressing rooms. Its 37 metre tower is inspired by the Empire State Building. The 
interior is in an opulent Classical style and includes the original Wurlitser organ.  
 
PTAL Rating  
4-6 (2015/2031) 4 to 6 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
The Gaumont State cinema is a Grade II* listed Art Deco movie palace. The building opened in 
1937 and was originally designed as a cinema but with a fully equipped stage for theatre use 
including workshops and dressing rooms. It has a long history as a cultural and community 
venue. As well a s a cinema, it served as a popular music venue for a number of years. Its 37 
metre tower is inspired by the Empire State Building. The interior is in an opulent Classical style 
and includes the original Wurlitser organ. One of the largest and most impressi ve movie palaces 
ever constructed in Britain, the Gaumont State, had the greatest audience capacity of any 
English cinema (4,004 seats). On the corner on Willesden Lane was an imposing second 
entrance with restaurant and dance floor above. Both externally and internally, George Coles 
(the architect) brilliantly orchestrated the decoration and space.  
 The size and quality of the building has significant potential as a cultural or leisure 
destination to support Kilburn’s role as a major town centre and in Lond on’s night 
time economy and as such its more intensive use to support these objectives will 
be supported.  
 Given its Grade II* Listed  significance early consultation is advised with consultees such 
as Historic England, C20 Society, and Theatres Trust.  Applications for changes of use 
and substantial alterations to the building will need to be supported and justified 
within a Heritage Statement.  
 Continued access to the adjacent carpark area and workshop at the rear which, when 
back in use, would be are cons idered essential to the long term viability of servicing the 
building  for large scale productions and should not be compromised .  Any proposals 
for the building and the car park must be considered with this in mind.  
 The site is adjacent Brondesbury Mews w hich has a terrace of Locally Listed Buildings.    
 The site is also a djacent an area which has been identified in the Heritage and Place -making 
Strategy for designation as a possible conservation area extension to the Kilburn 
Conservation Area .  
 The buildin g is located within Kilburn Major Town Centre.  
 The area benefits from High public transport accessibility levels within walking distance 
of Kilburn High Road station and Brondesbury Park are the closest tube and overground Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
stations . The area is also serve d by various bus routes from 6 bus stops within the vicinity . 
Car free development is the starting point.  
 The site is  Within an Air Quality Management Area, with the adjoining A5 being a major 
source of both air and noise pollution. As a minimum development is to be Air Quality 
Neutral.  
 
Design Principles  
 As well as being a building of significance it is adjacent to a terrace of locally listed 
buildings in Brondesbury Mews and a possible conservation area extension to the 
Kilburn Conservation Area  (see Heritage and Placemaking Strategy).  As such, 
retention, preservation and enhancement of Any proposals will be required to retain 
and enhance  the Gaumont State building and its setting  are required . the building’s interior 
forms part of its significa nce and should be preserved . Applications for substantial 
alterations to the building will need to be supported and justified within a Heritage 
Statement and early engagement with the council is advised.   
 In addition, applications for change of use will n eed to be supported by a detailed analysis of 
the potential need and impact of the proposed use on the building and its context as well as 
any public benefit. Buildings such as this are required elements of a sustainable community, 
providing social, cultur al, environmental and economic benefits as well as regeneration. 
They make a major contribution to the vitality of town centres and are a significant element 
of the Borough’s cultural infrastructure.  
The immediately adjacent carpark forms part of the get i n area and access to the workshop 
at the rear of the Gaumont which, when back in use, would be used on a regular basis and 
will be essential to the long term viability of the building.  Any proposals for the building and 
the car park must be considered wit h this in mind.  
 
Justification  
 The Gaumont Cinema is a Heritage asset of national importance which has played an 
important role in Kilburn’s history , currently At present the building is an  underutilised . 
public asset, as only parts of the building are use d by a church group  
Promoting full use of the building for cultural, leisure and community uses will help 
safeguard its future, and allow the wider community to access the facility.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Gaumont State is located within Kilburn Town Centre, and increasing its use for cultural, 
leisure and community activities will contribute to the vibrancy of Kilburn Town Centre and 
its night time offer and help safeguard its future.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MM77  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA20, 
page 230 -
231 Insert Site Plan:  
 
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years 50  
110+ Years 50 
 
PTAL Rating  
6a (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 As The market and units fronting the High Road form  part of the primary frontage of Kilburn 
Major Town C entre ,. As such, development should maintain an active frontage along the 
High Road and include retail floorspace.  
 The market adds to the vibrancy of the centre and will is to be required to be  retained and 
improved in accordance with the requirements of policy BE8 – Markets and Car Boot 
Sales.  
 To the south the site is bounded by Brondesbury Road , which forms part of Kilburn 
Conservation Area. The road comprises 2 to 3 storey brick villas built pre -1865.  
 Number 10 Brondesbury Road is locally listed.  
 The north -eastern corner of the site is located within a Site of Archaeological Importance 
which will require appropriate assessment and if necessary mitigation strategies 
prior to development . 
 The area benefits from High public transport accessibility levels.  Kilburn High Road station 
(Overground) is 200m south east  and Kilburn Park stations are close  (Bakerloo) 400m 
south of the site. The area is also served by various bus routes from 6 bus stops within the 
vicinity , car free development should be the startin g point . 
 Improving accessibility and connectivity between The main access point onto the site 
is from Kilburn High Road  and Kilburn Square via potentially reconfigured market 
area, and consideration of , which forms part of the A5, a busy route into Central London. 
There is also access to the residential areas through Brondesbury Road.  
 Although much of the site is hard landscaped, Kilburn Square is soft landscaped and 
provides amenity space for residents.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 There are a number of mature trees within the  square along the High Road, Brondesbury 
Road to the south of the site is lined with trees.  
 A number of a Areas of hard standing to the rear of the site are within flood zone 3a due to 
potential for surface water flooding. A Flood Risk Assessment will be r equired.  
 The site is Within an Air Quality Management Area, with the adjoining A5 being a major 
source of both air and noise pollution.  As a minimum development is to be Air Quality 
Neutral.  
 A number of night time uses are concentrated within Kilburn Hi gh Road which can generate 
noise. The ‘agent of change’ principle will apply , with regards to High Road night -time 
uses.  This means  Development which introduces sensitive uses to an area (for example 
housing) will be responsible for managing and mitigating the impact from existing uses.  
 
Design Principles  
 Comprehensive approach by the two principal landowners for Kilburn Square to be 
enhanced and function as a single new public square space, suitable for residents’ 
amenity, events,  and a modern market facility , as will create  a focal point both for the site 
adjacent residential estate and Kilburn High Road. The layout and design of the square 
should enable its use for events.  
 Kilburn High Road frontage provides an opportunity for a comprehensive 
redeve lopment to use land more efficiently providing space that meets modern 
retailing requirements and reinstate a streetscape that is more consistent with the 
urban design principles applied in the rest of the town centre, with a ctive frontages 
should be locat ed along Kilburn High Road and the square, with  at ground floor and 
mixed -use development above.  
 Adjacent is Brondesbury Road, part of Kilburn Conservation Area comprising 2 to 3 
storey brick villas built pre -1865 and number 10 is locally listed.  Develop ment 
fronting the High Road  should integrate well with the surrounding context and consider 
character, setting, and the form and scale of neighbouring buildings.  
 Given surface water flooding and poor air quality it will be important development seeks to 
increase soft landscaping.  
 There are a number of  Mature trees within the square , and along the High Road, and along 
Brondesbury Road to the south  of the site is lined with trees should where possible be 
retained and reinforced . Tree planting should be prot ected and reinforced, particularly 
along the A5 . Development, through its layout and materials, should mitigate impacts from 
the A5 and nearby night time uses.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Re-provision of the market and creation of a new public square.  Replacement of health 
centre with an alternative use that meets community needs.  
 
Justification  
 The market and buildings are now dated . The layout does not make the most efficient use of 
the land and has poor permeability connectivity .  
 At present Kilburn Hi gh Road Lacks of a focal point and although this site contains a wide 
paved area, its linear form and the fact it is bounded by the busy A5 mean that it is  
currently not a desirable location to spend time or hold events.  
 Kilburn has the highest comparison  goods turnover of any centre in the Borough, and has 
increased its market share over the past decade.  The Brent Retail & Leisure Needs Study 
identifies Kilburn as having the highest comparison goods turnover of any centre in 
the Borough . to continue this positive momentum, and additional comparison retail 
floorspace should be directed to this town centre.  
 This site is a key Opportunity to meet the need for additional comparison retail floorspace to 
meet needs ,  in Kilburn Town Centre, and create a new focal point in the form of a modern 
public square and market facility , and  . As a town centre location with good public transport 
accessibility, both the NPPF and London Plan policy promote intensification for mixed -use 
development including residential . Ther e is scope for this to be achieved through an 
improved layout which makes more efficient use of the land .  
MM78  
  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA21, 
page 232  Insert Site Plan:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
 
Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Existing Use  
Supermarket, car parking and an employment  retail use.  
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use including housing  and retail and employment uses.  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
01-5 Years  
56-10 Years 25  
110+ Years 25 
 
Description of Existing Site  
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
The site consists of a large single storey Sainsbury’s supermark et and large expanse of car 
parking. In the north east corner of the site is a  vehicle repair garage fireplace and antique 
architectural pieces showroom and associated car park. To the north the site is bounded by 
rows of 3.5 storey terraced housing with g round floor commercial uses. To the south and east, 
the site is bounded by residential gardens. The site is accessible from Willesden High Road via 
Ellis Close, Richmond Avenue and Poplars Avenue. Poplars Avenue is pedestrianised and is not 
accessible for vehicles.  
 
PTAL Rating  
4 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is Within Willesden District Town Centre Secondary Shopping Frontage where 
replacement ground floor retail frontage will be sought  and is adjacent to the 
Willesden Town  Centre Conservation Area . The Sainsbury’s currently represents part of 
Willesden Town Centres Secondary Shopping Frontage.  
 The site lacks soft landscaping with the exception of four trees on site.  
 As with the majority of Brent the site is located Within an Air Quality Management Area. As a 
minimum development is to be Air Quality Neutral.  
 The site has a history of industrial use. The north east corner of the plot is currently a 
vehicle repair garage and is therefore currently industrial. Testing for cont amination should 
be undertaken along with any necessary remediation works.  
 An increase in employment floorspace will be required as part of any redevelopment.  
 The site contains an existing employment use.  The draft London Plan requires Brent to 
provide add itional employment floorspace capacity. As such an increase in employment 
floorspace will be sought.  
 Surrounding the supermarket are small areas designated as Flood Zone 3A due to the risk of 
surface water flooding. A Drainage and Flood Risk Assessment sh ould identify measures to 
mitigate the potential flood risk.  
 With a PTAL of 4 , the site is located within a 10 -minute walk of  and Willesden Green 
underground  station  close by, car free development should be the starting point and 
within a 5 -minute walk o f numerous bus services .  
 The Sainsbury’s supermarket is an anchor store which contributes to the vitality of the town 
centre.   It also helps to meet the borough need for convenience retail floorspace. A 
supermarket should therefore be retained as part of  any proposal.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Justification  
 The site is currently Underutilised with large site in a residential area, with land used 
for land dedicated to  car parking . It is a large site in a residential area  which could provide 
significant uplift in housing.  
 The site  is Well serviced with a variety of stores along the High Road to the north and within 
close walking distance to transport facilities, making it a sustainable location for residential 
development.  
 The site has low landscape value and would benefit from th e introduction of greenery. This 
could also help mitigate surface water flood risk.  
 To protect the vitality and viability of the centre the supermarket should be 
retained.   The Sainsbury’s supermarket is an anchor store which contributes to the vitality 
of the town centre. It also helps to meet the borough need for convenience retail floorspace. 
A supermarket should therefore be retained as part of any proposal.  
 The site contains an existing employment use. The draft London Plan requires Brent to 
provide additional employment floorspace capacity. As such an increase in employment 
floorspace will be sought.  
 Retention of employment floorspace in this location is consistent with the designation of 
Willesden as a creative quarter. This designation is informed  by the Brent Workspace Study 
which identifies demand for workspace within Willesden.  
MM79  
 
  5.6 South East 
Place BSESA22, 
page 233  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative Homes: 20 42  
Comments:  17/0322 pending decision  minded to approve  
5.6 South East 
Place BSESA25, 
page 233  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative Homes:  5070 
Comments:  17/5291 allowed at appeal  
5.6 South East 
Place BSESA28, 
page 233  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Allocated Use: Mixed -use employment industrial  and residential  
5.6 South East 
Place BSESA34, 
page 233  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative Homes: Unknown 20 
5.6 South East 
Place BSES A35, 
page 233  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Existing Use: Storage and health and fitness centre .  
Allocated Use: Residential,  commercial  and industrial employment in the B use class  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Comments: An uplift in employment  The maximum viable provision of industrial  floorspace 
will be required as part of any redevelopment.  
MM80  
 5.7 South West  
Place  BP7, page 
241 Amend part b) of ‘Character, Heritage and Design’ to read:  
a) Conserving and enhancing heritage assets including the Shree Sanatan Hindu Mandir 
on Ealing Road and the listed buildings and gardens of Barham Park.  
b) Respecting the low -rise character of the Sudbury and Wembley su burban residential 
areas, through focusing tall buildings (as defined in Policy BD2) in the Growth Areas of 
Wembley and Alperton.  and elsewhere  In the intensification corridors of A404 Harrow 
Road and A4005 Bridgewater Road/Ealing Road, A4089 Ealing Road, A404 Watford 
Road buildings where around 15 metres (5 -storeys) could be appropriate and Sudbury 
and Ealing Road town centres where  buildings  around 15 -18 metres  (5-6 storeys) 
could be appropriate.  
c) Creating a strong link between Wembley and Wembley Park tow n centres through 
public realm and junction improvements and new development to the east of 
Wembley Triangle, forming a continuous active frontage between the two centres.  
 
Amend part d) and part e) and add new part d i) to ‘Homes’ to read:  
d) Minimum of 10, 600 additional homes in the period to 2041 through  Continuing 
residential -led mixed -use development within  the Alperton Growth Area 
(minimum 6,800 additional homes) and  the Wembley Growth Area (that also 
crosses into the Central Place)  and Alperton Growth Areas , the Ealing Road and 
Sudbury town centres and intensification corridors.  
di) Delivering a minimum of 245 new homes in the Sudbury Town 
Neighbourhood Plan area in the period to 2041.  
e) Co-locating residential uses on areas of industrial and employment land within the 
Alperton Growth Area, taking advantage of areas well -served by public transport. 
Where alternative uses are co -located on industrial sites this will be as part of a 
comprehensive regeneration scheme which ensures no net loss of  a net increase in  
industrial floorspace.   
 
Amend part g) of ‘Town Centres’ to read:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
f) Protecting and enhancing the retail function of Wembley town centre by clearly 
defining acceptable ground floor uses and maintaining a strong retail core on the high 
road. 
g) Providing a quality, diverse retail offer in Wembley town centre by providing for an 
additional 4,300sqm of A3 food and drink and A4 pubs/drinking establishments 
floorspace particularly in secondary shopping frontages to further support an evening 
economy and support the centre’s potential change in status to a metropolitan centre 
in the London hierarchy.  2,100 sqm of additional comparison retail floorspace, 
and 4,3002 sqm of convenience retail floorspace to 2028, in addition to that 
already existing and consented.  
h) Promoting uses which enhance and diversify the cultural and commercial leisure offer, 
particularly those which provide ‘family entertainment’.  
 
Amend part j) of ‘Em ployment and Skills’ to read:  
i) Encouraging the intensification of existing Strategic Industrial Locations and Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites around Alperton.  
j) Introducing mixed -use development to employment  industrial  sites around the 
junction of Eali ng Road and Bridgewater Road.  
k) Increasing the supply of workspace in Wembley and Alperton including affordable 
workspace as set out in Policy BE3  
MM81  5.7 South West  
Place 5.7.25, 
page 244  Amend para 5.7.25 to read:  
 
The Sudbury Town  Neighbourhood Plan supports development that results in the strengthening 
of Vale Farm as a regional centre for sports excellence. and that  It identifies that improvements 
should not result in the loss of green space or open space, nor involve change of use and 
development o ther than for uses which support recreation, sporting and amenity use.  
MM82  
 5.7 South West  
Place  BSWGA1, 
page 244  Amend Policy to read:  
Alperton Growth Area’s transformation as an extensive area of mixed use residential led regeneration 
principally focussed along the Grand Union canal will continue between Alperton and 
                                                           
2Total combined floorspace to be delivered over the Central and South West Places.   Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Stonebridge Park stations. The area will be a location for tall er  buildings at its Ealing Road and 
Northfields ends, with principally mid -rise in between.  
Investment in the canal and its setting on adjacent sites will enhance its role as an increasingly 
important environmental, recreational and movement corridor that draws the area together 
rather than acting as a divide.  
 
In addition to over 6000 6,800 additional homes, Alperton will  be encouraged to become an 
enterprise hub . This will principally be through new business and employment floorspace 
within those residential developments to provide a major boost to business and employment 
opportunities . This will deliver a new varied sup ply of neighbourhood friendly modern light 
industrial premises, studios and managed workspaces for local business, creative industries, 
and artists to reinvigorate the local economy .  
 
All developments will achieve the highest design standards and contribu te positively better integrating 
the canal and its hinterland into Alperton into the surrounding area. Energy efficient design and 
renewable energy are encouraged. Development will be supported by associated additions to 
social infrastructure identified in  the Infrastructure Delivery Plan, which will include:  
 public squares and pocket parks A series  of equipped  play areas within new 
developments and open space  
 Creation of informal recreation, Good quality public realm  along the canal and 
linking improved p edestrian and cycling routes;  
 4 x 0.2ha Pocket park  
 Improvements to the quality and accessibility of existing public open spaces;  
 Opportunities for Food growing  
 New nursery facilities;  
 New health facilities (as part of the Northfields Industrial Estate regeneration scheme)  
 A new 1 -hectare public open space;  
 Multi-use community centre;  
 Roads/Junction and other public transport improvements; and  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Planting new trees.  
MM83  5.7 South West  
Place  BSWSA1, 
page 248 -
249 
 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative Capacity  
1200 1850  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 650 1,059  
5-10  6-10 Years 350 114  
10+ 11+ Years 200 677  
 
PTAL Rating  
3-5 (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The sites are within Alperton Growth Area,  and have been partially allocated for 
development previously, albeit at much lower densities than currently proposed.  
 Excluding the site of The Boat public house, these sites are all designated as Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites and therefore, in line with London Plan requi rements  Policy 
BE2, there must be a minimum replacement of the existing amount of employment  
floorspace or  0.65 plot ratio, or the existing industrial floorspace total,  whichever is 
the greater across the sites . The configuration of employment industrial  floorspace will 
be agreed as part of the forthcoming masterplan process.  
 Developments of non -industrial uses will not be permitted on LSIS until the 
council has approved a masterplan, which shows how intensification / co -
location will achieve an increase in  industrial floorspace. Piecemeal 
development which would prejudice the delivery of a comprehensive 
masterplan will not be permitted.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 If necessary and where it can be shown the existing landowners are effectively 
frustrating a comprehensive approach to an  area’s development that would 
frustrate the outcomes of the masterplan, the use of Compulsory Purchase will 
be considered.  
 The site contains no recognised heritage assets, however Alperton Station is Locally 
Listed and any future development must take ca re to preserve and enhance its heritage 
value.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Given current and historic industrial use there is a  risk of contamination and a 
Preliminary Risk Assessment will be required, and if necessary remediation.  
 Potential noise associated with the roads and adjacent employment uses will have to be 
addressed in design of development.  
 The railway line along the northern boundary of the sites is designated as a wildlife 
corridor. Development and its associated  should take care to protect this area from any  
works which would  should not  compromise its biodiversity and retain . There are a 
number of  mature trees acros s the sites which should be retained  where possible.  
 An operational bus garage of equivalent capacity needs to be retained/re -
provided on the site unless TfL confirms that it is no longer operationally 
required, or a suitable replacement can be provided el sewhere.  
 Development close to the rail station and rail infrastructure will need to take 
into account operational requirements and the potential need to provide 
mitigation for any impacts.  
 Contributions will be sought towards potential capacity and/or ste p free access 
improvements at Alperton station that are likely to be needed to accommodate 
the cumulative impact of development related trips from this and other nearby 
sites in the Alperton Growth Area.  
 Parts of the site in the south are adjacent to the Grand Union canal and classified under 
Green Chain and Waterside Development Policy BGI1, where management, integration 
and enhancement of existing green and blue infrastructure are encouraged. The southern Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
boundary along the Grand Union Canal will need an  appropriate set back, landscaping 
and public access as part of a wider connection along the northern side of the canal.  
 The enhancement of the existing moorings along the southern stretch of the canal should 
be considered in association with the Canals a nd Rivers Trust. In addition, developers will 
be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon energy source to heat 
and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy strategy set out as part of its 
sustainability statement.  
 Thames Water ha s indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivere d prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
Design Principles  
 Given the height of the  permitted Minavil House scheme and  surrounding buildings 
including Peppermint Heights and residential development on the south side of the Grand 
Union Canal, these sites are deemed suitable to continue the cluster of tall buildings 
around Alperton Station in line with London Plan guidance.  
 Tall buildings should be centred on the junction of Ealing Road and Bridgewater Road, 
stepping do wn towards the peripheries of the sites where in some cases it is likely that 
adjacent two storey residential properties will remain.  
 Alperton Station should be well connected to or integrated into new development, 
providing a high quality public realm/ped estrian/cyclist environment.  
 Potential noise associated with the roads and adjacent employment uses will have to be 
addressed in design of development.  The sites to the east of Bridgewater Road must take 
account of the significant noise constraints creat ed by the adjacent railway line.  
 The Minavil House and Alperton House site should come forward in line with principles set 
out as part of planning permission 16/2629 and 18/4199.  
 Active frontages should be created where development is adjacent to a road an d along 
the open spaces north of the canal.  
Infrastructure Requirements  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Social, physical and sustainable infrastructure requirements to be fully drawn out in any 
future masterplan related to the residential capacity of the site.  
 The enhancement of the exi sting moorings along the southern stretch of the 
canal should be considered in association with the Canals and Rivers Trust. In 
addition, developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water as a 
low carbon energy source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an 
energy strategy set out as part of its sustainability statement.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area may be 
unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  Upgrades to  
the wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to be 
engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing 
plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the development 
creating identif ied additional capacity requirements. Public sewers cross or are 
close to the site. The risk of damage during construction must be minimised. It 
must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access for maintenance or the 
services in any other way.  
 
Justification  
 These sites are generally low density Locally Significant Industrial Sites which have not 
maximised their development potential. This allocation would allow these underutilised 
sites to contribute to Brent’s housing numbers within the designated  Alperton Growth 
Area, as well as increasing provision of employment  industrial floorspace in line with 
London Plan requirements.  
 The site’s proximity to Alperton Station make it an excellent location for residential use in 
addition to the existing indust rial and commercial activity.  
 Redevelopment of the sites bordered by the Grand Union Canal will allow for a 
continuation of the high quality canal side development planned to the east in further 
sites allocated for development.  
MM84  
 
 5.7 South West  
Place BSWSA2, 
page 251 -
252 
 Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
0-5   1-5 Years  
5-10  6-10 Years   
10+ 11+ Years  200 
 
PTAL Rating  
4 (current and 2041 estimate)  
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within the Alperton Growth Area with a reasonable level of public transport 
accessibility providing and consistent with London Plan provides the  opportunity for a 
more intensive use of the site,  ideally  through a vertically mixed use development of 
store/supporting uses and residential above . 
 The site is of Archaeological Importance so proposals should demonstrate impacts and  
detailed  consideration of BHC1 towards the significance of the heritage asset and its 
wider context. Development should provide a detailed analysis and justification of the  
potential impact of the development on the heritage asset.  
 The store is in an out of centre location and trading well. There are no sequentially 
preferable locations available in Brent’s town centres locally that could accommodate the 
store. Therefore, a retention of a supermarket of similar size on site would be sought. As 
an out of centre site , sequentially it is not the preferred location for additional retail 
space/town centre uses. Any such additional space will need to pass the sequential test 
and impact assessment.  
 North of the site is the Grand Union Canal that is part of the green chain and falls under 
waterside development BGI1. Adhering to London Plan policy, the council will encourage 
the enhancement of green and blue infrastructure.  
 An activ e frontage along Ealing Road would be desirable as well as positive frontages 
along Glacier Way and the Grand Union Canal.  
 The opportunity to incorporate a boater facility hub on the site should be explored with 
the Canal and River Trust.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon energy 
source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy strategy set out as 
part of its sustainability statement.  
 The existing petrol station if kept or removed will have to be  satisfactorily addressed in 
terms of impacts on potential residents.  
 Tall buildings will be appropriate on this site, taking its cue from the scale of immediately 
adjacent heights.  
 A small amount of the site falls under Flood zone 3a and is susceptible to  surface water 
flooding, predominantly on highway land off Glacier Way. To the North of the site, 
surface water flooding risk comes from the canal. As the site is over one hectare, a site 
specific flood risk assessment will be required.  
  Thames Water has i ndicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to 
the wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest 
opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential 
infrastructure is delivered p rior to the development creating identified additional capacity 
requirements.  
 The site is located on an historical industrial site. A Preliminary Risk Assessment for 
contamination will be required, and if necessary remediation.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Noise associated with the continued industrial use, or intensification of employment uses 
on the adjacent sites, plus the operation of the supermarket will need to be addressed in 
the design of development.  
 The use of Glacier Way as a TfL bus stand will also need be taken into account. This 
must be retained or enhanced as part of any development and early discussion 
with TfL  London Buses on this should take place.  
 Ealing Road is a London Distributor road. A transport assessment for the site will be 
required to determine the impact that development at this site will have on the transport 
network.  
 Thames Water has indicated th e scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the  development creating identified additional capacity requirements  
Design Principles  
 Tall buildings will be appropriate on this site, taking its cue from the scale of immediately 
adjacent heights.  
 Active frontage should be created along Ealing Road, Grand  Union Canal and Glacier 
Way, with the Northwick Road positively addressed. Ideally, any replacement superstore 
will place its public entrance closer to Ealing Road, the main ‘box’ surrounded by smaller 
retail/commercial units or residential to remove the potential for dead frontage.   
 There may be an opportunity to realign Northwick Road to create better development 
parcels/place.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 No specific infrastructure requirements identified beyond  Contributions will be sought 
towards pote ntial capacity and/or step free access improvements at Alperton 
station that are likely to be needed to accommodate the cumulative impact of 
development related trips from this and other nearby sites in the Alperton 
Growth Area.  
 Developers will be encourag ed to explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon 
energy source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy 
strategy set out as part of its sustainability statement.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local waste water network capacity in this  area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure where required essential infrastructure is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 Enhancement of blue infrastructure and consideration of sustainable infrastructure during 
master planning and construction.  
MM85  5.7 South West  
Place  BSWSA3,pa
ge 253 -254 
 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Indicative Capacity  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
335 450 dwellings  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 86 110  
5-10  6-10 Years 249 330  
10+ 11+ Years  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site comprises a mix of retail and commercial uses including restaurants, a banqueting 
suite that meets the Indian community’s needs for large function space associated with 
weddings and festivals, a gym, a community church and associated car parking. There is also a 
forme r cash & carry. To the north the site boundary runs along Ealing Road and behind new 
mixed -use development, with the Piccadilly Line railway forming the western boundary. To the 
south of the site there is a modern development comprised of taller apartment blocks 
completed in 2011 as part of the previous Atlip Road A4 site allocation . Alperton underground 
station is located directly opposite the site along with a number of small retail units along Ealing 
Road.  
 
PTAL Rating  
3-5 (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site falls under the Alperton regeneration and Growth Area and is allocated for 
residential led mixed use development . 
 The site includes a place of worship which must be re -provided at least to an equivalent 
scale/quality in any redevelopment.  
 The banqueting suite at the Atlip Centre is also a facility which meets a local community 
need related to function spaces for Indian weddings/cultural events. These community Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
facilities should be replaced as this contributes towards the Eali ng Road niche town 
centre offer as set out in the vision . 
 In addition,  Some retail/main town centre uses will require inclusion within the scheme to 
provide an active frontage along the Ealing Road.  
 Given Brent’s need to provide for additional industrial f loorspace  Brent’s status as 
a provide capacity borough , the developer needs to consider provision of workspace.  
 Located within a Tall Buildings Zone, t he site is appropriate for high -density 
development including tall buildings in part (as shown by the ex isting consent for 10 
storeys) but  however,  any redevelopment must provide a comfortable relationship with 
adjacent residential development which is likely to remain, particularly  and the two 
storey properties along Sunleigh Road.  
 The site contains no reco gnised heritage assets, however  Alperton Station is Locally 
Listed and any future development must take care to preserve and enhance its heritage 
value.  
 A road access will need to be provided to connect the development from north to the 
south currently served by Atlip Road.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 Development close to the rail station and rail infrastructure will need to ta ke 
into account operational requirements and the potential need to provide 
mitigation for any impacts.  
 The railway line along the northern boundary of the sites is designated as a wildlife 
corridor. Development and associated works  should take care to prot ect this area from 
any works which would  not compromise its biodiversity.  
 Consideration of It will also need to deal satisfactorily with the noise impacts of the 
railway.  
 The area covering Atlip Road falls under Flood zone 3a and is susceptible to surface water 
flooding. As the site is over one hectare a site specific flood risk assessment will be 
required.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the  earliest opportunity Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
Design Principles  
 Building height and massing should bui ld upon the established rhythm in this part of  the 
regeneration in  Alperton regeneration scheme , corresponding to the neighbouring 
buildings and stepping down towards the east of the site.  
 Development along Ealing Road should provide an active frontage to continue the road 
line of the retail units to the east of this site.  
 If Atlip Road is realigned, A clear and obvious inviting ‘homezone’  pedestrian/cycle 
route from Ealing Road to the canal must exist, with active frontage overlooking it.  If 
Atlip Road is  realigned it should have positive frontages addressing it.   
 The properties along Sunleigh Road must have defensible space/should not have rear 
fences along any public realm.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 The church, and community centre and banqueting hall  should be re -provided as part of 
any future development in line with policy BSI1 Social Infrastructure and Community 
Facilities. This should be at least to an equivalent scale/quality in any 
redevelopment.  
 Contributions will be sought towards potential ca pacity and/or step free access 
improvements at Alperton station that are likely to be needed to accommodate 
the cumulative impact of development related trips from this and other nearby 
sites in the Alperton Growth Area.  
 Atlip Road will form part of a cont inuous publicly accessible east/west 
walking/cycling route from Ealing Road along the northern edge of the canal 
running through the development sites BSWSA3/BSWSA4/BSWSA5/ BSWSA6/ 
BSWSA7).  
 Thames Water has indicated the local waste water network capacity in this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure where required essential infrastructure is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Justification  
 This site is generally comprised of low density commercial and retail uses which have not 
maximised th e development potential of the area. This allocation would allow this site to 
contribute to Brent’s housing numbers within the designated Alperton Growth Area , 
continuing development which has come forward as part of the previous Atlip Road 
allocation . 
 The site’s proximity to Alperton Station make it an excellent location for residential use.  
 
MM86  
  5.7 South West  
Place  BSWSA4, 
page 255 -
256 
 Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use residential led development incorporating some replacement workspace  industrial  
at ground floor level  and potential commercial leisure use at ground floor level  to take 
advantage of/ enhance the canal setting.  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years  198 33 
5-10  6-10 Years  197 165  
10+ 11+ Years 197  
 
Description of Existing Site  
The site is comprised of low level industrial and commercial units with the Grand Union Canal to 
its south. The site has a low PTAL of 2 -3 (2031 estimate) although this is likely to rise given the 
high levels of development currently propo sed for the area.  The site was allocated for 
development previously albeit at a lower density than currently proposed.  
 
PTAL Rating  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
2-3 (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
 
 
Planning Considerations  
 Two parcels within this allocation have planning permission (ref 18/0418 and 18/0320) to 
provide relatively low levels of development. Further  The site sits within Alperton 
Growth Area and  development should come forward at higher densities in line with 
neighbouring allocations and the wider Alperton regeneration area.   
 The site’s location adjacent to the Grand Union Canal requires development to be in 
conformity with policy BGI1 Green and Blue Infrastructure in Brent which requires 
developments adjoining the borough’s Blue Ribbon network to pursue opportunities to 
improve public accessibility and its setting in relation to buildings and public realm. The 
appropriate setback for development adjacent to the canal will be established by an 
assessment of the character and context. This will need to balance the protectio n and 
enhancement of biodiversity and the multiple needs of the users of the canal and 
towpath.  The site is adjacent to the Grand Union canal and classified under 
Green Chain and Waterside Development Policy BGI1, where management, 
integration and enhancem ent of existing green and blue infrastructure are 
encouraged.  
 Developers should explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon energy source to heat 
and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy strategy set out as part of its 
sustainability statement.   
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastru cture is 
delivered ahead of development to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to 
the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 A new connecting homezone/pedestrian and cyclist street to the adjacent Atlip Road site 
to the west must be provided that creates a high quality direct route through site to link 
up with the same type of route in the adjacent Abbey Manufacturing Site Allocation.  
Publicly accessible walking/cycling routes through the development must be provide d Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
from Sunleigh Road and Woodside End to link to the new east/west pedestrian/cycle 
route, canal footbridge on Atlip Road and any new towpath/route along the northern 
edge of the canal across the site.  
 A small number of mature trees are located within the allocated area and should be 
retained where possible.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area  
 Mid-rise tall buildings will be appropriate o n this site subject to detailed design analysis 
showing no adverse impacts and a satisfactory relationship in terms of scale and massing 
being delivered with existing residential properties.  The site is within a Tall Buildings 
Zone where tall buildings are  appropriate.  
 Given that the site is existing employment  industrial land and Brent’s status as a 
provide capacity borough , the council will require the maximum viable amount of  no 
net loss of employment  industrial  floorspace , with re -provision probably pr ovided on the 
ground floors of the new buildings and where necessary to meet capacity requirements 
on upper floors . 
 The site includes a West London Waste Plan protected site. This should be 
accommodated in the redevelopment, or suitable capacity for the wa ste 
function provided elsewhere . 
 Piecemeal development of the site will not be allowed in advance of a 
masterplan/agreement between landowners on how the site will be developed 
comprehensively to provide a coherent development overall.  
 New moorings will be  required subject to not having an impact on the canal's 
navigability, water quality and biodiversity.  
Design Principles  
 This site is suitable for mixed -use development similar to the adjoining scheme on Atlip 
Road completed in 2011. Comprehensive mixed -use development will be promoted to 
make the most effective use of land and secure better development outcomes.  
 Flexible light industrial/maker workspace should be provided at ground floor level 
creating an active frontage to routes through the site and fro ntage along the canal Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
frontage where commercial leisure use to increase activity on the canal would be 
desirable.  
 The site is appropriate for Tall buildings of a mid -rise nature that  should provide s a 
satisfactory relationship in terms of scale and massing  with in relation to existing  
adjacent residential properties that will remain should be provided.  
 A clear and direct appropriately landscaped home zone route that gives priority to cyclists 
and pedestrians should be set out to promote greater permeability/connectivity through 
the site for cyclists and pedestrians in particular, suppressing the desire potential for rat -
running of vehicles from adjacent areas.  
 Development should be provide a publicly accessible landscaped  set back from the 
canal in line with policy BGI1 Green and Blue Infrastructure . to promote a high 
quality landscaped publically accessible east/west route/towpath in which opportunities 
for access to the canal be enhanced.   
 Publicly accessible walking/cycling routes through the development must be 
provided from Sunleigh Road and Woodside End to link to the new route along 
the northern edge of the canal across the site.   
 Vehicular access will be from Sunleigh Road and Woodside End.   
Infrastructure Requirements  
 A publicly accessible  east/west walking/cycling route  should be provided adjacent 
to the along the northern edge of the canal side as part of a wider continuous 
route running through the development sites BSWSA3/BSWSA4/BSWSA5/ 
BSWSA6/ BSWSA7 . 
 A direct and high qualit y homezone route that links the site to Atlip Road and into the 
adjacent BSWSA5 sites, to create a continuous route through to Mount Pleasant. .  
 Contributions will be sought towards potential capacity and/or step free access 
improvements at Alperton statio n that are likely to be needed to accommodate 
the cumulative impact of development related trips from this and other nearby 
sites in the Alperton Growth Area.  
 New moorings will be required subject to not having an impact on the canal's 
navigability, water quality and biodiversity .   Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Developers should explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon energy source 
to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy strategy set out as 
part of its sustainability statement.  
 Thames Water has indicated the lo cal waste water network capacity in this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing an d infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure where required essential infrastructure is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 
Justification  
 This site is generally comprised of low density commercial and indust rial uses which have 
not maximised the development potential of the area. This allocation would allow this site 
to contribute to Brent’s housing numbers within the designated Alperton Growth Area, 
continuing development which has come forward on neighbouri ng sites and the 
immediate area.  
 The site’s proximity to Alperton Station make it an excellent location for mixed residential 
and employment  industrial  use.  
MM87  
 5.7 South West  
Place  BSWSA5, 
page 257 -
259 
 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use residential -led development incorporating replacement  employment  industrial  
space, small scale retailing/commercial leisure and community uses (e.g. nursery).  
Indicative Capacity  
590 490  
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 300 14 
5-10  6-10 Years 290 286  
10+ 11+ Years 190  
Description of Existing Site  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site sits within Alperton Growth Area  and forms part of the wider regeneration 
scheme outlined in the Alperton Masterplan Supplementary Planning Document . The site 
was allocated for development previously albeit at a lower density than currently 
proposed. MM? 
 The site has a low PTAL of 2 -3 (2031 estimate) although this is likely to rise given the 
high levels of development currently proposed for the wider area  
 The north west corner o f the site is vacant land and the rest of the site forms a large 
industrial estate comprising around 60 industrial/warehouse units, predominantly car 
repair businesses. The site extends from the northern towpath of the Grand Union Canal 
in the south to the  rear garden boundaries of houses fronting Mount Pleasant and 
Woodside Close in the north and east. The site also bounds the under -construction Abbey 
Wharf residential development to the east and residential properties fronting Woodside 
Place and Woodside End to the west.  
 The site is also in the Alperton Housing Zone.  The site slopes from the north to the south.  
 
PTAL Rating  
2-3 (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site is within a Tall Buildings Zone where tall buildings are appropria te. 
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 The site’s location adjacent to the Grand Union Canal requires development to be in 
conformity with policy BGI1 Green and Blue Infrastructure in Brent which requires 
developments adjoining the borough’s Blue Ribbon network to pursue opportunities to 
improve public accessibility and its setting in relation to buildings and public realm. The 
appropria te setback for development adjacent to the canal will be established by an 
assessment of the character and context. This will need to balance the protection and 
enhancement of biodiversity and the multiple needs of the users of the canal and 
towpath.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 A sma ll part of the site to the south falls under Flood zone 3a and is susceptible to 
surface water flooding. As the site is over one hectare a site specific flood risk 
assessment will be required.  
 Developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water  as a low carbon energy 
source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy strategy set out as 
part of its sustainability statement.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network.  Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 A new conne cting homezone/pedestrian and cyclist street to the adjacent BSWSA4 site to 
the west must be provided that creates a high quality direct route through the site to link 
to Mount Pleasant on the east.  Publicly accessible walking/cycling routes through the 
development must be provided from Woodside Close and Woodside End to link to the 
new east/west pedestrian/cycle route, canal footbridge on Atlip Road and any new 
towpath/route along the northern edge of the canal across the site that links BSWSA3 
and the adj acent Abbey Wharf development to the west.  
 Given that the site is existing  employment  industrial land and the identified need 
within the  Brent’s status as a provide capacity  borough, some  maximum viable re-
provision of employment  industrial floorspace along the ground floors of the new 
buildings will be required as well as other potential uses such as small scale retail, 
commercial leisure or community uses (e.g. nursery).  
 Given the size of the site,  development should come forward as part of  a comprehe nsive 
masterplan -led approach should demonstrate and individual schemes which would 
compromise the most efficient land use  of the site will be refused . 
 New moorings will be required subject to not having an impact on the canal's 
navigability, water quality  and biodiversity.  
 A Thames Water Sewage Pumping Station is located within the proposed 
development boundary and this is contrary to best practice set out in Sewers for 
Adoption (7th edition). The development should make suitable arrangements to 
address t his matter satisfactorily and dependent on solutions devised, future 
occupiers of the development should be made aware that they could Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
periodically experience adverse amenity impacts from the pumping station in 
the form of odour; light; vibration and/or no ise.  
Design Principles  
 The site is appropriate for higher density and  tall buildings of a mid -rise nature  
subject to detailed design analysis. that It should provides a satisfactory relationship in 
terms of scale and massing in relation  to existing  reside ntial properties that will remain 
should be provided. Buildings closer  to the edges of the site should be of a 
complementary height to the existing suburban homes to which the site adjoin whilst 
buildings further from the edges could be of supported with a  greater mid -rise massing . 
 Development coming forward should be denser than the surrounding suburban character.  
 It is suitable for tall buildings of a mid -rise height, that sits well subject to detailed 
design analysis showing no adverse impacts and a satisfactory relationship in terms of 
scale and massing.  This should be delivered in context with the residential properties in 
the neighbouring Abbey Wharf development which rises to six storeys and the 
surrounding two storey residential properties elsewh ere that are likely to remain.  The 
proposal should seek a housing mix of private and affordable and appropriate provision 
of family units. The development should demonstrate exemplar design quality.  
 The existing Woodside Place and Woodside End should be e xtended into the site 
providing Homezone type through roads that prioritise pedestrian and cyclist movements. 
A new connecting Homezone/pedestrian and cyclist street should be provided to the 
adjacent BSWSA2 site that forms a continuous link between the At lip Road site to the 
west and Mount Pleasant. Pedestrian and cycle routes should also link to any new 
towpath/route that is also provided along the northern edge of the canal across the site.  
 Affordable workspace and flexible light industrial/maker worksp ace, plus potential small -
scale retail and community  uses A1 or D1  uses  should be provided at ground floor 
level creating an active frontage to routes through the site and frontage along the canal 
where commercial leisure use to increase activity on the c anal would be desirable.  
 Development should mitigate the transport impacts of the development clear and direct 
appropriately landscaped home zone route/routes that gives priority to cyclists and 
pedestrians should be set out to promote greater permeability /connectivity through the 
site for cyclists and pedestrians in particular, suppressing the desire potential for rat -
running of vehicles from adjacent streets/areas.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Development should be provide a publicly accessible landscaped  set back from the 
canal in line with policy BGI1 Green and Blue Infrastructure . to promote a high 
quality landscaped publically accessible east/west route/towpath in which opportunities 
for access to the canal be enhanced.  
 Vehicular access will be from Mount Pleasant and Woodside E nd.  
 
Infrastructure Requirements  
 A publicly accessible  east/west walking/cycling route  should be provided adjacent 
to the along the northern edge of the canal side as part of a wider continuous 
route running through the development sites BSWSA3/BSWSA4/BSWSA5/ 
BSWSA6/ BSWSA7 .   
 A direct and high quality homezone route that links the site to Atlip Road to create a 
continuous route  from Woodside End  through to Mount Pleasant.   
 Developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water a s a low carbon 
energy source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy 
strategy set out as part of its sustainability statement.  
 New moorings will be required subject to not having an impact on the canal's 
navigability, water quality and bi odiversity.  
 Consideration of blue/green and sustainable infrastructure in masterplanning and during 
development.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local waste water network capacity in this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure where required essential infrastructure is delivered prior 
to th e development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 Contributions will be sought towards potential capacity and/or step free access 
improvements at Alperton station that are likely to be needed to accommodate 
the cumulative impact of develo pment related trips from this and other nearby 
sites in the Alperton Growth Area.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM88  5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA6, 
page 260 -
261 Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use residential -led development incorporating employment  industrial  uses.  
 
Indicative Capacity  
135 147  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 135 33 
5-10  6-10 Years  104  
10+ 11+ Years  
 
Description of Existing Site  
 The site forms an industrial estate comprising various warehouse units and office 
buildings of poor quality.   
 Beresford Avenue runs along the northern boundary of the site with the Grand Union 
Canal forming the southern boundary.  
 The site is adjacent to the under -construction Abbey Wharf residential development to 
the west and meets the forthcoming Northfields development to the east. Part of the site 
has approved planning application 18/0752  
 
Planning History  
 Planning application 18/0752 for the demolition of existing buildings at Afrex House, and 
redevelopment to provide a residential development of 3 -5 storey s for 31 residential 
units (9 x 1bed, 18 x 2 bed, 4 x 3 bed), creation of public realm and alterations, Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
landscaped amenity space, car and cycle parking and all associated works. Off -site 
contribution made towards affordable workspace.  
 Residential  prior approvals in the Liberty Centre  
 
PTAL Rating  
2 (current and  2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site sits within Alperton regeneration and Growth Area and forms part of the wider 
regeneration scheme outlined in the Alperton Masterplan Supplementar y Planning 
Document. The site was allocated for development previously albeit at a lower density 
than currently proposed.  
 The site is within a Tall Buildings Zone where tall buildings are appropriate.  
 Given that the site is an existing employment  industria l land and the identified need 
within the  Brent’s status as a provide capacity  borough, the maximum viable  re-
provision of employment  industrial  floorspace along the ground floors of the new 
buildings  will be required.  
 The site has a low PTAL of 2 (2031 es timate) although this is likely to rise given the high 
levels of development currently proposed for the wider area.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area.  
 The site’s location adjacent to the Grand Union Canal requires development to be in 
conformity with policy BGI1 Green and Blue Infrastructure in Brent which requires 
developments adjoining the borough’s Blue Ribbon network to pursue oppor tunities to 
improve public accessibility and its setting in relation to buildings and public realm. The 
appropriate setback for development adjacent to the canal will be established by an 
assessment of the character and context. This will need to balance t he protection and 
enhancement of biodiversity and the multiple needs of the users of the canal and 
towpath.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon energy 
source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an en ergy strategy set out as 
part of its sustainability statement.   
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing  and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 A new connecting towpath/route along the northern edge of the canal across the site that 
links to BSWSA5 and the adjacent Northfields.  
 New moorings will be required subject to not having an impact on the canal's 
navigability, water quality and biodiversity.  
Design Principles  
 Development coming forward should be denser than the surrounding suburban  character 
and is suitable tall buildings of a mid -rise height (potentially around 6 storeys), subject to 
detailed design analysis showing no adverse impacts and a satisfactory relationship in 
terms of scale and massing being delivered with the surrounding  two storey residential 
properties that are likely to remain on Beresford Avenue.  
 Flexible light industrial/maker workspace, plus potential  retail/commercial, leisure or 
community A1 or D1  uses should be provided at ground floor level.  
 Proposals should seek to introduce active frontages along Beresford Avenue and the 
canalside.  
 Development should be provide an appropriate set back that is publicly accessible 
and landscaped  set back from the  along the canal to promote a high quality landscaped 
publically  accessible east/west route/towpath in which opportunities for access to the 
canal be enhanced. The appropriate setback for development adjacent to the canal will be 
established by an assessment of the character and context.  This will need to balance the 
protection and enhancement of biodiversity and the multiple needs of the users of the 
canal and towpath.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 A publicly accessible  east/west walking/cycling route  should be provided adjacent 
to the along the northern edge of the cana l side as part of a wider continuous Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
route running through the development sites BSWSA3/BSWSA4/BSWSA5/ 
BSWSA6/ BSWSA7.  
 New moorings will be required subject to not having an impact on the canal's 
navigability, water quality and biodiversity.  
 Green/blue and  sustainable infrastructure should be part of the development process and 
the development.  
 Developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon 
energy source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy 
strategy set  out as part of its sustainability statement.  
 Contributions will be sought towards potential capacity and/or step free access 
improvements at Alperton station that are likely to be needed to accommodate 
the cumulative impact of development related trips fr om this and other nearby 
sites in the Alperton Growth Area.  
 Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a 
housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure if 
required is delivered prior to the develop ment creating identified additional 
capacity requirements.  
 
MM89  
 5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA7, 
page 262 -
263 
 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Existing Use  
Mixed use  (Industrial with residential under construction)  
Allocated Use  
Mixed -use residential -led scheme  
Indicative Capacity  
2900 3,350 new homes  
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 752  400  
5-10  6-10 Years 750  974  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
10+ 11+ Years 1398  1976  
 
Description of Existing Site  
 The site is located to the south of Beresford Avenue and north of the A406 North Circular 
Road at the east of Alperton. The Grand Union Canal runs to the south western edge of 
the site, and the River Brent runs through the site, dividing it into two parcels.  
 The site has a total area of 9.16ha,  The majority of the site  which is to the north of the 
River Brent (8.1ha), while the smaller southern part has an area of 1.06ha. The  majority 
of the site (with the exception of a small area at the north -west) smaller southern part  
(1.06ha) of the site  is part of the Park Royal Strategic I ndustrial Location (SIL) as 
designated by the London Plan . The north -west part was formerly  that is not SIL land is  
a non -designated Local Employment Site.  
 There are no conservation areas or listed buildings within or adjacent to the application 
site. The nearest listed building to the site is the Grade II listed “Brent Viaduct” over the 
North Circular Road.  
 The site comprises brownfield land the majority of which was formerly in use as an 
industrial estate, most recently accommodating a range of low densi ty uses such as car 
workshops, car dealers, storage, and industrial uses. Much of the site has previously 
been cleared (and used as open air storage) and comprises areas of hardstanding, 
although there are some vacant predominantly single and two storey co mmercial 
buildings to the centre and western part of the site, and  Three industrial units remain 
along Beresford Avenue and are currently occupied under different ownership. There is 
also a temporary information centre with associated parking that is acces sed from 
Beresford Avenue towards the west of the site.  
 Stonebridge Park station is approximately a 1km walk along Beresford Avenue and the 
Old North Circular Road to the north east of the site and Alperton Underground station is 
approximately a 1.5km walk  along Mount Pleasant and Ealing Road to the west, and 
there are local bus stops on Beresford Avenue and the North Circular Road.  
Planning History  
 Approved hybrid planning permission  application 18/0321 is a hybrid planning 
application  as amended by permis sion 19/2732  and 20/2784 and a number of 
other non -material amendment applications  for the comprehensive redevelopment Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
of the former Northfields  industrial estate. The scheme proposes demolition of all 
existing buildings on site and the delivery of a mixed -use development including 2,900  
3,350 homes, around 2,300sqm commercial floorspace, a minimum of 17,581sqm and 
up to 19,000sqm industrial/ employment floorspace and 1,610sqm community and 
assembly and leisure floorspace (use classes B1a, B1c and B8), up to 2,900sqm 
community and assembly and leisure floorspace (uses classes D1 and D2), an energy 
centre, public and private open space, new routes and public access along the River 
Brent and Grand Union Canal, parking and cycle provision and new site acces s and 
ancillary infrastructure.  
 
PTAL Rating  
0-3 (current and  2031 estimate). May be revised in light of new development  
 
Planning Considerations  
 To the south of the site is the boundary of the Old Oak and Park Royal Opportunity Area 
identified by the Lon don Plan and its respective Planning Framework SPG.  
 South of the site is categorised as Flood zone 3a and 3b and susceptible to surface water 
and fluvial and tidal flooding. As the site is over one hectare a site specific flood risk 
assessment will be requ ired. 
 Parts of site adjacent to the Grand Union and River Brent are classified under waterside 
development Policy BGI1 where enhancement and use of Blue Ribbon Network are 
encouraged. Grade II SINC River Brent West of Stonebridge forms the wildlife corrido r. 
East and South of the site is bordered by the green chain where Policy BGI1 applies. The 
developers need to take into consideration the biodiversity and its recreational function 
that are important contributing factors to health and well -being of the co mmunity. The 
planning permission includes riverside meadows and semi -naturalisation.  
 Should the opportunity arise through any revisit of the planning permission then the 
Environment Agency has identified the need for potential for a fish easement of the r iver 
weir to be considered.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon energy 
source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy strategy set out as 
part of its sustainability statement.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. Due to the North Circular 
passing south of the site, development at this site should be air quality positive as it falls 
under the Growth Area. Noise associated with the adjoining roads and continued 
industria l/employment uses south of the site will need to be addressed in the design of 
the development.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earlies t opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
 Consistent with planning permission 18/0321 as amended by permission 19/2732 
and 20/2784  due to the site’s historic SIL designation a minimum of 17,581 sq.m  19, 
801sq.m  . of industrial and employment floorspace of the typology and 
affordability associated with that planning permission  must be re -provided as part 
of the development. Due to Brent’s  identified need classification as a ‘provide capacity’ 
borough , should the opportunity arise, for example through co -location north of the river 
Brent or through intensification to the south, greater provision of industri al floorspace will 
be supported.  
Risks 
 The development will result in increased use of the road network by vehicles, cyclists and 
pedestrians. However, the scheme includes improvements to Beresford Avenue and the 
route to Stonebridge Park Station. The impa ct on the road network has been assessed by 
Brent and TfL, who consider the proposed Transport Assessment to be acceptable, 
subject to agreed mitigation measures.  
 Delivery timescales dependent on market appetite.  
 Potential need for Compulsory Purchase Ord er of later phases to ensure delivery of site 
not owned by Berkley Homes  St George . 
Design Principles  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 High quality public realm with street planting to be delivered in early phases of the 
masterplan.  
 East-west green pedestrian and cycle spine connecting n ew development to existing 
urban areas and Stonebridge park station, the canal and Alperton.  
 It should cater to resident’s needs by providing local amenities and facilities such as 
shops, cafés and restaurants, and community centre . A community centre is i mportant 
to involve the local community.   
 Active frontage on ground floor.  
 Designing a cohesive residential neighbourhood with a variety of building typologies 
ensuring permeability to existing streets.  
 Opening up the canal with appropriate setback and la ndscaping. Improved connections 
and new routes and carriageway widening.   
 Design should respond to the various environments around the site, from housing in the 
north to large industrial units and the North circular in the south. It should encourage 
footfall to and through the site from the wider area through appropriate set back/ 
improved connections/ new routes/carriageway widening  and publicly 
accessible landscaped set back from the canal in line with policy BGI1 Green 
and Blue Infrastructure.  
 The scal e and massing should be sympathetic to existing heights in the surrounding 
context with lower building heights closer to Beresford Avenue. Tall buildings are 
appropriate on this site consistent with the heights parameters established by 
planning permission  18/0321 (as amended by application 19/2732 and 
20/2784 ).  Given the scale of the site, it can create a new building height character.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 The development includes a community facility, children’s nursery and health clinic where 
this has support from the CCG which would provide services to both the new and existing 
communities.  In addition, significant contributions would be secured through the 
Community Infrastructure Levy.  Brent CCG requires a healthcare facility of circa 800sqm  
fitted out and to be delivered prior to first occupation of the first 600 units across the 
development. This facility should be located to the west of the site in line with its 
requirements.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Improvements to Beresford Avenue and the link to Stonebridge Par k station would 
improve pedestrian and cycle facilities and safety, including crossing facilities.  
 A publicly accessible east/west walking/cycling route should be provided 
adjacent to the along the northern edge of the canal side as part of a wider 
continu ous route running through the development sites BSWSA3/ BSWSA4/ 
BSWSA5/ BSWSA6/ BSWSA7.  
 Contributions to improve  Beresford Avenue, the bus network, Stonebridge Park 
station and surrounding walking/cycling routes to mitigate the impact of the 
development o n the surrounding movement network.  
 Developers will be encouraged to explore  the use of canal water as a low carbon 
energy source to heat and cool buildings  demonstrated through an energy 
strategy set out as part of its sustainability statement  
 Thames Wate r has indicated the local waste water network capacity in this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity  to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure where required essential infrastructure is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements. Public 
sewers cross or are close to the site. The risk of dama ge during construction 
must be minimised. It must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access 
for maintenance or the services in any other way.  
Justification  
 The approved scheme seeks to provide for the redevelopment of this industrial site with a 
high density, residential -led mixed -use development. It will provide 2,900  3350 homes, 
industrial and employment floorspace, community, retail and leisure facilities and 
includes both a health centre and an energy centre.  
 To support the incoming residents a nd workers, and to enhance the wider community the 
proposal includes improved pedestrian, cycling and vehicular connections (including 
improved access to public transport); publicly accessible spaces (including the provision 
of level access), will open up the Grand Union Canal, and River Brent to the public; and 
provide a range of green spaces, open spaces and formal/informal play areas.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM90  
  5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA8, 
page 265 -
266 Amend parts of policy to read:  
 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 263 310  
5-10  6-10 Years  160 113  
10+ 11+ Years 237  227  
 
Description of Existing Site  
 The site forms part of Wembley Regeneration and Growth Area and falls within Wembley 
town centre boundary. It was formerly a long term allocation relating to a larger si te in 
the Wembley Area Action Plan (WAAP). Since then  Westernmost plot has come forward 
for is the residential -led development known as Chesterfield House.  The developable site 
area has been scaled back from the previous allocation due to lack of viability  of building 
over railway tracks.  
 The current  site forms the northern side of Wembley High Road between Wembley 
Triangle to the east  and the Chesterfield House development to the west . The site 
extends up to the southern edge of the Chiltern Line and is located in a prime position 
between the emerging Wembley Park development and Wembley town centre. Buildings 
along the High Road range from two and three storey units with retail at ground floor 
level and residential above to taller commercial units opposi te the former Copland 
School. Chesterfield House rises in part to 26 storeys.  
 
Planning History  
Planning permission (application ref: 18/3111) minded to approve subject to signing of S106 
obligation March 2019  for the erection of 2 residential blocks (17 and 19 storeys) connected at 
ground floor level comprising 256 self -contained apartments alongside 166sqm of flexible 
workspace.  
 
PTAL Rating  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
5-6a (current and 2031 estimate)  
 
Planning Considerations  
 The site falls within the Tall Building Zone so is appropriate for tall buildings.  
 A key aspect of the development of the High Road area is maintaining viability 
and vitality of Wembley town centre.  
 The site contains a Site of Archaeological Importance, the former Wembley Hill Farm. 
Development should pro vide a detailed analysis and justification of the potential impact 
of the development on the heritage asset.  
 The site is located within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Gro wth Area.  
 The land adjacent to the Chiltern Line railway is designated as a Wildlife Corridor and a 
Grade I Site of Importance for Nature Conservation. The site has good habitat 
connectivity and provides a mature habitat within the suburban landscape and The role 
of the wildlife corridors should be protected from  development should not  which would  
compromise its biodiversity or recreational function.  
 Development close to rail infrastructure will need to take into account 
operational requirements and the pot ential need to provide mitigation for any 
impacts.  
 This site is in an area where the night time economy is encouraged to expand. 
Development should take account of this and create flexible space where possible.  
 Commercial development complementary to the role of the town centre should be re -
provided in active frontages along the Wembley High Road.  
 Given  the identified need within the  Brent’s status as a provide capacity  borough, the 
Council will seek maximum viable no net loss of employment floorspace reprovision, 
existing industrial should be reprovided as and encourage to maximise its provision 
suitable for B1 (c), B8 and B2 use.  research and development/light 
industrial/general industrial/storage or distribution.   
 The potential to create a secondary pedestrian street/continuous public realm along the 
rear of the High Road from Chesterfield House to Ecclestone Place.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 Small portion of the site is categorised as Flood zone 3a and susceptible to surface water 
and fluvial and tidal flooding. As the site is  over one hectare a site specific flood risk 
assessment will be required.  
 Landowners and site developers are encouraged to work together to ensure masterplan -
led approach  delivery as this is more likely to happen . Where the timing of delivery of a 
comprehe nsive scheme consistent with policy is adversely affected by lack of co -
operation, consistent with its need to deliver timely outputs to meet the Plan’s targets, 
the council will consider the use of compulsory purchase if required.  
 Thames Water has indica ted the scale of development is likely to require upgrades to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
Design Principles  
 A key aspect of the development of the High Road area is maintaining viability and 
vitality of Wembley town centre.  
 Development should support these objectives and will need to be in keeping with 
providing improved public realm and pedestrian access through this area.  
 Building height and massing should build upon the established rhythm along this part of 
Wembley High Road, corresponding to the neighbouring Chesterfi eld House and stepping 
down towards the east of the site. Density should reflect the site’s high PTAL.  
 The potential exists to create a secondary pedestrian street/continuous public 
realm along the rear of the High Road from Chesterfield House to Eccleston e 
Place.  
 The ground floor on the High Road frontage should contain active frontage of main town 
centre uses between Wembley Triangle and the retail units to the west.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Developers should give consideration to Green and sustainable infrastructure in master 
planning stage.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local waste water network capacity in this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required.  Thames Water will need Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure where required essential infrastructure is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirement s. Public 
sewers cross or are close to the site. The risk of damage during construction 
must be minimised. It must be ensured that development doesn't inhibit access 
for maintenance or the services in any other way.  
 
MM91  5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA9, 
page 267 -
268 
 Amend parts of policy to read:  
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 250  
5-10  6-10 Years  
10+ 11+ Years  
Description of Existing Site  
The site sits on the south side of Wembley High Road and a cleared site that was formerly Ark 
Elvin Academy (former Copland School). It is adjacent to the former Brent House site, which is 
currently under construction to provide  recently developed for 248 new homes with flexible 
commercial space at ground floor. To the south of the site sits the newly built Ark Elvin 
Academy, while to the east and west Wembley Park and Wembley town centres are a short 
walk away.  
Planning History  
Previously allocated for development in the Wembley Area Action Plan  None  
PTAL Rating  
6a (current and 2031 estimate)  
Planning Consider ations  
 The site is within the defined  Wembley town centre boundary and was previously 
identified as an opportunity site that is suitable for redevelopment and sensitive to tall 
buildings within the Wembley Area Action Plan (WAAP). and provides the opportun ity 
to introduce an active frontage  that has been missing along this part of the town 
centre  must be created to the  along northern edge of the site along the High Road.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The high PTAL provides the opportunity for higher density development.  
 The site is lo cated within an Air Quality Management Area. As such, development at this 
site should be air quality positive as it is within the Growth Area  
 The site contains a Site of Archaeological Importance, the former Wembley House. 
Development should accord with po licy BHC1 Brent’s Heritage Assets and provide a 
detailed analysis and justification of the potential impact of the development on the 
heritage asset.  
 Vehicular access to the site will be from Cecil Avenue.  
 A London Plane subject to Tree Preservation Order exists on the north eastern side of the 
site. Developers should have regard of existing verges and tree stock on site.  
 The site is adjacent to a secondary school, so will need to ensure that its operation as an 
effective place for education is not comprom ised. 
 The inclusion of community use floorspace that would otherwise be provided through the 
redevelopment of the former Wembley Youth Centre and Dennis Jackson Centre would 
create a more useable community space and increase housing capacity on that site.  
 A very small portion of the site is categorised as Flood zone 3a and susceptible to surface 
water. Any development on site should consider mitigation of surface water flood.  
 Thames Water has indicated the scale of development is likely to require upgrades  to the 
wastewater network. Thames Water will need to be engaged at the earliest opportunity 
to agree a housing and infrastructure phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is 
delivered prior to the development creating identified additional capacity  requirements.  
Design Principles  
 The site is suitable for tall buildings, but of a mid -range height that  Building heights 
should mediate s between the development of the former Brent House (10 storeys) and 
the hotel across Cecil Avenue (7 -8 storeys). Taking  account of the topography and scale 
of development along Cecil Avenue towards the rear of the site, development should step 
down southwards.  
 The ground floor on the High Road frontage should contain a continuous active frontage 
of main town centre uses t o continue the road line between the former Brent House 
development and the retail units to the west. Development along Cecil Avenue must Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
positively address the street and entrance to the Ark Elvin school, whilst to the east 
should face outwards along the school access route from the High Road.  
 Vehicular/servicing access to the site will be from Cecil Avenue and  safe access 
to the Ark Elvin Academy along Cecil Avenue.  
 Sufficient space should be provided along the High Road to allow street or on site tree 
planting to enhance the public realm on this part of the street.  
 Servicing access should be off Cecil Avenue.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 No specific infrastructure requirements identified.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local waste water network capacity in  this area 
may be unable to support the demand anticipated from this development.  
Upgrades to the wastewater network may be required. Thames Water will need 
to be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to en sure where required essential infrastructure is delivered prior 
to the development creating identified additional capacity requirements. Public 
sewers cross or are close to the site. The risk of damage during construction must 
be minimised. It must be ensu red that development doesn't inhibit access for 
maintenance or the services in any other way.  
 Consideration should be given to the inclusion of community use floorspace that 
would otherwise be provided through the redevelopment of the former Wembley 
Youth  Centre and Dennis Jackson Centre.  This would create a more useable 
community space and increase housing capacity on that site.  
 
MM92  5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA10, 
page 269 -
270 
 Amend policy name:  
BSWA10  BSWSA10 Elm Road  
Amend parts of policy to read:  
Existing Use  
Commercial use, hotel, parking, vehicle repair garage, residential, mixed -use residential, 
employment, church  
Allocated Use  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Mixed -use town centre use within town centre boundary, Mixed used residential led 
development, Hotel and supporting co mmunity facilities  
Indicative Capacity  
400 
Timeframe for Delivery  
0-5   1-5 Years 200  
5-10  6-10 Years  200   400  
10+ 11+ Years  
Description of Existing Site  
 Part of the site is within the Wembley town centre boundary comprising of  comprises a 
large format  retail unit of Primark and Pound store.  
 The site runs along the side street St. John’s Road with mixed use and small retail 
parade, a large car park and car repair garage.  
 Towards the east is the Spiritualist church and parallel to the High Road is Elm R oad with 
building stock of 2 -3 terraced houses and a three storey Euro Hotel.  
 North of the site is bounded by Grade I Chiltern Line /wildlife corridor. Wembley Central 
station and bus stops are less than 200m from the site.  
PTAL Rating  
PTAL 4-6a (currentl) increasing to  5-6a by (2031 estimate )  
Planning Considerations  
 The site sits within the wider Wembley Growth Area and Wembley regeneration.  Part of 
the site on Wembley High Road falls within the town centre boundary with primary and 
secondary s hopping frontage. The An active frontage of main town centre uses  will 
have to be maintained. As the site borders the Wembley High Road, the developer should 
carry out a viability and vitality assessment for provision of mixed use suitable for 
secondary fr ontage. The High Road frontage should contain main town centre uses.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The approved aparthotel redevelopment will demolish the exiting Euro Hotel.  The site 
contains a church and any future development of this must take care to provide 
accessible replacemen t  community facilities.  
 As Brent is a provide capacity borough in the London Plan , Given the identified need 
within the borough,  the loss of the garage means that  employment  maximum viable 
industrial floorspace use should be re -provided through a net inc rease in employment 
industrial floor space . 
 The site is bordered in the west and north by SINC Grade I Chiltern railway line linking a 
number of wildlife sites. Development should adhere to the London Plan policies and 
Brent’s Policy BGI1 that sets a local  requirement for the protection and enhancement of 
wildlife corridor.  
 There are a number of trees across the site which should be retained where possible.  
 The site is within an Air Quality Management Area so development will need to be air 
quality positive given it is within the Growth Area.  
 PTAL is high so parking provision should be minimal with consideration given to the 
signed cycle route. St. John’s Road should remain a high quality road to connect traffic.  
 The development needs to deal adequa tely with the noise impacts of the railways.  
 Given the size of the site and its multiple ownership, development should come forward 
as part of a comprehensive masterplan and individual schemes which would compromise 
the most efficient land use of the site  will be refused.  
 Parts of the site is flood zone 3a and susceptible to surface water flooding, predominantly 
adjacent to the railway tracks. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required 
ensuring highest feasible environmental standards . 
Design P rinciples  
 Development coming forward should provide active frontage along all publicly visible 
areas.  
 Density should be reflective of the site’s high PTAL.  Along the High Road, height 
should relate to adjacent heritage buildings and reflect the character of the area.  The 
rest of the site is suitable for tall buildings of a mid -rise height of 5 -6 storey to mediate a Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
satisfactory relationship of scale and massing already existing in the surroundings and 
take into account the topography.  
 The hotel developmen t should positively address the street and should be designed in 
line with principles set out in planning application 18/4063.  
 The developer should provide significant new pubic  public space, maintain pedestrian 
access through the site and high -quality pub lic realm to encourage use throughout the 
day.  
 The developer should benefit from the site’s high PTAL.  
 Proposals should seek to retain existing road network with frontage along the site.  
 Appropriate setback will be encouraged to balance the protection and enhancement of 
the wildlife corridor north of the site.  
 The existing tree stock of mature trees should be retained and positively addressed by 
any proposed building.  
Infrastructure Requirements  
 Accessible community facilities should replace the churc h, high quality route on St. John’s 
Road with pedestrian and cycle facilities. Consideration of sustainable infrastructure.  
 Thames Water has indicated the local water network capacity in this area may 
be unable to support the demand anticipated from this d evelopment.  Upgrades 
to the wastewater network are likely to be required. Thames Water will need to 
be engaged at the earliest opportunity to agree a housing and infrastructure 
phasing plan to ensure essential infrastructure is delivered prior to the 
deve lopment creating identified additional capacity requirements.  
Justification  
 This site is included in the Wembley Growth Area. It is generally comprised of low density 
commercial use which has not maximised the development potential of the area.  
 This allocation will allow the site to contribute towards Brent’s housing numbers, 
community facilities, retail and employment floor space. New developments have come 
forward on neighbouring sites.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 The site’s excellent PTAL and its close  proximity  to Wembley C entral Station, bus 
routes  and High Road make it a good location for residential and employment use.  
MM93  
 
 
 5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA 11, 
page 271  Amend ‘comments’ of the policy to read:  
Comments  
Part of Former WAAP W4, so principle of development considered acceptable.  Suburban scale 
development.  
 
5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA 12, 
page 271  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Allocated use  
Residential/commercial/employment ( Business Use Class ) 
Indicative homes  
24 22  
Comments  
Ground floor commercial/  employment  use maximised, with upper storeys residential  
5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA 15, 
page 271  Amend parts of policy to read:  
Address  
Employment  Land on Heather Park Drive  
Allocated use  
Residential/ employment industrial use  
Indicative homes  
28 36 
Comments  
Mixed use residential with maximum replacement employment  light industrial, general 
industrial or storage and distribution   floorspace.  
5.7 South West 
Place  BSWSA16, 
page 271  Amend part of policy to read:  
Indicative homes  
80 120  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
5.7 South West  
Place  BSWSA 17, 
page 271  Amend part of policy to read:  
Indicative homes  
150 170  
MM94  6.1 Design  BD2, page 
276 
 
 
6.1.13 -
6.1.22  Amend part of the policy to read:  
A tall building is one that is more than  6 metres above the general prevailing heights of the 
surrounding area or more 30 metres in height  above ground level.  
 
Tall buildings are directed to the locations shown on the policies map in Tall Building Zones , 
intensification corridors, town centres and site allocations .  
 
In Tall Buildings Zones heights  should be consistent with the general building heights above 
ground level  shown on the policies map, stepping down towards the Zone’s edge.  
In intensification corridors and town centres outside conservation areas  and areas of 
distinctive residential chara cter developments of a general building height of 15 metres 
above ground level could be acceptable, with opportunities to go higher at strategic points in 
town centres.  
Elsewhere tall buildings not identified in site allocations will only be permitted wher e they are:  
a) of civic or cultural importance; or  
b) on sites of a sufficient size to successfully create a new character area while 
responding positively to the surrounding character and stepping down towards the site 
edges.  
In all cases the tall buildin gs must be shown to be positive additions to the skyline that would 
enhance the overall character of the area. They should be of exceptional design quality, 
consistent with London Plan Policy requirements in showing how they positively address their 
visual , functional, environmental and cumulative impacts.  
 
6.1.13 Height is only one element of a development when considering its acceptability and 
whether it is of good design. Nevertheless, it is a significant one in terms of increasing 
the visibility of a de velopment and its potential wider impact on an area’s character. 
London Plan Policy D 89 requires  identifies that the Brent Local Plan to should provide a Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
definition of a tall building and identify areas where tall buildings are acceptable. The 
council has done this in a number of different types of location taking account of factors 
such as those identified in D 89 and other London Plan policies D1 London’s Form, 
Character and Capacity for Growth, D 24 Delivering Good Design and D 46 Housing Quality 
and Standa rds, including Table 3.2.  
 
6.1.14 The Local Plan policies map identifies Tall Building Zones which will each be able to 
accommodate differing scales of tall buildings including those of 30 metres or more. (A 
residential tall building typically has a floor  to floor distance of around 3 metres. So a 30 
metre residential building would typically be approximately 10 storeys in height). It sets 
out the general building heights that would be appropriate in the Zones. This has been 
based on extensive analysis con sistent with London Plan Policy D 24 criteria a, b and c, as 
set out in Brent’s Tall Buildings Strategy 2019. This includes factors such as a 
consideration of Brent’s prevailing character, a desire to create clusters of tall buildings 
rather than standalone  ones, and concentrating the densest development in areas with 
good public transport accessibility  such as growth areas, on site allocations and other 
areas of intensification such as principal movement corridors and town centres . 
 
6.1.15 Any reference wit hin any place, site specific or design policy in this plan to number of 
storeys is for residential storeys. Proposals for commercial premises should be consistent 
with the parameters set by the height in metres for the identified number of residential 
storeys. The heights identified for the Tall Buildings Zones, town centres and site 
allocations are based on a high level of analysis, rather than in many cases considering a 
detailed building design. They indicate the heights likely to be generally acceptable  to the 
council. This does not mean that all buildings up to these heights are automatically 
acceptable.  Proposals will still need to be assessed in the context of other policies to 
ensure that they are appropriate in that location.  There might however also be 
circumstances where the quality of design of a development and its impact on character 
is such that taller buildings in these locations could be shown by applicants to be 
acceptable.   
 
6.1.16 Within the areas identified there should be variety in h eights to add to visual interest to 
the skyline.  Whilst  there will need to be a progressive stepping down of buildings to the 
edge of the tall buildings zone , to respect the existing lower scale character of adjacent 
areas, this can be subtle and incorpor ate variety of building heights, it does not have to 
be a strictly linear progression .Exceptions to stepping down will be where longer term Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
(post 2041) higher density intensification is likely to occur, for example east beyond the 
current Wembley Growth Ar ea. 
 
6.1.17 In town centres (outside conservation areas and areas of distinctive character)  and 
intensification corridors outside conservation areas and areas of distinctive residential 
character , to support increased density to deliver a significant numbe r of new homes, 
well designed tall er buildings (compared to existing heights) are likely to be supported. 
Typically, these areas have reasonably good access to public transport and a range of 
services/facilities which could be better supported with increas ed patronage of new 
building occupants. The intensification corridors are main (A) roads where public 
transport accessibility level is 3 or above , and where the width of the street indicated by 
the distance between properties front to front (typically, but  not exclusively 22.5 metres) 
and space/relationship with properties to the rear  indicate scope for increase in height. 
The character of these places is such that the significant height associated with Tall 
Building Zones is not considered appropriate in t hese locations through the work that has 
been done to date in supporting the Local Plan, including the Tall Buildings Strategy. 
Nevertheless, taller buildings, typically of around 15 metres (5 storeys), with the 
opportunity to go higher at strategic points  in town centres (e.g. locations adjacent to 
stations) could be appropriate. Buildings should in these locations reduce in scale 
towards adjacent properties on side streets.  
 
6.1.18 Similar to the Tall Buildings Zones, w hilst town centres and intensificati on corridors have 
been identified to be acceptable for taller buildings, development will still need to be 
consistent with other Development Plan policies, including BD1. It might be that for 
example policies that relate to heritage assets or the amenity o f neighbouring properties 
will reduce the appropriate height below those identified. In addition, the opportunities 
for increases in height consistent with this policy are more likely to be acceptable where 
a more comprehensive development takes place incl uding a whole or significant parts of 
a terrace, or in the case of detached and semi -detached buildings a number of adjacent 
properties. This will allow for instance better relationships between proportions of width 
to height and probably greater developme nt capacity to be achieved. The council will 
provide further guidance on preferred solutions for different blocks of properties within 
individual town centres and intensification corridors.  
 
6.1.19 Elsewhere, recognising the need in particular to promote new homes and places for 
work, in other locations, flexibility may be allowed on height compared to existing Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
buildings (potentially up to 6 metres).   Outside of Tall Building Zones, town centres and 
intensification corridors the council as a result of the detailed analysis it has undertaken 
for the Brent Tall Buildings Strategy, considers opportunities for tall buildings are likely to 
be more limited.   
 
6.1.20 The council does however recognise that historically buildings that would be defined as 
tall in po licy BD2 have been developed in low rise suburban locations and have positively 
added to the character of a place. This might have been buildings of civic or cultural 
importance such as places of worship that will have incorporated features taller than the  
prevailing surrounding buildings, that they warrant landmark status. Another example 
includes well designed taller mansion blocks.  
 
6.1.21 Whilst identifying priority locations for tall buildings, the council does not want to stifle 
opportunities for good  development elsewhere that might be tall but not necessarily 
inconsistent with good design and other desired policy outcomes. The council recognises 
that it does not yet know all sites that will be developed over the lifetime of the plan. 
Extensive areas might come forward for redevelopment that might not be subject to an 
allocation. A recent example Northfields shows that large sites can create the opportunity 
for new character areas that complement the surroundings and are appropriate to 
accommodate tall  buildings. As such the policy seeks to allow for some flexibility where it 
can be justified, to allow for tall buildings outside areas identified in the Plan, such as in 
the case of civic or cultural buildings, or sites of a scale which complement that of  
adjacent areas. As with other areas covered by the policy there should be a stepping 
down to form a positive relationship with remaining adjacent properties .  
 
6.1.22 In all cases the tall buildings element must be of such a design quality that it should 
enhance the character of the place within which it is set. London Plan policy D 89 contains 
criteria for the assessment of the appropriateness of tall buildings applications, including 
visual functional, environment and cumulative impacts. This together wit h design policies 
D1, D3, D24, and D46 (incl. Table 3.2) and D6  forms a detailed policy framework against 
which the design merits of a tall building can be considered. In addition, Brent Local Plan 
policies, Brent Tall Buildings Strategy and the Brent Desi gn Guide SPD1 identify a range 
of matters to appropriately address some of which include:  
a) Visual impacts:  
· Positive contributions to views from different distances  
· Positively reinforcing the hierarchy of place and assist wayfinding  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
· Elegant, with e xemplary architectural quality and materials  
· Buildings positively contributing to the character of an area, including impacts on 
heritage assets  
· No adverse reflected glare  
b) Functional Impacts:  
· Internal design to ensure safety of occupants  
· Servicing, maintenance and management  
· Accesses and ground floor uses ensuring no  
· Movement capacity in the area  
· Sufficient infrastructure provided  
· Benefits to wider area maximised  
· No adverse effect on aviation, navigation, telecommunication and s olar energy 
generation  
c) Environmental Impacts:  
· Wind, daylight, sunlight and temperature conditions  
· Support air movement  
· Noise  
d) Cumulative Impacts:  
· Combined impacts of numerous buildings in one place  
 
LONDON PLAN  
D1 London’s Form, Character and Capacity for Growth  
Policy D1A2 Infrastructure Requirements for Sustainable Densities  
Policy D1b3 Optimising Site Capacity Through a Design Led Approach  
Policy D24 Delivering Good Design  
Policy D 89Tall Buildings  
 
BRENT  
Brent Tall Building Strategy  
Brent Design Guide SPD1  
 
 
MM95  6.1 Design  BD3, page 
280 Add new part g) to the policy to read:  
Proposals for basement development of an existing property must:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
f) Ensure any lightwells are modest in scale, preferably located to the rear and if located to 
the front  are no more than whichever is the smaller of 800mm or half the length of the 
garden.  
g) Be protected from sewer flooding by a suitable pumped device  
MM96  6.2 Housing  6.2.6, page 
283  Amend para 6.2.6 to read:  
 
The Brent Strategic Housing Market Assessment 2018 (SHMA) identified a need for 
approximately 48,000 additional homes between 2016 -2041. This is equivalent to 1,920 
dwellings per annum. Using a limit of 33% of gross household incomes to be spent on 
rent/ mortgages, affordable housing comprises 884 dwe llings per annum (19,448 homes 
over the Plan period) or  46% of that need. This increases to over 50% when taking 
account of wider London’s affordable needs when applying these to the additional homes 
Brent is required to provide as set out in the London Pl an.  This does not include people 
who currently live in private rented housing who are receiving housing benefit to make 
their rents affordable; technically the market can provide for their needs. A desire to 
reduce benefit dependency, particularly of thos e who work arguably would mean real 
affordable needs are higher. Of the affordable need, 85% was for social rent (council 
house type rents) and 10% was for London Living Rent (pegged at a % of median 
incomes). 5% was for people able to afford between that and 80% of median local rents; 
typically these people might seek to buy shared ownership homes.  
6.2 Housing  6.2.15, 
page 284  Amend para 6.2.15 to read:  
 
Typically, around 260 new homes per year have been delivered on small sites (defined as sites 
less th an 25 dwellings or 2,500 sqm  0.25 hectares  in the London Plan). The Mayor 
considers that there is large potential in increasing numbers, identifying outer London 
boroughs as the principal locations. The London Plan identifies a target of 1,023  433 
dwelling s for Brent through this source. Historic levels of delivery with policies that were 
generally supportive of small site delivery show this to be extremely  indicate this will be 
a challenging target . The council’s evidence indicates that an average target o f 373 
dwellings over the first 10 years of the Plan is more realistic with 469 dwellings per 
annum from 2029/30.  
MM97  6.2 Housing  Policy BH1 
Page 287  Amend Policy to read:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
The council will maximise the opportunities to provide additional homes in the period to 2041 
and beyond . To achieve this it will grant planning permission to support the delivery of the 
Growth Areas, site allocations and appropriate windfall sites to provide a minimum 27,482  
23,250  homes in the period 2019/20 -2028/29 . It will positi vely plan to promote a further 
minimum of 18,074 homes from 2029/30 to the end of the Plan period in 2041  and a 
minimum of 46,018 homes in the period 2019/20 -2040/41 . Delivery will be assessed 
against Appendix 3 Housing Delivery Trajectory Annual Housing R equirement . 
In doing so it will take into account the likely need to continue to plan for new homes beyond 
each of these periods, ensuring that master planning and planning permissions take account of 
and positively plan for the potential for adjacent and sites in the wider area to come forward in 
the future to create successful places and mixed use communities.  
 
MM98  
 
  6.2 Housing  BH2, page 
288 Amend policy to read:  
In addition to the Growth Areas and Site Allocations identified in this Plan, town centres, edge 
of town centre sites , areas with higher levels of public transport accessibility levels  and 
intensification corridors will be priority locations where the provision of additional homes will be 
supported.  
Within town centres, edge of town cent re sites and intensification corridors where existing non -
residential floorspace forms part of a site proposed for residential development, the Council will 
require re -provision of the same amount and use class of non -residential floorspace.  
Exceptions to  this will be where it can be shown that:  
a) the site is allocated or has planning permission for an alternative use(s);  
b) there is no need for it or reasonable prospect of its use if provided; or  
c) in exceptional cases that its loss is outweighed by the benefits  that its replacement with 
residential floorspace will bring.  
MM99  6.2 Housing  BH3, page 
290 Add new sentence to the beginning of the policy to read:  
The provision of Build to Rent development as defined within London Plan Policy H11 
will be supported wit hin Brent.  To encourage increased housing delivery, within each Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Growth Areas (excluding South Kilburn) or development sites of 500 dwellings or more, the 
provision of Build to Rent properties will be expected unless this would:  
 
MM 
100 6.2 Housing  BH4, page 
291 Amend policy to add new text to read:  
Planning Permission for Small Sites will be determined in accordance with London Plan Policy H2 
with the exception of:  
Criterion D 2, which in Brent will only apply within PTAL 3 -6 locations  
Small housing developments (below 0.25 hectares or 25 dwellings in size) 
delivering a net addition of self -contained dwellings through the more intensive 
and efficient use of sites, where consistent with other policies in the 
development plan, will be supported within t he priority locations of PTAL 3 -6, 
intensification corridors, or a town centre boundary through:  
a) the infill of vacant or underused brownfield sites,  
b) residential conversions, redevelopment, extensions of dwellings, or infill within 
the curtilage of a dwelling  
c) the redevelopment of flats, non -residential buildings and residential garages,  
d) upward extensions of flats and non -residential buildings  
In these priority locations, the character of the existing area will be subject to 
change over the Local Plan period. Outside the priority locations greater weight 
will be placed on the existing character of the area, access to public transport 
and a variety of social infrastructure easy accessible on foot when determining 
the intensity of development appropr iate. 
Developments that demonstrably fail to optimise potential housing delivery on a 
site or prejudice more comprehensive development, particularly that of a site 
allocation, will be refused.  
All minor residential developments (less than 10 dwellings) are  required to 
deliver an Urban Greening Factor of 0.4 on site.  
 
Amend policy justification to read:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Justification  
6.2.39  The London Plan sets ambitious targets for small site development across London on the 
basis of the content of Policy H2 Small Sites. The council is positive about the extent to 
which small sites can contribute towards meeting housing needs. It anticipates delivery 
of about 370 dwellings per year. In relation to Policy H2 the council has in the Local Plan 
identified town centre boundaries an d main movement/ public transport corridors (known 
as intensification corridors) as principal areas where it considers the most obvious 
potential exists. The London Plan in Policy H2 Small Sites identifies that for London to 
deliver more of its housing; a substantial contribution from smaller sites below 0.25 
hectares in size will be required. It sets a Brent minimum target of 4,330 for the period 
2019/20 - 2028/29 from this source. Consistent with the London Plan, the Council wants 
to encourage the develop ment of small sites and provide a positive environment for small 
site developments in areas with good access to public transport and local services.  
 
6.2.40  As an outer London borough Brent has comparatively high car dependency rates for 
journeys, particularly no rth of the North Circular Road. Some tube and railway stations 
are located in town centres, some however are not and otherwise have a poor level of 
access to viable public transport alternatives, employment and retail/ other facilities to 
meet every day ne eds away from the immediate vicinity of those stations. London Plan 
policy H2’s 800 metre buffer around town centres and underground/ railway stations also 
takes no account of the quality of the physical links to those centres or the quality of 
public tran sport service there. A large site development might be able to address these 
through contributions to improve links or public transport improvements/ contributions to 
provision of controlled parking zones. Small developments however usually are not 
subject  to S106 and provide limited Community Infrastructure Levy funds which are 
therefore unlikely to be able to satisfactorily address such shortcomings. In addition, the 
percentage of residents that use the train/ underground as their main/ only mode of 
transport is very limited . 
The policy identifies the types of the developments considered likely to be appropriate and the 
priority locations for these types of developments. The areas are likely to be some of the 
better served by public transport and thus more  sustainable, in terms of reducing 
reliance on the private car with its associated impacts, such as air quality. The Council 
accepts that priority locations that are not identified as designated heritage assets or Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
areas of distinctive residential character  are likely to be subject to substantial change in 
character over the Plan period. Whilst character will change, the Council will still expect 
high quality development.  
 
6.2.41 As such the council considers that London Plan Policy H2 needs some refinement to take 
account of Brent circumstances. In areas where small scale development is likely to 
encourage high levels of car dependency it could undermine other objectives, such as 
reducing travel by car, improving air quality, maintaining quality of life of e xisting 
residents and impacting business efficiency related to movement of goods. As such in 
Brent criterion A2 has been amended to only apply where there are genuine reasonable 
public transport alternatives that could realistically encourage people to not  own/ use a 
car on a frequent basis.  
 
6.2.41 Developments are likely to be within close proximity to existing homes. They should 
therefore be carefully and creatively designed, to avoid for example an unacceptable 
level of harm to neighbours’ and occupants ’ amenity. Building design and the placement 
of windows and the use of landscaping can positively address privacy matters and ensure 
homes benefit from satisfactory levels of daylight and sunlight. In addition to design 
guidance for small housing sites tha t the Mayor will produce, the Council is also likely to 
adopt its own guidance to reflect Brent’s characteristics.  
 
6.2.41a   Although it is likely that opportunities will exist outside the priority locations 
for small sites development, the intensity of de velopment allowed is likely to be less. This 
is likely to be as a result of the existing character of those areas, which as they are not 
priority areas for development is not expected to significantly change. In addition the 
extent to which public transpor t and access to social facilities is within walking distance 
will also be considered. The poorer the access, the less intense the acceptable 
development is likely to be. In order to maximise the potential of all sites within the 
borough, small housing deve lopments will not be acceptable where they fail to optimise 
potential housing delivery or prejudice the more comprehensive development of a wider 
site allocation.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
6.2.41b  The open, green quality of the suburban environment was part of Brent’s historical 
appeal. Over time, intensification of building coverage and hard landscaping, principally 
to accommodate cars, has reduced incidental green infrastructure. This has not only 
affected the visual quality of the environment, but has also bio -diversity, urban 
temperatures, air quality, and the volume and speed of surface water run -off, together 
with water quality. Small site development without some form of safeguards could well 
intensify these matters. Application of the urban greening factor to minor developme nts 
will assist in better addressing these matters, making up for the loss of green 
infrastructure where this might be lost, or supporting its re -introduction where sites may 
now have none. As such, delivery of green infrastructure on site consistent with an Urban 
Greening Factor of 0.4 will be sought on site with London Plan Policy G5 Urban Greening 
applying to minor developments (under 10 dwellings).  
 
LONDON PLAN  
Policy H2 Small sites  
Policy H2A Small Housing Developments  
Policy G5 Urban Greening  
Policy D7 Accessible Housing  
MM 
101 
 6.2 Housing  BH5, page 
292 Amend policy to read:  
 
In Brent the strategic affordable housing target that will apply is 50% of new homes in the 
period to 2041. London Plan Policy H5 Threshold Approach to Applications will be 
applied . The affordable housing tenure split required to comply with London Plan Policy H 56 
Threshold Approach to Applications is for:  
Non-Build to Rent developments of 10 dwellings or more is: 
d) 70 per cent Social Rent/ London Affordable Rent and;  
e) 30 per cent intermediate products which meet the definition of genuinely affordable 
housing, including London Living Rent, affordable rent within Local Housing Allowance 
limits and London Shared ownership. These must be for households within the most up Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
to date i ncome caps identified in the London Housing Strategy or London Plan Annual 
Monitoring Report.  
Build to Rent developments , a minimum of : 100 per cent at London Living Rent equivalent 
rents or lower.  
Developments of between 5 -9 dwellings will be required to make a financial contribution for 
the provision of affordable housing off -site.  
MM 
102 6.2 Housing  6.2.49a, 
page 294  Insert new para labelled 6.2.49a after 6.2.49 to read:  
6.2.49a In accordance with national policy and London Plan Policy H4, on major residential 
developments affordable housing should be provided on site, as part of the emphasis on 
creating mixed and balanced communities.  Nevertheless, it might be that in exceptional 
circumstances financial contributions in lieu of provision of afforda ble housing on site will 
be acceptable.  This is most likely to be the case for sites subject to late stage viability 
assessment reviews that due to the threshold approach will be subject to viability testing 
prior to and post planning permission.  More de tail on when contributions in lieu of on -
site provision will be acceptable and how they are calculated is set out in the Mayor’s 
Housing SPG. On sites of between 5 -9 dwellings it is recognised that on site provision is 
likely to be more challenging related  to a number of issues, but particularly their 
attractiveness to registered providers to take on responsibility for ownership and 
management.  As such, on these sites a financial contribution in lieu of on -site provision 
will be sought to support affordabl e housing provision elsewhere in the borough as set 
out in Policy BH5.   
MM 
103 6.2 Housing  BH7, page 
296 Amend part d) and part e) of the policy to read:  
 
f) includes management arrangements agreed with the council suitable to its proposed use 
and size to not unacceptably impact on neighbour amenity;  
g) demonstrates that there is a specific Brent need, or in the case of education  purpose 
built student accommodation   a London need, for the particular use; and  
h) will not lead to an over -concentration of the type of accommodation in the area. For 
Houses in Multiple Occupation this an over -concentration  is defined as where no 
more than 4 of 11 adjacent  three or more of the ten nearest properties are Houses 
in Multiple Occupation . Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
MM 
104 
 6.2 Housing  BH8, page 
299 Amend policy to read:  
To support achieving the London Plan annual benchmark monitoring provision target  figure  of 
230 dwellings per annum the council will require minimum provision of specialist older people’s 
accommodation in the following circumstances:  
a) Within all Growth Areas except South Kilburn developers will be expected to work 
together to identify sites on which as a minimum 10% of all the Growth Area’s additional 
dwellings over those which already have planning permission will be delivered as 
specialist older people’s accommodation;  
b) Elsewhere, as a minimum 10% on  sites with a capacity of 500 or more dwellings.  
 
MM 
105 6.2 Housing  BH9, page 
300 Amend policy to read:  
The existing Lynton Close travellers’ site will be retained and reconfigured to maximise the 
number of pitches available, as well as being brought up to a standard that allows for 
it to meet its existing residents’ needs  unless evidence shows it is no longer needed.  
The Council will seek to accommodate the identified needs for any add itional pitches in it’s the 
latest available gypsy and travellers needs  study that is consistent with the most up to date 
national or adopted London Plan definition of Gypsy and Travellers and associated needs 
assessment methodology . 
Within Growth Areas (e xcept South Kilburn) and developments of 1 hectare or more that will 
include new homes, the potential for the incorporation of a dedicated Gypsy and Travellers’ 
site/s should be robustly considered as part of any required masterplanning/site design 
evoluti on process. If it is evidenced that a more traditional format of site cannot be 
incorporated, then more innovative ways of accommodating needs should also be shown to 
have been considered.  
Any new Proposals for  Ggypsy and Ttravellers’ sites should:  
i) Meet a Brent derived need for such accommodation;  
c) Be located on a site and in an area both environmentally acceptable for residential 
occupation forming part of a balanced and mixed community,  and suitable where Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
required for the undertaking of occupants’ employment and entrepreneurial activities 
without detriment to adjacent occupiers’ amenity;  
d) Have acceptable accessibility by road users and pedestrians and to local services and 
public transport; and  
e) Be laid out and incorporate boundary treatments that see k to positively integrate with 
the adjacent townscape/ communities.  
 
Amend policy justification to read:  
 
Justification  
6.2.79  Brent currently has 30 31 formal pitches of accommodation located on the Lynton Road 
Close site of approximately 1 hectare  which histor ically has had problems of over -
crowding . A West London Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation 
Assessment was undertaken in 2018  consistent with national policy and guidance related 
to identifying needs . Using the draft London Plan defini tion of a Gypsy or Traveller, a 
minimum of an additional 90 pitches would be required. This is very different to the 
results in the same assessment generated for the national definition. This indicated a 
need for no additional pitches. Existing residents o f Lynton Road Close  although living in 
caravans did not fall within the current national definition of Ggypsies and Ttravellers for 
planning purposes. Clarity will be provided on adoption of the London Plan which is the 
most appropriate.  The Council broug ht Lynton Close back under its management in 2017 
and subsequently undertook an audit of the site.  This clarified that the site is over -
occupied and that the on -site facilities are inadequate for the number of occupants and in 
any case need updating to br ing the site up to a satisfactory standard.  The Council has 
resolved to address both these issues.  It is working with the site’s occupants to find a 
solution for those legitimately on site.    Ultimately it will be for the community working 
closely with the Council to decide what is appropriate for them.  If the outcome of this 
process is that a new site is necessary to accommodate needs, then any proposed site 
should be consistent with the criteria set out in the policy.  
6.2.80 Assuming traditional accommodatio n density levels the 90 additional pitches would 
indicate the need for nearly three hectares of land. For management purposes, this could 
be three of more sites, depending on their size. Realistically the only land that could Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
accommodate this size of need will be that currently in non -residential use which through 
redevelopment could provide an acceptable residential environment.  
6.2.81 Due to the need to accommodate an increased population with associated social 
infrastructure, many Local Plan policies require re placement of existing residential and 
non-residential uses. This and the value of land realistically plays a significant role in 
limiting opportunities for delivery of single use travellers’ sites. The 2018 assessment 
identifies that those in need are unli kely to be in a position to purchase/ develop a site. 
As such the best opportunities for delivering additional provision are likely to be in areas 
that will be subject to wholesale regeneration for a range of uses where residential is also 
appropriate. Thi s includes Growth Areas, or larger development site allocations/ windfall 
sites that come forward for development incorporating new homes.  
6.2.82 In order to give a greater likelihood to delivery of Gypsy/ Traveller pitches sites, the 
council will require robust consideration of their incorporation as part of any large 
development where a development proposes new homes. This includes in the 
masterplanning of Growth Areas, or large scale sites of 1 hectare or more. The exception 
is South Kilburn Growth Area where a  masterplanning exercise related to the need to 
rehouse a significant number of existing tenants in social rent properties has already 
identified maximum development potential.   
6.2.83 The scarcity of development land in Brent means that it has to be used effici ently. This is 
likely to mean that the low density/ intensity models previously used for Gypsy/ 
Travellers’ will be extremely challenging if not impossible to deliver. As with other uses 
such as schools, health centres or supermarkets, suitable sites may w ell only come about 
as part of wider, potentially vertically mixed used developments. Therefore, consideration 
needs to be given to innovative ways of accommodating Gypsy/ Traveller sites within 
these types of developments.  
6.2.84  Any new proposed  Ggypsy and Ttraveller sites will need to provide a safe and acceptable 
potential living environment; essentially consistent with the characteristics expected of 
mainstream housing  and ideally forming part of a wider balanced and mixed residential 
community . This includ es having good access to social infrastructure to help address 
recognised disadvantages in relation to educational attainment and health/ life 
expectancy that this group has. Nevertheless, there should also be consideration of 
particular needs such as abil ity of work vehicles and homes to access the main road 
network and facilities that support employment. The council aims to further Brent’s 
reputation as a place that welcomes diversity. Therefore, the design and layout of Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Ggypsy and Ttravellers' sites, par ticularly at their edges, should look to integrate well 
with its surroundings and promote opportunities for positive interaction  with the adjacent 
townscape and associated communities . 
MM 
106 6.2 Housing  BH13, page 
306 All new dwellings will be required to have external private amenity space of a sufficient size and 
type to satisfy its proposed residents’ needs. This is normally expected to be 20sqm per flat and  
50sqm per home for family housing (including ground floor flats)  (3 bedrooms or more) 
situated  at ground floor level and 20 sqm for all other housing . 
MM 
107 
  6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  BE1, page 
315 Amend policy and add new paragraph to the policy to read:  
 
The Granville multi -purpose workspace and community space in South Kilburn Growth Area will 
be protected and opportunities to provide additional affordable workspace will be sought. In 
Alperton, Burnt Oak Colindale, Church End, Neasden, Staples Corner and Wembley Growth 
Areas a minimum of 10% of total employment  floorspace within major developments 
exceeding 3000 sq.m of employment floorspace  is to be affordable research and 
development, light industrial and studio  workspace in the B use class  which will be 
protected by condition and / or legal agreement, where appropriate to do so . 
 
New affordable workspace should normally be provided on -site for the lifetime of the 
development and managed by an approved provider. Only in exceptional 
circumstances where it can be demonstrated robustly that this is not appropriate, 
may it be provided off -site. A financial contribution in lieu of on -site provision will 
only be accepted where this would have demonstrable benefits in furthering 
affordable workspace in the borough.  
 
Further and higher Eeducational  provision quarters  at Northwick Park and Wembl ey will be 
protected and enhanced.  
MM 
108 
 6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  BE2, page 
317 Amend first part of the policy to read:  
 
The Council is committed to exceeding the additional 0.6 hectares equivalent of 
industrial floorspace need within the plan period.  Within SIL and LSIS , as shown on the 
Borough Policies Map,  development will be supported where it intensifies 
employment industrial  uses, including those for waste, utilities and transport 
infrastructure  and accords with the following principles:  
as follows  
Amend table to read:  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
Employment Indust
rial Site Designation  Policy approach  
East Lane  SIL Intensification  
 
These sites will be protected 
for solely industrial uses as 
defined in London Plan 
Policy E4 ‘Land for industry, 
logistics and services to 
support London’s economic 
function’ Criterion A.  
employment uses within use 
class B1c, B2, B8 and closely 
related sui generis uses. 
Development will be supported 
which increases the amount of 
employment industrial  
floorspace in these use classes , 
includi ng for start-up and 
space,  move on space. Any loss 
or reduction in floorspace will 
be resisted.  Northfields ( east 
and west of Grand 
Union Canal ) SIL 
Wembley  SIL 
Alperton (central)  LSIS 
Alperton (south)  LSIS 
Brentfield Road  LSIS 
Kingsbury  LSIS 
Staples Corner  
 SIL 
 
 
 
 Intensification and some co -
location subject to the 
comprehensive masterplan 
approach as set out for 
LSIS below, including 
requirements a) to g).  
Alperton (north)  LSIS On these sites intensification 
through co -location will be 
supported, subject to a 
comprehensive masterplan 
approach produced with or 
agreed by the council Church End  LSIS 
Colindale  LSIS 
Cricklewood  LSIS 
Honeypot Lane 
(Lowther Road)  LSIS Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Honeypot Lane 
(Westmorelane  
Westmoreland 
Road)  LSIS demonstrating the following 
will be achieved:  
a) Conformity with London 
Plan policy E7;  
b) a net increase in 
employment industrial  
floorspace  resulting in 
a minimum  0.65 plot 
ratio or the existing 
floorspace total, 
whichever is greater, 
across the masterplan 
area; 
c) a mix of B1(b)  research 
and development , 
B1(c) light industrial  , 
B2 general industrial 
and B8 storage and 
distribution   
employment floorspace 
will be delivered 
reflective of borough 
needs, including start -up 
space,  and move on 
space;  
d) proactive engagement 
with existing businesses 
to seek to retain them 
on site where possible, 
and support for any 
businesses that cannot 
be incorporated to 
relocate off site ; Neasden Lane  LSIS Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
e) 10% of employment 
floorspace to be 
affordable workspace;  
f) the development is of a 
high quality design and 
will result in sustainable 
development, well 
served by community 
facilities and open 
space; and  
g) any potential conflicts 
between uses can be 
mitigated  and a high 
standard of amenity 
achieved.  
Northfields (east 
of Grand Union 
Canal)  SIL Co-location within site 
boundary of extant planning 
permission subject to as a 
minimum providing the 
amount, typology, and 
affordability of employment 
floorspace consistent with 
planning permission 18/0321.  
Intensification on the 
remainder of the SIL.  
 
MM 
109 
 6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  BE3, page 
319 Amend and add new text to policy to read:  
 
Local Employment Sites have an important role to play in ensuring that a range of 
employment premises are available to meet employment needs, including ensuring 
the need for additional industrial floorspace capacity is met in the borough. The 
council will require their retention and where possible their use for research and 
development, light industrial, general industrial or storage and distribution will be 
inten sified.  The Council will only allow the release development of  Local Employment Sites 
to for non-employment uses where:  
a) continued wholly employment use is unviable; or  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
b) development increases the amount of workspace as well as retaining the existing 
employment use or provides that additional workspace as  affordable studio, 
research and development, light industrial or general industrial  workspace in the 
B use class , with maker space in light industrial  use class B1(c)  prioritised to meet 
demand . ; or 
c) the site is allocated for development  
 
Where criterion a) or c) is being used to justify the release, the maximum viable 
replacement of the existing employment floorspace will be sought . 
 
Where criterion b) applies, if within the existing or emerging creative clusters of 
Harlesden, Wembley Growth Area, Willesden Green, Alperton Growth Area, Kilburn, 
Kensal Green, Neasden, Queen’s Park, Burnt Oak Colindale Growth Area, and Church 
End Growth Area, affordable workspace is to be provided on -site. Elsewhere , if 
affordable workspace is considered unlikely to successful, financial contributions will 
be secured to provide equivalent affordable workspace elsewhere.  
 
Work-Live units will be acceptable where they are managed by an organisation committed to 
their u se primarily for employment, as evidenced by a management plan. Loss of Work -Live 
units to residential will be resisted.  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  6.4.21 page 
319 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.4.26  Local Employment Sites are sites outside of SIL and LSIS in employment use within the B use 
class and closely related sui generis uses. They can be sites wholly in employment use, or 
part of the floorspace or yardspace of a mixed use building or site. They make an important 
contribution to the local economy, by providing loca l employment opportunities and reducing 
the need to travel. This policy allows for the release of unviable employment floorspace or, 
where appropriate, mixed -use development. This is consistent with the NPPF which requires 
the efficient use of land.  
 
Work-Live is the combination of living accommodation (Use Class C3)  with  
workspace (Not Use Class B1, but not  B2 or B8) within a single self -contained unit.  
 
MM 
110 
 6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  BE4, page 
320 Amend policy title to read:  
 
POLICY BE4: SUPPORTING STRONG CENTRES DIVERSITY OF USES  
 
Add title ‘Diversity of uses’ and amend part of that policy to read:  
 
DIVERSITY OF USES  
No further A4drinking establishments  or A5takeaway  uses will be permitted within the 
defined Primary Shopping Frontage of Brent’s town centres, as shown on the Policies Map.   
 
Non-A1 or A2 uses will be permitted within town centres where:  
 
d) they would not reduce the proportion of frontage in A1 and A2 use to less than 65% of 
the primary frontage; or  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
e) if vacancy rates exceed 10%  of primary frontage it would not reduce the proportion of 
frontage in A1 and A2 use to less than 50%; and  
f) the proposal provides, or maintains, an active frontage.  
 
Unviable secondary frontage , as shown on the policies map,  on the periphery of town 
centres  will be promoted for workspace, social infrastructure and residential uses. Viability will 
be determined in accordance with the marketing requirements set out in paragraph 
6.4.33.  
 
MM 
111  6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  FIGURE 34 
Town 
Centre 
hierarchy, 
page 321  Replace amended figure:  
 
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM 
112 
 6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  BE5, page 
323 Amend part of the policy ‘Takeaways’ to read:  
 
Subject to other policies within the development plan, takeaways will be approved except where 
they would result in:  
 
g) The introduction of any new A5takeaway  use within the designated primary frontage of 
a town centre;  
h) an A5 use takeaway within 400 metres walking distance of a primary school, secondary 
school or further education establishment entrance/ exit point;  
i) more than 6% of the units within a town centre frontage in A5 uses  being takeaways ; 
j) more than 1 unit or 15% of the units within a neighbourhood parade, whichever is the 
greater, in A5 use  being takeaways ; 
k) less than three  two non-A5 takeaway  units between takeaways; or  
l) on-street parking in front of the premises creating highway safety problems.  
 
 
MM 
113 6.4 Economy 
and Town 
Centres  BE6, page 
324 Amend first part of the policy to read :  
 
Loss of A1, A2, A3  retail,  commercial, business  and service uses or launderettes in 
neighbourhood parades or isolated shop units outside designated town centres will be permitted 
where the proposal does not result in a harmful break in the continuity of retail frontages, and 
the parade or unit is withi n 400 metres of equivalent alternative provision and;  
 
a) is unviable; or  
b) the proposal will provide a community facility for which there is a demonstrable need.  
 
MM 
114 6.4 Economy & 
Town Centres  After 
6.4.60, 
page 328  Add new para 6.4.60a after 6.4.60 to read:  
 
6.4.60a  When assessing criterion a) significant compromise will relate to the number of 
dwellings proposed by the applicant, against the likely reduction on the indicative 
capacity of the site allocation. An assessment of significance will be done o n a case -by-
case basis. In particular, it will take into consideration performance against the 5 -year 
land supply requirement. It will also assess the extent to which visitor accommodation 
has already been permitted against the London Plan requirement of 2 ,622 bedrooms by 
2040. The Council might consider that if performance against the housing requirement is Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
healthy, that a greater component of the allocation coming forward as hotel, is 
appropriate, even if this reduces housing delivery below the indicative  allocation target .” 
MM 
115  
 6.5 Heritage and 
Culture  BHC1, page 
333  Amend policy and add new part e) to read:  
 
Proposals for or affecting heritage assets should:  
a) demonstrate a clear understanding of the archaeological, architectural or historic 
significance and its wider context;  
b) provide a detailed analysis and justification of the potential impact (including incremental 
and cumulative) of the development on the heritage asset and its context as well as any 
public benefit;  
c) retain buildings, st ructures, architectural features, hard landscaping and spaces and 
archaeological remains, where their loss would cause harm  
c d) sustain and or enhance the significance of the heritage asset, its curtilage and 
setting, respecting and reinforcing the street  scene, frontages, views, vistas, street 
patterns, building line, siting, design, height, plot and planform and ensure that 
extensions are not overly dominating;  
d e) contribute to local distinctiveness, built form, character and scale of heritage 
assets b y good quality, contextual, subordinate design, and the use of appropriate 
materials and expertise, and improving public understanding and appreciation;  
e) seek to avoid harm in the first instance.  Substantial harm or loss should be 
exceptional, especiall y where the asset is of high significance.  Any proposed 
harm to or loss of a heritage asset (including to its setting) should require clear 
and convincing justification and can be outweighed by material planning 
considerations in the form of public benefi ts but only if these are sufficiently 
powerful .  
c) where demolition is proposed within a conservation area  detailed plans for any 
replacement building will be required to allow consideration of whether the replacement 
would contribute positively to the chara cter or will be applied to ensure construction of 
the approved scheme is implemented together with agreed mitigation measures 
appearance of the area. In cases where demolition is permitted conditions and/or legal 
agreements will be applied to ensure constr uction of the approved scheme is 
implemented together with agreed mitigation measures.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM 
116 6.5  Heritage 
and Culture  6.5.24 page 
336 In the first instance,  The council will resist significant  harm to or loss of  to designated  heritage 
assets. It will assess proposals which would directly or indirectly impact on heritage assets in 
the light of  their significance and the degree of harm or loss which would be caused. Where the 
harm is considered to be  would be  less than substantial, it will be weighed ag ainst any public 
benefits of the proposal, including securing optimum viable use of the heritage asset and 
whether it would enhance or better reveal the its significance of the conservation area.  For 
demolition or alteration to be approved, there will need  to be clarity about what will be put in 
its place within a suitable time frame. It should be noted designation as a Locally Listed Building 
does not provide further statutory protection but it draws attention to the special qualities of 
the building.  
MM 
117  6.5 Heritage and 
Culture  BHC4, page 
339  Amend policy to read:  
 
The London Plan identifies the Night Time Economy of Wembley of National/International 
Importance and Kilburn High Road, Cricklewood and Wembley Park as of more than local 
importance.  
The council through its own actions and working with others will support Brent’s night time 
economy and in particular the four centres which will be the priority locations for such uses. 
Development that preserves or enhances existing night time economy activi ties or creates new 
ones that will reinforce the role and significance of each centre in the London hierarchy in an 
inclusive and accessible way will be supported, whilst that which would undermine it will be 
refused. Development impacting the night -time e conomy must preserve or enhance its 
function in line with the London Plan town centre hierarchy. This must accord with 
the principles of inclusivity and accessibility as laid out within the Mayor’s Culture 
and Night -Time Economy SPG.  
MM 
118  
 6.5 Heritage and 
Culture  BHC5, page 
340  Amend first paragraph of policy to read:  
 
The Council will support  recognises the important role that pubs can have in 
contributing to the borough’s character and their role as community assets. New 
public houses will be supported in town centres. The loss of public houses only where  will 
only be supported where the following can be adequately demonstrated:  
 
Amend part a) to read:  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
d) its continued use as a pub or as an alternative community facility within the D1 use class 
is not economically viable as demonstrated by meeting the marketing requirements as 
set out in paragraph 6.5.39;  
MM 
119  6.6 Green 
Infrastructure 
and Natural 
Environment  
 BGI1, page 
345 Amend first part of policy to read:  
 
The council will expect the provision of additional public open space as set out in Growth Area 
policies.  
Major residential developments outside Growth Areas will be expected to provide 0.81  sqm of 
public open space per resident in the following manner : provision will be on site  will address 
current and future needs :  
a) in the wards with a public open space deficiency of  Alperton, Brondesbury Park, 
Dudden Hill, Harlesden, Kensal Green, Kilburn, Mapesbury, Queens Park, Queensbury, 
Tokyngton, Wembley and Willesden Green provision will  be by maximising the on-site 
provision of a range of publicly accessible open spaces for a range of users;  
b) In the rest of the borough, provision will be on-site unless the size and typology of 
space that the development generates a need for, with the exce ption of a Local Area of 
Play, is already within 400 metres by a direct and safe walking route.  
Where public open space is not being provided on site, a financial contribution will be sought 
to improving the quality and/or accessibility of existing open s pace provision.  
The provision of ‘meanwhile uses’, such as pocket parks and community gardens on parts of 
sites that are likely to be otherwise vacant for long periods will be sought in association 
with development proposals.  
 
MM 
120 
 6.6 Green 
Infrastructure 
and Natural 
Environment  
 BGI2, page 
350  Amend part b) of policy to read:  
 
b) In the case of major development to make provision for the planting and retention of 
trees on site. Where retention is agreed to not be possible, developers shall provide 
new trees to achieve equivalent canopy cover or a financial contribution for off -site 
tree planting of equivalent canopy cover will be sought. Replacement canopy cover 
will be measured as total canopy area of new trees at time of planting being 
equal to canopy area of existing mature trees proposed for removal.  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
 
MM 
121  
 6.7 Sustainable 
Infrastructure  BSUI3, 
page 361  Amend first paragraph of policy to read:  
 
Proposals requiring a Flood Risk Assessment must demonstrate that the development will be 
resistant and resilient to all relevant sources of flooding including surface water. Proposed 
development must pass the sequential and exceptions test as required by national 
policy.  The design and layout of proposals requiring a Flood Risk Assessment as set out in 
paragraph 6.7.37 must contribute to flood risk management and reduction and:  
 
Amend last paragraph of policy to read:  
 
Opportunities will be sought from the redevelopment of sites in functional floodplain (flood zone 
3b) to restore the natural f unction and storage capacity of the floodplain. Proposals that result 
in an increase  involve the loss of functional floodplain or otherwise would constrain its  in 
natural function, by impeding flow or reducing  flood  storage capacity and the environmental 
quality of the watercourse , will be encouraged  resisted.  
 
MM 
122 Sustainable 
Infrastructure  6.7.35, 
page 362  Add new para 6.7.35a) after para 6.7.35 to read:  
 
6.7.35a) The Plan’s site allocations and intensification corridors have been considered to be 
acceptable in principle taking account of the recommendations of the Brent Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment Level 2 August 2020 (SFRA2) and the Brent Flood Risk Sequential 
and Exceptions Test September 2020.  Applications for their development must be 
consistent with the recommendations of the SFRA2 and supported with an appropriate 
FRA that shows that the development does not unacceptably increase flood risk on or off 
site. 
 
Add new para 6.7.35b) to read:  
 
6.7.35b) The Council will only consider the redevel opment of sites in functional floodplain to 
occur within the already identified site allocations and intensification corridors that have been 
supported by a Level 2 SFRA and Sequential Test. When applying this policy the guidance in the 
West London SFRA (2 018) specifically Sections 3.11.1 and 3.11.2 must be adhered to, so that it 
is clear which parts of the site are developable and which areas of the site should remain for Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
flood storage (i.e. functional floodplain). The compatibility of development vulnerab ility 
classifications for Flood Zones 3a and 3b set out in the Planning Practice Guidance will apply.  
The policy is specific about the improvements that will be sought such as restoring natural 
function and storage capacity of the floodplain.  The Council will also seek to improve the 
environmental quality of any watercourse on these sites. The high level of flood risk warrants 
very careful consideration of design, mitigation and overall environmental improvement, taking 
into account climate change, and ear ly discussions with the Environment Agency are 
recommended.  
MM 
123  
 6.8 Transport  BT1, page 
370 Amend  ‘Active Travel’ part c) to read:  
 
c) provide for and make contributions towards connected, high quality, convenient and safe 
cycle routes and facilities in accordance with the Brent Cycling Strategy, including cycle 
parking, in line with or exceeding London Plan standards and  TfL and WestTrans 
design standards, the implementation of new cycleways, and a borough wide cycle hire 
scheme;  
 
Amend  part k) to read:  
 
Clean Technology  
a) support the bus network in Brent by identifying and implementing bus priority 
measures to  improve  coverage and  journey time reliability ; maintaining existing 
coverage and improving connectivity to areas of the borough with limited public  
transport access,  of the bus network  and enable and improv inged bus interchange 
facilities;  
 
Insert title before  part l) to read:  
 
Clean Technology  
b) increase coverage of Electric Vehicle charging points across the borough.  
 
MM 
124  6.8 Transport  Policy BT2, 
page 373  Amend first paragraph of the policy to read:  
 
Developments should provide parking consistent with parking standards in Appendix 4. Car 
parking standards are the maximum and car free development will be encouraged where an 
existing Controlled Parking Zone (CPZ) is in place or can be achieved. should be the starting Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
point for all development proposals in places that are (or are planned to be) well -
connected by public transport, with developments elsewhere designed to provide the 
minimum necessar y parking.  
 
Contributions secured through a planning obligation to existing and new car clubs, bike clubs 
and pool car and bike schemes in the borough  will be strongly encouraged in place of private 
parking in developments.  
 
MM 
125  
 6.8 Transport  BT3, page 
376  Amend part of the policy to read:  
 
PROVISION AND PROTECTION OF FREIGHT FACILITIES  
 
Development that would generate significant movement of goods or materials, both during 
construction and in operation, should minimise the movement of goods and materials by road. 
Freight consolidation through maximising the use of the capacity of vehicles entering 
and exiting a site and  the use of more sustainable alternatives, i.e. by rail and canal, or for 
last mile delivery cargo cycles,  and pursuit of best practice in techn ical innovation to 
consolidate delivery and construction transport  is encouraged.  
 
For longer distance movements, the provision of sidings within suitable new developments 
adjoining railway lines is supported. Warehousing development, adj oining rail lines where rail 
access can be provided, should include sidings.  
 
Existing sidings and sites adjacent to them or the canal with the potential for rail 
freight use  will be protected where these are adaptable to serve anticipated needs. 
Developme nt proposals which would conflict with the effective operation of these 
facilities will not be permitted unless:  
 
a) appropriate mitigation is provided to ensure it will not place unreasonable 
restrictions on the effective operation of these facilities; or   
b) the existing facility can be satisfactorily relocated within the development 
proposals in terms of operational requirements and environmental criteria; or  
c) the facility is replaced in an appropriate alternative location.  
 
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
MM 
126 
 7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   7.1.20, 
page 384  Add new sentences at the end of para 7.1.20 to read:  
 
Infrastructure delivery will also be monitored through the AMR and the Infrastructure Funding 
Statement, both of which are intended to be published on an annual basis. In a ddition, the 
Council has introduced formal governance arrangements for the spending of strategic CIL and 
S106. This will enable CIL to be allocated in a transparent, consistent and accountable way that 
will help deliver key infrastructure priorities identi fied in the Local Plan, the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan and the Council’s capital programme.  
MM 
127 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   7.1.22, 
page 384  Add new sentences at the end of para 7.1.22 to read:  
 
Monitoring is an important part  of the continuous planning process. Changing circumstances 
means that the monitoring of policies is required to deliver, manage, and if necessary adapt or 
bring forward alternative planning approaches to Brent’s growth and meeting the borough’s 
needs for homes, jobs, services and infrastructure. Monitoring of policies will be undertaken 
through the AMR and where targets are not being met, a review may be triggered. A review 
may also be triggered by a review of the London Plan or changes to national policy.  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385, 
(new 
targets – 
first and 
second 
measures):  Performance Measure " Proportion of Brent Local Super Output Areas in the bottom 20% of most 
deprived areas nationally as identified in the Indices of Multiple Deprivation."  Target " 15% 
2031" Specific Policy to be monitored " Development Vision "  
Performance Measure " Proportion of the top 20% least deprived areas nationally as identified in 
the Indices of Multiple Deprivation ." Target " 2% 2031 " Specific Policy to be monitored 
"Development Vision "  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  Performance Measure “Tall Buildings allowed inconsistent with policy” Target “ None Zero”   
Specific Policy to be Monitored “  BD1 BD2” 
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39,  
page 385  Performance Measure “Residential basements in existing properties allowed that are larger than 
policy criteria” Target “ None Zero”   Specific Policy to be Monitored “  BD2 BD3  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385 
(new 
measure)  Performance measure: “ Percentage of Build to Rent affordable housing to be London Living 
Rent tenure”  
Target: “ 100%”  
Specific policy to be monitored: “ BH3” 
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385 
(new 
measure)  Performance Measure “ Number of homes built on small sites .”  
Target “ 433 dwellings per annum” .  
Specific policy to be monitored “ BH4"  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  
 Performance measure: " Tenure split of affordable housing within major development with an 
affordable housing  planning obligation.”   
Target “70% social/ London affordable rent; below LHA rates  30% intermediate”.  
Specific policy to be monitored “BH5"  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  Performance measure: " Additional bed spaces built in communal establishments.”   
Target “No specified target”.  
Specific policy to be monitored “BH7"  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  
 Performance measure: " Net Number of Additional Gypsy and Traveller Pitches Provided.”   
Target “Consistent with  accepted  definition outcome of Lynton Close audit. ”  
Specific policy to be monitored “BH9"  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  Performance measure: " Net number of dwellings lost where the development results in an 
overall loss of dwellings.”   
Target “No specified target.  Reasons for any net loss of dwellings to be explored and 
clarified within the AMR. ”  
Specific policy to be monitored “BH10"  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39 , 
page385  Performance measure: " Number of permissions where conversion of an existing 3 bed dwelling 
results in additional dwelling plus family accommodation.”   
Target “ “No Target”  No net loss of family sized (3+bedroom) accommodation .”  
Specific policy to be monitored “BH11"  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39 , 
page 385  Performance measure: " Amount of managed work space provided.”   
Target “ “No Target”  10% of employment floorspace within major developments exceeding 
3000sqm employment as affordable workspace ”  
Specific policy to be monitored “BE1"   
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  
 
(target for 
BE2)  Performance measure: “Net additional employment  industrial floorspace provided in SIL and 
LSIS and LES  by intensification or co -location”  
Target: “No specified target, but definitely no net loss”  
Specific policy to be monitored: “BE2 and BE3 ” 
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  
 
(new 
separate 
line for 
BE3)  Performance measure: “ Net additional industrial floorspace provided in Local Employment Sites ” 
Target: “ No specified target. Reasons for any  net loss of floorspace to be explored and 
clarified in the AMR ” 
Specific policy to be monitored: “ BE3” Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  Performance measure: “Additional A4 or A5  drinking establishments and hot food takeaway 
units granted p ermission in Primary Shopping Frontages.”  
Target: “ None Zero” 
Specific policy to be monitored: “BE4”  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39 
(removal of 
target), 
page 385  Performance measure: Proportion of primary frontage in A1 and A2 use.  
Target: Proportion of frontage in A1 and A2 use not to fall below 65%, or 50% if vacancy 
rates exceed 10%.  
Specific policy to be monitored: BE4  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 385  Performance measure: “Concentration of takeaways and proximity of takea ways to primary 
schools, secondary schools and further education establishments.”  
Target: “Proportion of units in use as takeaways in town centres not to exceed 6%, and no 
further takeaways within 400 metres or of a primary school, secondary school or further 
education establishment. ” 
Specific policy to be monitored: “BE5”  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 386  Performance measure: “ Number of public houses lost and not replaced by development. ” 
Target: “ No net loss of viable  public houses/ drinking establishments ” 
Specific Policy to be measured: “BHC5”  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39,   
page 386  Performance measure: “ Loss of Category A Tree Preservation Order Trees. ” 
Target: “ None Zero” 
Specific Policy to be measured: “ BGI4 BGI2”  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 386  Performance measure: “ Change in Community Infrastructure Floorspace (Schools, Healthcare, 
Other Community Space, Cultural and Leisure Facilities). ” 
Target: “ None Zero” 
Specific Policy to be measured: “BSI1”  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 386  
 Add Performance measure: “ Number of new district heat networks in growth areas ” 
Target: “ No specified target ” 
Specific policy to be monitored: “ BSUI1 ” 
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 386  Add Performance measure: “ Percentage of major developments delivered within Growth Areas 
and Air Quality Focus Areas that are air quality positive ” 
Target: “ 100% ” 
Specific policy to be monitored: “ BSUI2 ” 
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 386  Add Performance measure: “ Percentage of major developments delivered outside of Growth 
Areas and Air Quality Focus Areas that are air quality neutral ” 
Target: “ 100% ” 
Specific policy to be monitored: “ BSUI2 ” Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
7 Delivery and 
Monitoring   Figure 39, 
page 386  Add Performance measure: “ Number of developments permissioned where the Environment 
Agency has outstanding advice that there has been failure to make appropriate provision for 
flood risk mitigation, or which would increase risk or consequence of flooding ” 
Target: “Zero” 
Specific policy to be monitored: “ BSUI3 ” 
MM 
128 Appendix 1  Page 388  Delete Appendix 1 from the Plan  
MM 
129  Appendix 3  Page 392  Amend Appendix 3 and the table to read:  
 
BRENT LOCAL PLAN ANNUAL HOUSING REQUIREMENT  HOUSING DELIVERY TRAJECTORY  
  
Consistent with Policy BH1 ‘Increasing Housing Supply in Brent’ this trajectory is the delivery 
target against which the National Planning Policy Framework’s Housing Delivery Test and 5 year 
Supply of Deliverable Housing Sites will be assessed.  
 
Year 19/20
-
23/24  24/25 -
28/29  29/30 -
33/34  34/35 -
40/41  Total 
Dwelling
s 15,08
0  12,402  11,514  6,560  45,554  
Average 
Per Year 
Over 
Period  3,016  2,480  2,302  937  2,070  
Year  19/20 -
28/29   29/30 -
40/41   
Dwelling
s  27,482   18,074  45,554  
Average 
Per Year 
Over 
Period   2,748   1,807  4,555  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Period  Housing Delivery Target 
Per Annum  
First 5 years (2019/20 - 
2023/24)  2,325  
6-10 years (2024/25 - 
2028/29)  2,325  
Total First 10 years – 
consistent with London Plan 
2021 23,250  
11-15 years (2029/30 - 
2033/34)  1,897  
16-22 years (2034/35 - 
2040/41)  1,897  
Total for the next 12 years  22,768  
Whole plan period  46,018  
 
 
MM 
130  Appendix 6  Strategic 
Policies in 
the new 
Brent Local 
Plan for the 
purposes of 
Neighbourh
ood Amend table in Appendix 6 to read:  
Table 1: Strategic Policies in the new Brent Local Plan for the purposes of 
Neighbourhood Planning  
 
8.6.1 The NPPF requires Plans to make it explicit which are strategic policies.  
 
Strategic Policies  
DMP1, BP1, BCGA1, BP2, BEGA1, BEGA2, BP3, BNGA1, BP4, BN WGA1, BP5, BSGA1, BP6, 
BSEGA1, BP7, BSWGA1, BD1, BD2, BH1, BH2, BH3, BH4, BH5, BH6, BH7, BH8, BH9, BH10, 
Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Planning, 
page 396  
 BH11, BH12, BH13, BSI1, BE1, BE2, BE3, BE4, BE5, BE6, BE7, BE8, BE9, BHC1, BHC2, BHC3, 
BHC4, BHC5, BGI1, BGI2, BSUI1, BSUI2, BSUI3, BT1, BT2, BT3, BT4  
 
STRATEGIC POLICIES:  
All Place Policies:  BP1, BP2, BP3, BP4, BP5, BP6, BP7  
All Growth Area Policies:  BCGA1, BEGA1A, BEGA2A, BEGA1, BEGA2, BNGA1, BNWGA2A, 
BNWGA1, BSGA1, BSEGA1, BSWGA1  
All Site Allocation Policies:  BCSA1 -BCSA20, BESA1 -BESA3 , BNSA1 -BNSA8, B NWSA1, BSSA1 -
BSSA19, BSESA1 -BSESA35, BSWSA1 -BSWSA17  
Other policies:  BD1 Leading the Way in Good Urban Design  
BD2 Tall Buildings in Brent  
BH1 Increasing Housing Supply in Brent  
BH2 Priority Areas for Additional Housing Provision within Brent  
BH3 Build to Rent 
BH4 Small Sites and Small Housing Developments in Brent  
BH5 Affordable Housing  
BH6 Housing Size Mix  
BH7 Accommodation with Shared Facilities or Additional Support  
BH8 Specialist Older Persons Housing  
BH9 Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation  
BH10 Resisting Housing Loss  
BH11 Conversion of Family Sized Dwellings  
BSI1 Social Infrastructure and Community Facilities  
BE1 Economic Growth and Employment Opportunities for all  
BE2 Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL) and Locally Significant Industrial Sites (LSIS)  
BE3 Local Employment Sites and Work -Live  
BE4 Supporting Strong Centres  
BE9 Visitor Accommodation and Attractions  
BHC1 Brent’s Heritage Assets  
BHC2 National Stadium Wembley  
BHC3 Supporting Brent’s Culture and Creative Industries  
BHC4 Brent’s Nigh t Time Economy  
BHC5 Public Houses  
BGI1 Green and Blue Infrastructure in Brent  
BGI2 Trees and Woodlands  
BSUI1 Creating a Resilient and Efficient Brent  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
BSUI2 Air Quality  
BSUI3 Managing Flood Risk  
BSUI4 On -site Water Management and Surface Water Attenuation  
BT1 Sustainable Travel Choice  
BT2 Parking and Car Free Development  
BT3 Freight and Servicing, Provision and Protection of Freight Facilities  
 
Non-Strategic Policies  
BCSA1, BCSA2, BCSA3, BCSA4, BCSA5, BCSA6, BCSA7, BCSA8, BCSA9, BCSA10, BCSA11, 
BCSA12, BCSA13, BCSA14, BCSA15, BCSA16, BCSA17, BESA1, BESA2, BESA3, BNSA1, BNSA2, 
BNSA3, BNSA4, BNSA5, BNSA6, BNSA7, BNWSA1, BSSA1, BSSA1, BSSA2, BSSA3 BSSA4, 
BSSA5, BSSA6, BSSA7, BSSA8, BSSA9, BSSA10, BSSA11, BSSA12, BSSA13, BSSA14, BSSA15, 
BSSA16, BSSA17, BSSA1 8, BSSA19, BSESA1, BSESA2, BSESA3, BSESA4, BSESA5, BSESA6, 
BSESA7, BSESA8, BSESA9, BSESA10, BSESA11, BSESA12, BSESA13, BSESA14, BSESA15, 
BSESA16, BSESA17, BSESA18, BSESA19, BSESA20, BSESA21, BSESA22, BSESA23, BSESA24, 
BSESA25, BSESA26, BSESA27, BSESA28, BS ESA29, BSESA30, BSESA31, BSESA32, BSESA33, 
BSESA34, BSWSA1, BSWSA1, BSWSA2, BSWSA3, BSWSA4, BSWSA5, BSWSA6, BSWSA7, 
BSWSA8, BSWSA9, BSWSA10, BSWSA11, BSWSA12, BSWSA13, BSWSA14, BSWSA15 and 
BSWSA16  
 
 
Non-Strategic Policies:  
DMP1 Development Management Gener al Policy  
BD3 Basement development  
BH12 Residential Outbuildings  
BH13 Residential Amenity Space  
BE5 Protecting Retail in Town Centres, Betting Shops, Adult Gaming Centres and Pawnbrokers  
BE6 Neighbourhood Parades and Isolated Shop Units  
BE7 Shop Front Desi gn and Forecourt Trading  
BE8 Markets and Car Boot Sales  
BT4 Forming an Access on to a Road  
 
Table 2: Assessment of the Draft Brent Local Plan policies against the Strategic Policy 
Criteria in the NPPF.*(included in next row for formatting purposes in this  table)  
 Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
NPPF Criteria across the top row 1=  Housing (including affordable housing), employment, retail, 
leisure and other commercial development; 2= Infrastructure for transport, telecommunications, 
security, waste management, water supply, wastewater, fl ood risk and coastal change management, 
and the provision of minerals and energy (including heat); 3 = Community facilities (such as health, 
education and cultural infrastructure); 4 = Conservation and enhancement of the natural, built and 
historic environ ment, including landscapes and green infrastructure, and planning measures to 
address climate change mitigation and adaptation; 5 = Any relevant cross -boundary issues, 6 = 
Planning for and allocating sufficient sites to deliver the strategic priorities of the area.  
 
NPPF CRITERIA  1 2 
 3 
 4 5 6 CONCLUSION  
DEVELOPMENT VISION AND GOOD GROWTH IN BRENT  
DMP1 Development 
Management General Policy        Non-Strategic  
ALL PLACE POLICIES  
BP1,BP2,BP3,BP4,BP5,BP6,BP7            Strategic  
ALL GROWTH AREA POLICIES  
BCGA1, BEGA1, BEGA2, 
BNGA1, BNWGA1, BNWSA1, 
BSGA1, BSEGA1, BSWGA1             Strategic  
ALL SITE ALLOCATION POLICIES  
Central Place: BCSA1 -BCSA20  
East Place: BESA1 -BESA3  
North Place: BNSA1 -BNSA8  
North West Place: BNWSA1  
South Place: BSSA1 -BSSA19  
South East Place: BSESA1 -
BSESA35  
South West Place: BSWSA1 -
BSWSA17              Strategic  
DESIGN  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
BD1 Leading the Way in Good 
Urban Design         Strategic  
BD2 Tall Buildings in Brent         Strategic  
BD3 Basement development        Non-Strategic  
HOUSING  
Policy BH1 Increasing Housing 
Supply in Brent         Strategic  
Policy BH2 Priority Areas for 
Additional Housing Provision 
within Brent         Strategic  
Policy BH3 Build to Rent         Strategic  
Policy BH4 Small Sites and 
Small Housing Developments 
in Brent         Strategic  
Policy BH5 Affordable Housing         Strategic  
Policy BH6 Housing Size Mix         Strategic  
Policy BH7 Accommodation 
with Shared Facilities or 
Additional Support         Strategic  
Policy BH8 Specialist Older 
Persons Housing         Strategic  
Policy BH9 Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation         Strategic  
Policy BH10 Resisting Housing 
Loss        Strategic  
Policy BH11 Conversion of 
Family Sized Dwellings         Strategic  
Policy BH12 Residential 
Outbuildings        Non-Strategic  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Policy BH13 Residential 
Amenity Space        Non-Strategic  
SOCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE  
BSI1 Social Infrastructure and 
Community Facilities         Strategic  
ECONOMY AND TOWN CENTRES  
Policy BE1 Economic Growth 
and Employment 
Opportunities for all         Strategic  
Policy BE2  Strategic Industrial 
Locations (SIL) and Locally 
Significant Industrial Sites 
(LSIS)           Strategic  
Policy BE3 Local Employment 
Sites and Work -Live         Strategic  
Policy BE4 Supporting Strong 
Centres          Strategic  
Policy BE5 Protecting Retail in 
Town Centres, Betting Shops, 
Adult Gaming Centres and 
Pawnbrokers        Non-strategic  
Policy BE6 Neighbourhood 
Parades and Isolated Shop 
Units        Non-strategic  
Policy BE7 Shop Front Design 
and Forecourt Trading        Non-strategic  
Policy BE8 Markets  and Car 
Boot Sales        Non-strategic  
Policy BE9 Visitor 
Accommodation and 
Attractions         Strategic  
HERITAGE AND CULTURE  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Policy BHC1 Brent’s Heritage 
Assets         Strategic  
Policy BHC2 National Stadium 
Wembley           Strategic  
Policy BHC3 Supporting 
Brent’s Culture and Creative 
Industries          Strategic  
Policy BHC4 Brent’s Night Time 
Economy          Strategic  
Policy BHC5 Public Houses          Strategic  
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE  
Policy BGI1 Green and Blue 
Infrastructure in Brent            Strategic  
Policy BGI2 Trees and 
Woodlands         Strategic  
SUSTAINABLE INFRASTRUCTURE  
Policy BSUI1 Creating a 
Resilient and Efficient Brent           Strategic  
Policy BSUI2 Air Quality          Strategic  
Policy BSUI3 Managing Flood 
Risk           Strategic  
Policy BSUI4 On-site Water 
Management and Surface 
Water Attenuation           Strategic  
 
 
TRANSPORT  
Policy BT1 Sustainable Travel 
Choice         Strategic  
Policy BT2 Parking and Car 
Free Development           Strategic  Ref  Chapter / 
Policy Number  Paragraph 
Number or 
Section  Modification Proposed  
Policy BT3 Freight and 
Servicing, Provision and 
Protection of Freight Facilities         Strategic  
Policy BT4 Forming an Access 
on to a Road        Non-Strategic  
 
 
  
MM 
131 Glossary  Page 397 -
99 
 "Intensification Corridor: Principal movement corridors such as main roads, with good access to 
public transport where it is considered that higher density development/ buildings around 5 
storeys are likely to be appropriate."  
MM 
132 Glossary  Page 398, 
Locally 
Significant 
Industrial 
Sites (LSIS)  “Employment  Industrial  sites identified in the Core Strateg y Local Plan  as being of significance 
to Brent’s economy.”  
 
MM 
133 
 Glossary  Page 398  Makerspace: Studio or light industrial workspace for creative industries. These businesses 
create social and economic value through events and places of interest, attracting visitors, 
enriching lives and highlighting diverse perspectives through the arts.  
 