www.lbhf.gov.ukL Ham 
O mersm 
C ith & 
A Fulh 
L  am 
PL
Febr AN
uary 2018 h&fV 
hammersmith & fulham 
MAKING H&F THE BEST PLACE TO LIVE AND WORK IN EUROPE 1
www.lbhf.gov.ukCONTENTS 
 Foreword  2 
1 Introduction  3 
2 Hammersmith & Fulham 7 
3  Spatial vision and strategic objectives  25 
4 Delivery and implementation  33 
5 Regeneration area strategies  39 
– White City Regeneration Area 42 
– Hammersmith Regeneration Area 59 
– Fulham Regeneration Area 70 
– South Fulham Regeneration Area 79 
6  Meeting housing needs and aspirations  89 
7 Local economy and employment  113 
8 Town and local centres  121 
9  Community facilities, leisure and recreation  139 
10 Green and public open space  149 
11 River Thames  161 
12 Design and conservation  169 
13 Environmental sustainability 191 
14 Transport and accessibility  215 
15  Planning contributions and infrastructure  227 
16 Glossary  237 
17 Appendices  255 
Appendix 1 – Summary of the Local Plan Sustainability Appraisal  256 
Appendix 2 – Town and Local Centre Hierarchy  258 
Appendix 3 – Open Space Hierarchy  260
 Appendix 4 – Nature Conservation Areas and Green Corridors  263 
Appendix 5 – Archaeological Priority Areas  265 
Appendix 6 – Local Plan Monitoring Indicators  266 
Appendix 7 – Car Parking Standards  272 
Appendix 8 – Cycle Parking Standards  275 
Appendix 9 – Viability Protocol  277 
Appendix 10 – Strategic policy list  2792
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018
LEADER’S VIEW 
We’re passionate and ambitious for Hammersmith & Fulham. 
We’re aiming high and want to become the best place to live and work in Europe. Our borough is on the up with exciting and bold opportunities ahead and our vision is to grasp these and make sure this prosperity is shared – and no-one is left behind. 
We’re thrilled to have launched a ground-breaking enterprise partnership, 
wit
h the new Imperial College campus at White City at its heart. Our 
expanding biotech and digital hub is at the heart of our growing prosperity. 
We believe the wealth and opportunity being generated by development 
acr
oss the borough should be shared by the residents of Hammersmith  
& Fulham, particularly our young people. 
That means training the next generation to take advantage of the high-skills, high-reward job market. And it means the companies who are building and developing our borough must do their bit to fund the genuinely affordable homes that local people need so they can afford to live here. 
People love living in Hammersmith & Fulham and it is vital to bring people and businesses together to act as partners in regenerating, improving and protecting our local areas. 
New opportunities for revitalising our borough must not only protect our rich heritage but provide 
the be
st in public open space and quality architecture. Building on our thriving arts and culture 
scene, creating more vibrant and buzzing public spaces and facilities that are accessible to all local residents and not a privileged few. 
We are determined to make Hammersmith & Fulham the greenest and most environmentally 
posi
tive borough in the UK. Our residents deserve a safe, clean and green borough and have set our 
direction of travel with the highest numbers of electric cars and ground-breaking action plans for improving air quality and biodiversity. 
We are a compassionate council and it is a priority for us that we will continue to protect our valuable 
hos
pitals and community facilities which often the most vulnerable in our society rely on the most. 
This Local Plan is a clear statement of our commitment to continue to deliver on our pledges to our r
esidents. It provides an important tool so we can be pioneering in our approach to promoting 
regeneration and managing change so that everyone benefits and we can take even greater pride in our wonderful borough. 
Cllr Stephen Cowan 
Leader, London Borough of Hammersmith & FulhamFOREWORD 
r SECTION 1 
INTRODUCTION4
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION
Purpose of this document 
1.1 This document is Hammersmith & Fulham’s 
Local Pl
an. It has been prepared in 
accordance with Regulation 19 of the  Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012. The Local Plan has been subject to consultation and Examination in Public by the Secretary of State and has been found ‘sound’  
.
1.2 The document has benefited from the res
ults of pre-Regulation 18 engagement 
with stakeholders on Issues and Options for review undertaken from July to September 2013, Regulation 18 consultation undertaken in January 2015, Regulation 19 consultation in September 2016 and Examination in Public in July 2017. 
What is a Local Plan? 
1.3 The Local Plan is a Development Plan doc
ument and is part of the Government’s 
planning policy system introduced by  the Planning and Compulsory Purchase  Act 2004. 
1.4 The Local Plan will be used in conjunction 
with
 the London Plan (2016) , and any 
(ad
opted) neighbourhood plans, to help 
shape the future of the borough and to determine individual planning applications and deliver development. It will be supplemented by supplementary planning documents (SPDs) which will need to be in conformity with the Local Plan. The Local Plan will replace the existing Core Strategy and Development Management Local Plan. 11.5 The Local Plan will set out the council’s visi
on for the borough until 2035, including 
placing more people in decent, affordable homes in a stronger local economy that provides training and job opportunities  for local residents. It will highlight the strategic objectives for the borough, focusing on the key planning issues to be addressed, and include a delivery strategy for achieving these objectives. It will identify the major regeneration areas, including additional regeneration that would be secured in the South Fulham Riverside area with a Crossrail 2 station at Imperial Wharf. It will allocate strategic sites for development which are considered crucial to the achievement of the Local Plan, including site policies for the Hammersmith Flyunder and the Imperial Gasworks National Grid site. 
1.6 The document will set out as far as 
pra
cticable when, where and by whom 
actions will be taken, identifying the council and its partners where relevant. 
1.7 All the planning documents that the 
Council
 is producing, and their production 
timeframe, are set out in the borough’s Local Development Scheme (LDS). The LDS and all the borough’s planning documents may be viewed on the link to the Council’s website below.
2 
1 Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016 
2 www.lbhf.gov.uk/localplan 5
The Local Plan’s relationship with 
other policies and strategies 
1.8The Local Plan, replaces the existing 
Core S
trategy (2011) and Development 
Management Local Plan (2013). The Local Plan has built upon the existing Core Strategy and Development Management Local Plan policies. Although a number of existing policies have been amended, or replaced by those in the Local Plan, some policies in the Core Strategy and Development Management Local Plan are still relevant, so these have been replicated in the Local Plan. However, a major change is the deletion of policies that are applicable to the area of the borough now included within the boundary of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation. Since April 2015, the OPDC took full planning control for the Old Oak Regeneration Area. As the Local Planning Authority for the area, OPDC is responsible for development plan making and the determination of planning applications for the area of Hammersmith and Fulham within the boundary of OPDC. 
1.9 With the exception of the area covered by 
the OPDC, t
he Local Plan will provide a clear 
way forward for the regeneration of the borough. It will closely relate to the council’s housing and regeneration strategies and its Corporate Plan. The policies will also reflect effective co-operation that has taken place with strategic partners, such as the GLA, neighbouring boroughs and Hammersmith and Fulham Clinical Commissioning Group on cross-boundary issues. 
www.lbhf.gov.ukINTRODUCTION
Neighbourhood Planning 
1.10 Neighbourhood Planning was introduced as par
t of the Localism Act 2011. 
Neighbourhood plans are development and land use documents led by members of the community. Neighbourhood plans must be developed in general conformity with the strategic policies in the relevant local, regional and national planning policy documents and guidance. 
1.11 The Neighbourhood Planning Regulations sets ou
t the procedure and key milestones 
in developing a neighbourhood plan. In order for a neighbourhood plan to be adopted and form part of the Development Plan Framework, they must be voted on and agreed by a majority vote, in a local Referendum. 
National Policy and the London Plan 
1.12 The Local Plan must be consistent wit
h national policy, produced by the 
Department for Communities and Local Government in the form of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)
3, 
supporting Guidance Notes and Circulars. The Local Plan also needs to be in general conformity with regional guidance and policies produced by the Mayor of London and set out in the London Plan. 
1.13 National and London policy is continually being p
roduced and updated. As new 
policies emerge, the Local Plan will need to take account of them.  
 
3 Communities and Local Government, National Planning Policy Framework, March 2012 6
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018INTRODUCTION
Sustainability Appraisal 
1.14 Development Plan Documents must 
be sub
ject to a Sustainability Appraisal 
(SA) which is an integral part of the plan preparation process. An SA involves identifying and evaluating a plan’s impacts having regard to social, environmental and economic impacts  and helps to ensure that the plan accords with sustainable development principles. An SA incorporates the requirements of the European Directive 2001/42/EC on  the ‘assessment of effects of certain plans and programmes on the environment’ (SEA Directive). 
1.15 Appendix 1 of this proposed submission 
Local Pl
an provides a summary of  
the findings of the SA. The full SA is published separately as a supporting background document. 
Key stages in the production of Development Plan Documents 
Evidence 
gathering Preparation 
of DPD + 
consultation Publication 
of DPD + 
consultation Conformity 
with  
London Plan Submit DPD  
to Secretary  
of State 
Final 
Sustainability 
report Sustainability  
appraisal 
Council  
adopts DPD Monitoring 
report Inspector’s 
report Examination  
in public ➔ ➔ ➔ ➔ ➔ 
I I l 
+- +-SECTION 2 
HAMMERSMITH 
& FULHAM8
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
HAMMERSMITH  
& FULHAM
2.1 It is important that the strategy for the 
futu
re development of Hammersmith and 
Fulham is based on an understanding of the area as it is now, the challenges that need to be addressed and the opportunities that exist. The summary below outlines the key features of the borough and the challenges that the Local Plan seeks to address. Please note that some of the statistics in this section are from the census and other data sources which cover the whole borough, including the part of the borough now within the OPDC’s planning remit. 
The Area 
2.2 Hammersmith and Fulham is an inner Londo
n borough in a strategic location 
on the transport routes between the City and Heathrow. The borough is oriented north-south with most major transport links, both road and rail carrying through traffic east-west across the borough. Some of the busiest road junctions in London are located in the borough at Hammersmith Broadway, Shepherds Bush and at Savoy Circus and the borough suffers disproportionately from the effects of through-traffic. However north-south transport links are limited. The borough benefits from a long frontage along the River Thames (7km/4½ miles) and from a section of the Grand Union Canal in the north of the borough which lies within the boundary of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation. These waterways enhance the environment and character of the borough and provide the potential for further benefit to the borough. 2.3 It is an area of contrasts, of wealth and 
dep
rivation, and of attractive environments, 
many of which are protected by conservation designations and other areas that are less attractive and that need improvement. It has at least four distinct areas each with their own character – Fulham, Hammersmith, Shepherds Bush and the area to the north of Wormwood Scrubs. There are four designated regeneration areas which overlap with these areas and which will transform much of the borough in the years ahead as new housing, employment and supporting infrastructure is built. 
2.4 The four regeneration areas in the boro
ugh, namely White City, Hammersmith 
Town Centre, Earls Court and West Kensington and South Fulham Riverside, offer tremendous opportunities for growth, in terms of new mixed tenure private and social housing and jobs, as well as provision of supporting infrastructure. The areas are at different stages of development and will require careful management over the next 20 years or more. Plans for Earls Court and West Kensington as well as White City Regeneration Area are well advanced. In all cases it will be important for new development to meet local needs and to integrate seamlessly with the rest of the borough and west London. A fifth area is that covered by Old Oak Common, Hythe Road and Wormwood Scrubs. Until the establishment of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation in April 2015, this area fell within the local planning authority functions of Hammersmith and Fulham Council. The area is characterised 9
Hammersmith riverside 
by large areas of railway infrastructure, 
including Cross Rail safeguarding strategic work sites and the Car Giant dealership. Wormwood Scrubs comprises a large area of metropolitan open land. 
Population 
2.5 The population of Hammersmith and Ful
ham has risen by over 10% from 165,242 
in 2001 to 182,500 in 2011. The GLA’s 2015 projections estimates the population to be 186,800. The population of the borough is relatively young and ethnically diverse. It is also a highly mobile population with about half of all households having moved in the previous five years. Nearly half of the population (45%) is between the ages of 20 and 40 years old which is significantly higher than in London (32%) and the rest of the country (27%). The borough has a high proportion of single people, the fourth highest proportion (55.9%) in London. Three in ten (29%) of all households consist of one person (Source: 2011 Census). 
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.6 According to the 2015 GLA Population pro
jections (SHLAA)4, the borough’s 
population is expected to increase by 11,895 people (6.7%) between 2011 and 2021; this compares to a 9.1% increase in London as a whole. The further projected increase in population between 2021 and 2031 is 8.2%; a similar level as the London average (8.3%). While there will be growth in the borough’s population in all age groups, the main growth will occur for people aged 85 and over. The population in that age group is expected to increase by 2,260 by 2031, equivalent to 110%. The population aged 65 to 84 is expected to grow by 61% during the same period, and population aged 50 to 64 to grow by 30%. The main growth in number of households will be in ‘one person’ households (32% up to 2026), while the number of ‘couple’ households will decrease by nearly 8%. 
7km
The length of the borough’s frontage 
along the River Thames 
4 Linked to development trajectories from the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) 10
Deprivation 
2.7 The borough has high levels of deprivation. 
Acco
rding to the 2015 Indices of Deprivation, 
it is ranked 76th most deprived local authority area in the country (31st in 2010 and 38th in 2007) however, there are still significant pockets of deprivation, particularly in the north of the borough. Eight (7%) of the borough’s Lower Super Output Areas (LSOAs are used by the Office of National Statistics (ONS) to identify local neighbourhoods of about 700 households) are within the top 10% most deprived nationally. These areas comprise major public sector housing estates: Clem Attlee, Edward Woods, White City, Wormholt, Charecroft and Ashcroft Square. A further 15% of the borough’s LSOAs are in the 10-20% worst nationally. Most of these areas are in the north of the borough, but also extend into parts of Hammersmith and north Fulham (see Map 1). 
2.8 Hammersmith and Fulham not only has hig
h levels of deprivation, it is polarised 
socially and economically. For example, in the last census 41.6% of household heads classified themselves as “managers or professionals”, while more than a quarter said they were entirely dependent on benefit. Some 23.9%  of households in 
Ham
mersmith and Fulham depend on 
less than £20,000 per annum compared to 27% for London and 34.9% for Great Britain. Just under 40% of borough households have an unequivalised household income between £20k and £50k per year and 21.3% have an income between £50k and £80k per year. There are 16.2% of households which have an income greater than £80k per annum. This is equivalent to nearly 13,000 households. 
Source : ID 2015 , Depa11men1 of 
Communities and Local Government 
e•-•1t1110G.1-lftn\0l•1:,:,oSOt Jll&_l' .. NO-•o! o.,,..,.., s.r,., •~ 00,1 r<tr.•~•1.,., l•~s:inn q oew 
c,o,, ...., «1:,jrq-\ 
~;;•:E_;E~J:i:~: ::-;:mmi LONDON BORO UGH OF 
HAMM ERSMITH 
AND FULHAM 
h&f\-/ 
h•.....-"' '"'th •1~1 ....... 
Index of Multiple Deprivation 2015 
The Top 3 Most 
Deprived 10% 
Nation.al bands 
- O.0'Ki-9 .9't!omostdepriv ed 
11111 10.(1'11, -19.9% 
LJ 20.0'llo-29 .9% 
LJ JO.Ullo-100 .0%1eastdeprivtd 
LJ Ulpop\Aated Areas 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.9 Until the 1970s, social housing and cou
ncil estates tended to be occupied 
by households with a greater mix of incomes than is now the case. The mix of social housing tenants has come to include proportionally more people on lower incomes, some experiencing multiple deprivation. Approximately 53% of households living in social housing in Hammersmith and Fulham are currently workless and dependent on benefits and they make up the largest single group within the estimated 13,150 workless households in the borough (2011 Census). Nearly 2,000 lone parents are dependent on out-of-work benefits and a further 2,800 are claiming Working Tax Credit  and/or Child Tax Credit benefits.
5Map 1  Index of Multiple Deprivation 
5 CACI 201511
2.10 Deprivation and low household incomes 
als
o impact on health inequalities and 
result in high levels of child poverty. About 20% of children live in poverty in Hammersmith and Fulham compared nationally to 30% of children living in poverty.  There is a noticeable 
con
centration of childhood poverty 
in the north of the borough, with the greatest density (35-53%) in the two northernmost wards (among the 20% wards in London with the highest density), College Park and Old Oak, Wormholt and White City. The only ward that features among the 20% wards in London with the lowest density of child poverty (0-14%) is the southernmost ward, Palace Riverside. Similarly the wards with the second lowest density of child poverty (14-22%) are both in the south of the borough. In 2012, over 7,490 children under the age of 16 were living in families receiving means-tested benefits. In 2013 over 30% of primary school children and 23.8% of secondary school children were entitled to free school meals in the borough compared to national figures of 15% and 12% respectively. Further details of the health, wellbeing and social care needs of the borough can be found in the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment 2013/14  carried out by the council and 
NHS H
ammersmith and Fulham (now 
NHS Hammersmith and Fulham Clinical Commissioning Group).
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
Health 
2.11 Among the key health issues in relation to th
e council’s spatial strategy is the 
health and well-being of residents as well as ensuring that health care is provided to meet the needs of local residents. Life expectancy for men in Hammersmith and Fulham is 79.7 years and for women it is 84.1 years
8. The difference in life 
expectancy between affluent and deprived areas in the borough is 7.9 years in men and 5.4 in women. In order to improve the health of borough residents it is important that they have good access to the appropriate facilities, including high quality specialist and emergency health care facilities. The borough’s hospitals are a key part of the local community and the recent closure of Hammersmith Hospital A&E and any potential closure of Charing Cross Hospital A&E, together with the loss of 336 acute in-patient beds would be of great concern. The council is concerned that the health needs of the increasing local population has not been adequately assessed. Also that the proposed improvements in primary and community care and the Out of Hospital Strategy
9 have not yet reduced demand 
for in-patient beds. Until there is evidence of a reduced need for hospital beds to serve the local community, Charing Cross Hospital should not be closed.6
7
6 Child Poverty JSNA Report 2014 
7 Joint Strategic Needs Assessment 2013/14 
8 Public Health England – Health profiles 2012-2014 
9 Hammersmith and Fulham CCG’s out of hospital strategy: 2014/15 progress and plans for 2015/1612
2.12 As part of a strategy to improve the 
hea
lth of the local community, it is 
important that residents and workers are able to live and to participate in healthier lifestyles. Tackling overcrowding and poor housing, improving air quality, reducing the impact of climate change, improving access to parks and open spaces, controls on hot food takeaways and opportunities to walk and cycle can all help to reduce health inequalities in the borough.
Local Economy and Employment 
2.13 Hammersmith and Fulham has a very suc
cessful and diverse economy and it 
makes a significant contribution to the economies of London and the UK, with its concentration of businesses, retail and tourism uses. 
2.14 The borough occupies a favourable loc
ation in west London and is attractive 
to a variety of businesses including foreign owned businesses. It has enjoyed significant growth in employment and economic activity over the last three decades with the central Hammersmith area becoming an important sub-regional location for offices. The local economy is the 6th most competitive in the country
10, 
with an estimated Gross Value Added of £8.1bn
11. There is also a strong visitor 
economy with 1.25 million visitors each week to our town centres. Westfield London alone attracts approximately 600,000 visitors each week. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.15 The borough has developed as a centre for a range of creative and media industries, due partly to the presence of the BBC in the White City area but also to good transport links. The largest employers in the borough include L’Oreal Ltd, Hammersmith Hospital, Charing Cross Hospital, Metropolitan Police, Mref Tradeco Ltd, Omni Facilities Management and Walt Disney Co Ltd. In recent decades there has been a substantial change in the composition of businesses with a significant decline in traditional manufacturing and increases in retail and leisure activities as well as in emerging markets such as knowledge based industries and life sciences. Over £2billion of public and private sector funding has already been invested over the last five years by developers such as Imperial College who are developing a large life sciences campus in White City. 
2.16 In Hammersmith and Fulham there are 12,
055 registered businesses and over 
5,000 self-employed sole traders and VAT exempt enterprises. In 2014, 155,450
12 
people worked in the borough. Smaller firms have become much more important to the economy of the borough; 13.3% of employees worked in the borough’s ‘micro enterprises’ (less than 10 employees) and these make up 90% of the total enterprises of the borough. At the other extreme, 58.4% of all employees work in large enterprises with more than 250 or more employees, but account for 0.6% of all enterprises
13. In 2014, B use 
class property accounted for 37% of all businesses in the borough and 33.5%  of employment.
10 2013 Huggins Competitiveness Index 
11 TBR LBHF Commissioned Report 
12 LBHF Employment Study 2016 
13 2011 BRES analysis, ONS13
CGI of what White City may look like 
2.17 With the development of the Westfield 
Londo
n shopping centre there has been 
an increase in importance of the retail 
sector to the local economy, with Westfield London providing approximately 8,000 jobs. Planning permission has also been granted for an extension to Westfield which is estimated to deliver approximately 3,000 additional jobs. The wholesale and retail sector is now the largest sector in the borough with almost 22,000 people working in the sector in the borough. This is a 49% increase from the number working in the sector 5 years ago. There  is a footfall of 1.25m per week which equates to a retail spend of more than £1billion across 26 key shopping areas and high streets. Other key sectors include publishing, information services, accommodation and food services, real estate activities, professional scientific  and technical activities, administrative  and support services, property, arts  and c
ulture, entertainment and 
recreational services14 
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.18 The council is sensitive to the needs of businesses in the borough, including small local firms. The challenge is to build upon success in delivering workspace for small and medium enterprises and new start-ups and to continue to ensure that in addition to protecting employment land and premises where justified there is a strong supply of new, relevant space for small businesses. The areas that are most appropriate for growth are those areas with high levels of public transport accessibility. In particular, new flexible business space in the vicinity of transport nodes provide a useful means of stimulating growth within the business community. In regeneration areas it will be important for a balance to be made between employment and housing..
 
 
 
14 IDBR 2012, Location Quotients by number of enterprises 14
Fulham Palace Road 
2.19 The Local Plan needs to provide the 
cond
itions for businesses to thrive to 
ensure that there is a broad range of employment opportunities and for the qualifications and skills of local people to be improved so that the levels of worklessness can be reduced. The Local Plan aims to improve and maintain the supply of employment land, allocate development sites to accommodate forecasted employment growth and to support the borough’s many smaller and younger firms and highly entrepreneurial economy to develop and remain in the borough. The Local Plan policies also need to continue to contribute to London’s world city role.
Housing 
2.20
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
house. This lack of affordable homes to rent or buy for low and middle income households is a key challenge for the Local plan. There are also limited desirable housing options appropriate for older people in the borough. 
The very high cost of private sector housing in the borough means that it is difficult for households on low to middle incomes to access suitable housing that they can afford in Hammersmith and Fulham. Many households cannot get suitable housing in either the private or social housing sectors and have to move out of the borough when they no longer want to share with others or need a larger 2.21 Approximately one third of Hammersmith and F
ulham’s housing stock is social rented 
housing (31%) compared to an average of 24.1% in London. Social rented housing is particularly concentrated in the north of the borough, where over 40% of the housing is in this tenure. Shared Ownership and other Intermediate low cost housing only makes up 1.6% of housing stock in the borough (Census 2011). 
2.22 Another key challenge in relation to ho
using supply is overcrowding. 
According to the 2011 Census 13% of dwellings are overcrowded by at least one bedroom. Private rented and social rented households have proportionally more overcrowding (17% each) than owner occupied households (5%). Of the council owned housing, approximately one third is one bedroom accommodation and about one third is two bedroom. There are over 40 different Private Registered Providers (PRPs) with properties in the  15
2.23 The council’s housing stock is relatively old 
and i
s becoming increasingly expensive 
to maintain to a decent standard. It is important that housing stock is maintained to a decent standard so that it meets residents’ expectations, their changing needs and is resilient to the potential impacts of climate change. All the council owned stock was improved to meet the national decent homes standard but this programme did not address the fundamental issue of an ageing housing stock that is becoming increasingly expensive to repair. 
2.24 The design of the current social housing stoc
k also makes it difficult to increase the 
number of dwellings that are accessible to residents who need to use a wheelchair. Of 508 medium-rise mansion or deck access blocks, only 85 (17%) have lift access. Retrofitting lifts to blocks that were not designed to have such a facility is often difficult, if not impossible, and where it is possible, the cost of installation is prohibitive. Also, access ways into blocks and homes are not wide enough and there are often stairs and raised thresholds which would need to be removed to allow full access. 
2.25 the health and well-being of residents. As a r
esult, there is need for more family 
sized housing in the borough both from new and existing demand; this also applies across low income households who wish to rent or purchase. 
The way that public housing has been funde
d in the past means that new 
housing built over the past 25 years or so has tended to be smaller sized units. This has meant that overcrowding has become an issue as families grow and cannot move on to more suitable accommodation, which can impact on  
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.26 The age of the borough’s housing stock also affects the energy efficiency of the housing stock because most of the older stock is of solid wall construction and only 16% having cavity walls. This impacts on the levels of fuel poverty in the borough with over 8,000, or nearly 11% of all households estimated to be fuel poor. Council owned housing has higher energy and environmental performance than private sector housing. Council housing in the borough has an average Standard Assessment Procedure (SAP) rating of 74 as compared to a SAP rating of 53 for private sector housing in the borough
15 .
2.27 In the private sector, improvements to energy ef
ficiency will be mainly through 
government legislation and initiatives, for example through the building regulations and programmes such as RE:NEW, the Green Deal and through private investment. Planning policies can help to ensure that new housing is built to meet higher standards of energy efficiency and accessibility. The Council’s Home Energy Conservation Act Report provides further details on the council’s strategy to improve energy efficiency in existing social and private housing stock. borough. The majority of PRP properties in t
he borough are owned by Notting 
Hill, Peabody, Guinness, Octavia and Shepherds Bush. 
31%
The approximate amount of social rented 
housing in Hammersmith & Fulham
15 H&F Home Energy Conservation Act Report 2013 16
Ravenscourt Park
 Fulham Broadway 
Town centres and local centres 
2.28 The main challenge in relation to the 
town c
entres – Hammersmith, Shepherds 
Bush and Fulham – is the need for their continued regeneration and better utilisation of sites within the designated town centres. It will be important to ensure the continued provision of a wide range of high quality retailing, services, arts, cultural and other leisure facilities, including those that contribute to a vibrant night time economy to serve local residents, visitors and workers. 
2.29 There have been public realm imp
rovements in all three town centres 
and others are planned, and there is a need for regeneration to respect local context as well as provide for further improvements to increase the vitality and quality of each centre. The economic health varies in different parts of each town centre and specific policies and intervention is needed to improve  these areas. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.30 There is concern that too many ind
ependent and specialist shops and 
services are being displaced by retail chains and that there is little variation between the town centres. Common challenges affecting the town centres and other centres within the shopping hierarchy to a greater or lesser extent include: 
• pressure to change from shopping to other uses; 
• increases in the numbers and clustering of betting shops and payday loan shops; 
• too many vacant shops and premises and poor quality environment in some centres and parades; 
• the loss of local pubs to higher value uses;  
• concern about takeaways in close proximity to schools and the potential impact on children’s health; 
• underutilisation of sites and older premises; and 
• the need to ensure parking policy encourages rather than deters  local shopping.17
Mini tennis at Bishops Park 
2.31 According to GLA projections, by  
203
1 the number of 4-10 year-olds 
(primary sector) is predicted to rise from 13,368 to 16,208. For the age range 11-15 (secondary sector), numbers will rise from 7,337 to 9,875. The projections clearly show that the need for additional secondary places will increase after 2017 at a much faster rate than for primary places. The council uses these projections to help plan future investment in new school places. The council’s investment programme will maintain a surplus of primary school places until 2023, however there will be a deficit in secondary provision by 2019-20 without further investment. 
2.32 Additional primary school places will also be n
eeded to support the projected 
population growth resulting from proposed development, particularly in the Wood Lane and Earls Court areas. The council will respond to this growth by an assessment of the capacity in existing primary schools, as well as the possible provision of new schools. 
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.33 Many of the schools in the borough are built on sites with limited outdoor space and therefore it is important to improve access to and provision of sports facilities in order to improve health and to reduce child obesity levels. 
2.34 There are 114 children’s play spaces in  the bo
rough across 84 sites. Most 
of these are unsupervised equipped playgrounds, located in the boroughs housing estates. There is a general deficiency of playgrounds in the north and south of Hammersmith and Fulham. There is only a small amount of the borough within a catchment of a play space for children over 8 years old, with even fewer facilities that cater specifically for older children and teenagers. Increasing access and provision of play space for children in the borough, is likely to improve their health and reduce childhood obesity levels. Where appropriate, large housing developments will need to provide  new play facilities as part of the open space contribution.Children and Young People 18
Transport 
2.35 The strategic location of the borough 
and
 its position in relation to London’s 
transport network means that it suffers from some of the worst road congestion in London
16. Congestion on north-south 
routes, particularly the Fulham Palace Road – Shepherds Bush – Wood Lane –  Scrubs Lane corridor is a major issue. The only alternative north-south route in Fulham is North End Road and that is also heavily congested. 
2.36 Road traffic is one of the main causes 
of c
arbon dioxide (CO2) emissions, 
poor air quality17 and noise pollution in 
the borough. Nearly one sixth of CO2 
emissions in the borough in 2011 was from road transport
18 and traffic related 
emissions contribute to the exceedence of air quality targets in the borough. In 2000 the whole borough was designated an Air Quality Management Area and an Action Plan adopted with the aim of meeting the government’s national air quality objectives for nitrogen dioxide and particulates. Exposure to high levels of these pollutants has been shown to cause respiratory and cardiovascular diseases. The other main cause of noise pollution and to a lesser extent air pollution is air traffic, the flightpaths into Heathrow and its associated road traffic. Any further expansion of capacity at Heathrow could adversely impact on borough residents through increased surface transport congestion, as well as increased noise and air pollution. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.37 Most of the borough has good public transport apart from pockets in the south and particularly the north of the borough, where some borough residents have relatively poor levels of personal accessibility. There is also overcrowding of passenger rail services, particularly at peak times, but increasingly at other times as well. The future growth in the demand for travel will impact on the environment of the borough, including on air quality. The proposed HS2/Crossrail/Great Western Main Line interchange at Old Oak Common will significantly increase public transport capacity and provide a catalyst for sustainable development in this area. 
2.38 There is also an issue with the lack of acc
ess to London Underground services 
for disabled and other less mobile people. Only 5 of the 14 stations are accessible from the street and one is accessible travelling in one direction only. The provision of a lift at Shepherds Bush Central Line Station is particularly important in this respect, serving the major transport interchange and Westfield shopping centre; however the council recognises that due to financial constraints this will not be installed in the near future, but remains as a longer term aspiration. 
2.39 A specific challenge will involve ensuring that prop
osed growth in the borough, 
especially in the regeneration areas, is adequately provided with new transport infrastructure that adds to (and complements) existing transportation provision and accessibility, combined with Travel Demand Management to minimise the amount of motorised traffic generated by new development.
16 TfL RNPR Tech Note 3 April 2006 
17 Air quality progress report and action plan review: LBHF 
18 Local and Regional CO2 Emissions Estimates for 2005-2006: DEFRA 19
Although the borough has one of the 
highest rates of cycling in London,  
there are barriers to cycling and walking at particular locations, notably the Hammersmith gyratory. The council will seek to increase opportunities for walking and cycling in the borough.
Environmental Sustainability 
2.41 Environmental sustainability is a major lon
g term challenge that needs to be 
addressed in this Local Plan and in future development in Hammersmith and Fulham. Carbon dioxide (CO
2) 
emissions need to be reduced through a range of measures that reduce energy consumption, decarbonise the energy supply and help move towards the use of transport that has low/zero carbon emissions, such as the modal shift to water transport and rail transport. 
2.42 Climate change is expected to lead to more
 frequent extreme weather events, 
so as well as reducing CO2 emissions, 
developments need to be designed to cope with warmer, wetter winters and hotter, drier summers. They also have to withstand potential impacts such as heatwaves, droughts and flooding. The latter is of particular importance in Hammersmith and Fulham, as much of the borough is subject to some risk of flooding, including from surface water run-off and sewer discharge during intense storms.  
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.43 Flood risk is a challenge that needs to be add
ressed in this Local Plan. Flood risk 
is a combination of the probability and the potential consequences of flooding from all sources – including from rivers and the sea, directly from rainfall on the ground surface and rising groundwater, overwhelmed sewers and drainage systems, and from reservoirs, canals and lakes and other artificial sources. Much of Hammersmith and Fulham is affected by one or more of these potential sources of flooding. The council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) (2015) and Surface Water Management Plan (SWMP) (2015) identify these risks and where tidal, surface water, sewer and groundwater flooding could occur. The extent of flood risk varies across the borough, with large parts being classified as high to medium risk to flooding from the Thames, and at risk of elevated groundwater with over 250 surface water flooding hotspots and over 2,000 sewer flooding incidents recorded by Thames Water in the borough. As such, these risks need to be taken into account when planning for development. Mitigation measures may need to be integrated to ensure new development is protected against flood risk and to prevent any further increase of flood risks in the borough. 
2.44 A further serious challenge is that of air q
uality. The whole of the borough 
is an Air Quality Management Area for Nitrogen Dioxide (NO
2) and particulate 
matter (PM10).2.40 20
Green and Open Space 
2.45 The quality of the local environment is 
a key i
ssue for many local people and 
businesses and is influenced by many factors. The borough’s open spaces and waterways give Hammersmith and Fulham its character and sense of place. 
2.46 Hammersmith and Fulham has relatively lit
tle open space per person, just 231ha 
of public open space, or 1.3ha of open space per 1,000 residents
19. It has some 
fine parks which have been awarded green flag status and is fortunate to have a section of the Thames which is a major linear open space. However, in some parts of the borough, particularly to the east, many residents do not have convenient access to local parks. Additional development in the borough will put further pressure on the open space that is available to local residents and visitors, unless additional open space can be created as part of new developments, such as the new park at Imperial Wharf and within the regeneration areas in general. 
2.47 The value of open space is immense and parks a
nd open spaces fulfil a number 
of different and sometimes potentially conflicting roles – including providing opportunities for walking and sitting, active play and quiet recreation, allowing for social interaction and decreasing the sense of loneliness, benefiting mental health and mitigating the impact of pollution and heat island effects. Many borough parks and open spaces are subject to nature conservation area designations. Two parks are designated as historic parks and gardens. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.48 Of the open space in the borough, just 58.6 ha (a quarter of the public open spaces), is available as outdoor playing space. This equates to 0.34 ha of space per 1,000 residents, which is only 14% of the national standard recommended by the National Playing Fields Association. The difficulty of providing additional open space means that all opportunities to increase the provision or improve access to and the quality of outdoor playing space or other forms of sports provision need to be taken
20. This means that where 
appropriate, new developments will be required to provide appropriate amenity space for recreation. 
River Thames and Canal 
2.49 The River Thames was the major influence on early set
tlement patterns in the 
borough and it remains a major asset in the environmental quality and historic character of Hammersmith and Fulham. There are vacant and underused sites and premises along the Thames which have significant potential for more intensive development. However, any development of riverside sites will need to respect the unique character of the river and will need to enhance the vitality of the riverfront whilst improving public access to the Thames for recreation and sporting activities. The Thames Strategy Kew to Chelsea
21 document provides detail of the 
qualities and character of the river and riverside environment, and the Riverside Walk Enhancement Report
22 outlines 
opportunities for improvement along  the river.
19 Open Spaces and Outdoor Recreation Facilities in H&F 2006 
20 Sport and physical activity strategy 2006 to 2012: LBHF 
21 Thames Strategy – Kew to Chelsea 2002 
22 Council’s Riverside Walk Enhancement Report 201021
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
1,---Map 2  Open Space 
© Crown copyright and database rights. 
2017 Licence No. LA100019223 
Metropolitan Open Land 
OPDC Area 
Open space of borough importance 
Open space deficiency & -
BARNE, ~~------,:-;--I 
~ 
. ~~ / • 22
2.50 The Thames performs many functions, 
ran
ging from being a transport resource 
to a refuge for plants and wildlife. Hammersmith and Fulham has three safeguarded wharves in the south of the borough identified in the London Plan (2016)
23. Only one of these wharves still 
uses the river for freight movements and one wharf, Hurlingham, has been vacant since 1997 and is now safeguarded for Thames Tideway Tunnel construction works. The London Plan (2016) seeks to protect these wharves for cargo-handling uses and all three wharves are designated as safeguarded wharves on the Policies Map. However, it is the council’s view that vacant and under-used wharves should continue to be comprehensively assessed approximately every 5 years to determine their longer term use by the Mayor of London. In addition, the review should look at opportunities to consolidate wharves. A long stretch of the Thames is in the South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area. 
2.51 The Grand Union Canal has many of the cha
racteristics and environmental features 
of the River Thames. The stretch within the borough lies within the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation area which will be subject to considerable change to accommodate and take advantage of HS2 and Crossrail.
500
The approximate number of statutory 
Listed Buildings within the borough 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
Historic Environment 
2.52 The borough’s rich and varied townscape 
whic
h is evident today is largely a result 
of its historical development. Most of the borough’s built fabric dates from the extensive building programmes in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries and it has maintained a much-valued built heritage, much of which falls within the borough’s 45 designated conservation areas (Map 3). In many of these areas, the street provides a sense of scale and the setting for the consistent terraces of uniform architectural design
24 .
2.53 Within the borough, there are app
roximately 500 statutory Listed 
Buildings and approximately 2,150 locally designated Buildings of Merit, as well as a number of archaeological priority areas and the ancient monument of the Fulham Palace moated site, which is a registered historic park and garden and scheduled monument. The heritage assets make an important contribution to the townscape character of the borough. 
2.54 The town centres at Hammersmith, Fulham and S
hepherds Bush have developed from 
the earliest patterns of settlement, and now have their own character and sense of place. Their architectural and historic quality is reflected in their Conservation Area designations. Historically they developed at accessible locations, an advantage that remains today. The areas around these centres, at Fulham in the southern part of the borough, Hammersmith in the central part, and Shepherds Bush in the northern part of the borough, have their own character which reflects their development over time. 
23 Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016 
24 Background Paper: Townscape Character of Hammersmith and Fulham - March 201123
Map 3  Conservation Areas 
Conservation Areas 
OPDC Area © Crown copyright and database rights. 
2017 Licence No. LA100019223 
1 - - ~ ------,,-------1 
www.lbhf.gov.ukHAMMERSMITH & FULHAM24
Each of the areas have strong, identifiable 
townscape characters defined by their 
form, grain, building typology and architectural design. It will be important that the rich and varied character of the borough is preserved. Any design for proposals in these areas will therefore need to be informed and inspired by careful analysis of the character and form of the specific area in order that it enhances the locality and respects its history. 
2.55 Although some parts of the borough 
are v
ery attractive, other areas are of 
poor quality. The areas of poor quality often exist within the designated regeneration areas. There is the challenge of encouraging redevelopment and regeneration in the borough whilst preserving and enhancing valued local character especially in the areas that are protected by the borough’s conservation areas. The provision of green infrastructure in regeneration schemes can help to improve the quality of the local environment.
Community and leisure facilities 
2.56 Hammersmith and Fulham has a wide ran
ge of community uses, provided by 
the public, private and voluntary sectors. These are located across the borough in numerous buildings and spaces of varying quality. Although these uses are a valuable resource they often do not work in a joined up and focused way to meet the needs of vulnerable households. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM
2.57 Therefore as part of the development of a
rea based social regeneration 
initiatives, the council is assessing whether there is the opportunity to improve the quality and access to community uses by the co-location of services. Accessible recreation facilities are very important to local residents and workers, not only for enjoyment but because of their contribution to improving health, particularly children’s health. In addition, recreation facilities can provide diversionary activities and help reduce anti-social behaviour and crime. 
2.58 Hammersmith and Fulham also has a wide ran
ge of arts, cultural and entertainment 
facilities which are important to both local residents and in some cases to residents of a much wider area. These facilities enrich, educate and improve lives and add greatly to making the borough a place where people want to live. Facilities such as the Apollo, Lyric Theatre, Bush Theatre and the three professional football clubs are also of London-wide significance. Pubs can also be seen to be a place of community value and provide facilities of local importance. The challenge is to enable renovation or replacement where this is necessary without losing the uses. 
2.59 Although leisure activities bring many 
benef
its to the local area, for example 
contributing to the night time economy, enriching cultural opportunities and providing jobs, they can in some cases cause problems for local residents. Pubs, bars and clubs that stay open late and serve alcohol can lead to significant environmental disadvantages including concerns over crime and disorder if not properly managed. SECTION 3 
SPATIAL VISION 
AND STRATEGIC 
OBJECTIVES26
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018SPATIAL VISION AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
SPATIAL VISION AND  
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
3.1 The Local Plan spatial vision and objectives interpret the council’s corporate priorities and those 
of i
ts partners and outlines how the borough will have been transformed in 15-20 years’ time. 
Map 4  Key Diagram 
Borough boundary 
Key local centres 
Town centres 
Metropolitan Open Land 
Areas suitable for tall buildings
 (indicative) 
Potential Crossrail station 
Opportunity Area 
Railway station Major railways 
Regeneration Areas Major roads 
River Thames and Grand Union Canal 
Potential High Speed Rail Hub 
Potential Flyunder 
Old Oak and Park Royal Develop-
ment Corporation Area 
London overground Rail station Safeguarded Wharves 
© Crown copyright. All rights reserved. 
L. B. HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM 
Licence No. LA100019223 2014 © Crown copyright. All rights reserved. L. B. HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM Licence No. LA100019223 2014 WHITE CITY 
REGENERATION AREA 
HAMMERSMITH TOWN 
CENTRE 
FULHAM REGENERATION 
AREA 
SOUTH FULHAM 
RIVERSIDE HAMMERSMITH TOWN 
CENTRE KENSINGTON AND 
CHELSEA WESTMINSTER 
FULHAM REGENERATION 
AREA 
SOUTH FULHAM 
RIVERSIDE WHITE CITY 
REGENERATION AREA 
I 
I 
I , , , 
' ' ' ' 
~'to 7,~ 
~ 
! 
'"! 
9 I • I -... -• ,. ,. * , , 
t 
......... ,_ ----
I 
t 
t , , , , , , 
t 
-------II 
' I  27
www.lbhf.gov.ukSPATIAL VISION AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
SPATIAL VISION 
By 2035 Hammersmith and Fulham will be a key part of, and contributor to, London’s 
thriving international economy and the benefits of this will be shared throughout the borough. It will be home to centres of innovation, a skilled workforce and a growing number of businesses and jobs providing opportunities for local people. Genuinely affordable homes to buy and rent will have been delivered to meet local needs. The achievements of Hammersmith and Fulham’s young people will be widely celebrated and the levels of worklessness in the borough will have significantly declined. Hammersmith and Fulham will be the greenest borough and at the forefront of tackling and adapting to climate change. 
Building a stronger local economy 
Our vision is for a borough renowned and recognised nationally and internationally for its 
exper
tise and opportunity in the growth sector of Science, Technology, Engineering and  
Maths by attracting inward investment and partnerships in the borough with institutions such as Imperial College. Opportunities will have been taken to regain our pre-eminent position for Culture, Media, Arts companies in the borough following the relocation of parts of the BBC from Shepherd’s Bush. We will have encouraged inward investment, to support new enterprises and start-up businesses and to facilitate job growth in the local area, where all people are connected to economic opportunities and live in strong and thriving communities. 
Delivering affordable homes for local people to buy and rent 
At least 22,000 additional homes will have been developed, particularly family and affordable 
home
s to buy or rent, that meet the needs of local people and maintain and create more mixed 
and sustainable communities. Fifty per cent of the new residential dwellings will be affordable. The new housing will be fully integrated socially, economically and physically with the rest of  the borough. 
Regenerating the Borough 
Growth in housing and jobs will be mainly focused in the designated regeneration areas and the 
maj
or town centres of Hammersmith and Fulham and Shepherd’s Bush Metropolitan Centre and 
will include additional regeneration that would be secured in the South Fulham Riverside area, with the promotion of a Crossrail 2 station at Imperial Wharf. The regeneration of the Old Oak Common Area in the north of the borough will have started under the guidance of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation with phased, comprehensive mixed use development centred on the major HS2/Crossrail and Great Western Main Line interchange. We will, in conjunction with the GLA/TfL, have pursued options for replacing the Hammersmith Flyover  and other sections of the A4 with a tunnel (“Flyunder”) coupled with redesigning the local  road systems in order to reduce congestion and noise, improve air quality and allow pedestrian  re-connections with the river.
Continued over28
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018SPATIAL VISION AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Our town centres and smaller local centres will be important hubs within the borough, helping 
to sustain a strong, safe and prosperous borough community with fewer vacant shops and more local control over uses such as betting shops and pay day loan shops. Both footfall and the visitor economy will have been strengthened. 
Delivering an environmentally sustainable borough 
By 2035, Hammersmith and Fulham will be the greenest borough. New buildings will be energy 
and r
esource efficient and much more of the borough’s waste will be sustainably managed 
and there will be increased recycling. All development in the borough, both buildings and infrastructure will have been intelligently designed for durable and resilient futures, supporting the move to a low-carbon economy and taking account of climate change impacts, particularly the risk of flooding. Developments will have contributed to the concept of a “smart city”, where multiple information and communication technology (ICT) solutions have been integrated in a secure fashion to enable effective performance in terms of energy, water, waste and reducing  CO
2 emissions and to improve people’s health and well-being and quality of life. Sustainable 
Drainage Systems will be common place and major developments in the regeneration areas will  be promoted as zero carbon exemplars. 
By 2035, most areas of the borough will be of high environmental quality. The amount of 
open s
pace in the borough will have increased through provision in mixed use schemes in our 
regeneration areas. The borough’s parks and open spaces will have benefited from improvement programmes to make them more accessible and attractive and to improve sports and play facilities for local residents. They will be valued for their historic significance, leisure, sport and recreation as well as for their contribution to the biodiversity, clean air and health of the borough and will help to manage and adapt to climate change impacts such as over-heating and flooding. There will also be more street trees. 
New development will have created a high quality accessible, safe and inclusive environment  
tha
t respects and enhances local context and the borough’s natural and built and historic 
environment, including the designated heritage assets, such as conservation areas, listed buildings, historic parks and gardens and scheduled monuments, as well as undesignated heritage assets and important archaeological remains. The settings of heritage assets will have been considered to secure the heritage values and enjoyment of London’s historic environment. Developments along the River Thames will have respected the special character of this waterway and will have increased both public access and the use of the waterways, as well as enhancing biodiversity and improving flood defences where required. 
The council will have reduced road traffic generated in the borough and will have reduced the 
impa
ct of other road traffic on the local environment, particularly in terms of air quality and noise 
impacts. We will have worked with partners to improve sustainable transport in the borough, particularly north-south links, including the opportunities for cycling and walking.29
www.lbhf.gov.ukSPATIAL VISION AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Improving local health and adult social care provision 
The health and wellbeing of residents will have been improved, inequalities in health will have 
red
uced and there will be more opportunities for physical activity which will have assisted in 
reducing childhood obesity. Healthcare will continue to be based on specialist healthcare provided at accessible local hospitals such as Charing Cross Hospital and a network of local health centres. The integration of services across the health and social care sector through the Health and Wellbeing Board will support prevention, early intervention and reduce hospital admissions. 
Hammersmith and Fulham’s residential neighbourhoods will house: mixed, cohesive, more stable 
com
munities that thrive on the diversity of their population, including different ethnic groups, 
faiths and sexual orientations, the young, the elderly and disabled people. They will be green,  safe, accessible areas that enable healthy and sustainable lifestyles and foster wellbeing. Although high in density, they will excel in the sustainable design and management of their built environment and public spaces, with a strong focus on health, liveability, community safety, enhanced historic buildings and spaces with an improved sense of place. 
Delivering social and digital inclusion 
Social exclusion will have been reduced as a result of the council and its partners, including the 
loca
l third sector, faith groups and businesses working together and through the better use of 
resources. There will be high quality infrastructure, services and community facilities accessible  to all. Digital inclusion will have been increased with improved access to high speed internet across the borough. 
Providing the best start for younger people 
The standard of education in the borough’s schools and child care facilities will have been further 
imp
roved to ensure that local schools provide the best possible education for local children, 
including those with special educational needs and disabilities. Schools will have strong links  with their local communities and will enable community use of their facilities outside of school hours. Access to quality open space, parks and play space for children and young people will  be improved. 
This vision will be delivered co-operatively by Hammersmith and Fulham Council and its partners 
in co
nsultation with all stakeholders and supported by the policies contained in this Local Plan.30
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018SPATIAL VISION AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Strategic Objectives 
3.2 The Local Plan objectives, set out below, outline how the council will encourage the delivery 
of t
his vision for the future of the borough and address the challenges identified. They give 
direction to the Local Plan policies. 
Strategic Objectives 
Regenerating  
the borough 1. T o regenerate the most deprived parts of the borough  
and t
he designated town centres, regeneration and 
opportunity areas by improving their viability and vitality and promoting a network of supporting key local centres providing local services. 
2.  To ensure that regeneration in the borough benefits and inv
olves all sections of the community and meets the diverse 
needs of residents and visitors now and in the future. 
Achieving sustainable communities 3
 .  To create opportunities for education, training and emplo
yment in order to reduce polarisation and 
worklessness and create more stable, mixed and  balanced communities. 
4.  To ensure that both existing and future residents and visi
tors have access to a range of high quality facilities and 
services, including: health, education and training, retail, leisure, recreation, sporting activities, arts, entertainment and other community infrastructure, such as policing facilities and places of worship. 
Delivering affordable homes for local people 5.  T
 o increase the supply and choice of high quality housing 
and en
sure that the new housing meets local needs and 
aspirations, particularly the need for affordable housing  for local residents to rent or buy and for homes for families. 
6.  To protect social housing, improve services for council resid
ents and provide more new affordable homes for  
local residents to buy or rent. 
Building a stronger  local e
conomy 7. To encourage inward investment, help foster job growth and p
romote the borough’s many smaller and younger 
firms enabling a highly entrepreneurial economy to develop and remain in the borough. 
8. To help advance businesses, particularly local firms and 
the t
hird sector so that they maximise job opportunities, 
develop apprenticeships and recruit and maintain local people in employment and enhance the vitality and vibrancy of high streets. 
9.  To protect and enhance the borough’s attractions for  arts
, science and technology and creative industries.31
www.lbhf.gov.ukSPATIAL VISION AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
Strategic Objectives
Delivering an 
environmentally sustainable borough 10.  To preserve and enhance the quality, character and iden
tity of the borough’s natural and built and historic 
environment (including all local heritage assets) by respecting the local context, seeking high quality, intelligent developments and design, and ensuring compliance with the principles of inclusive, accessible  and sustainable design. 
11. To protect and enhance the borough’s open green spaces and c
reate new parks and open spaces where there is 
major regeneration, promote biodiversity and protect private gardens. 
12.  To increase public access and use of Hammersmith and Fulham’s
 waterways as well as enhance their environment, 
quality and character. 
13. To reduce and mitigate the local causes of climate change, mit
igate flood risk and other impacts and support the 
move to a low-carbon future and manage LBHF’s waste sustainably, increasing recycling in the borough. 
14.  To ensure the development of a safe, sustainable transport
 network that includes improvements to public 
transport, cycling and walking infrastructure which will improve transport accessibility and local air quality and reduce traffic congestion and the need to travel. 
Improving local  healt
h and adult social 
care provision 15.  To maintain and improve health care provision in the borou
gh and encourage and promote healthier lifestyles, 
for example through better sports facilities, to reduce health inequalities. 
Tackling crime and  anti
-social behaviour 
and ensuring a  safer borough 16. To protect and enhance the amenity and quality of life of resid
ents and visitors by providing a safe, accessible and 
pleasant local environment, characterised by a strong sense of place. 
17. To promote the safety and security of those who live, 
work a
nd visit Hammersmith and Fulham. 
Delivering social and digital inclusion 1
 8.  To work with partner organisations to reduce social 
exc
lusion and facilitate access to high speed internet 
across the borough. 
Providing the best start for youn
ger people 19. To ensure that the child care facilities and schools in the 
borou
gh meet the needs and aspirations of local parents 
and their children.32
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018SPATIAL VISION AND STRATEGIC OBJECTIVESSECTION 4 
DELIVERY AND 
IMPLEMENTATION
/ / 
I 
J I 34
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATION
DELIVERY AND  
IMPLEMENTATION
POLICY DEL1 
DELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATION 
The council will implement the policies and proposals of the Local Plan by: 
• working with stakeholders and partner organisations through a variety of fora and other 
arr
angements, including resident working groups and designated neighbourhood forums; 
• preparing Supplementary Planning Documents, joint Opportunity Area Planning Frameworks (OA
PFs), Development Briefs, master plans and best practice guidance where necessary; 
• maintaining an Infrastructure Schedule (part of the Infrastructure Delivery Plan) that  iden
tifies the infrastructure projects and programmes that seeks to create the most benefits 
from development; 
• utilising development management powers, including pre-application discussions and  inv
olving partner organisations where appropriate; 
• having regard to the financial viability of development in the following ways: 
 –  plan-making; 
 – CIL charge-setting; and 
 –  negotiating Section 106 Agreements (‘106s’), including for affordable housing, applying  the p
rinciples set out in the Viability Protocol in Appendix 9; 
 –  site specific circumstances including site specific infrastructure; 
 – site size, constraints and characteristics. 
• allocating council funding and seeking other monies for projects which support the Local Plan; 
and 
• preparing authority monitoring reports on an annual basis to review the effectiveness of poli
cies and identifying alterations where necessary. 
Justification 
Stakeholders and partner organisations 
4.1 Responsibility for the successful implementation of the policies within the Local Plan falls 
not o
nly upon the council as Local Planning Authority and in some cases as the land owner 
or service provider, but also upon the council’s partners and other stakeholders, including neighbouring boroughs, the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation, the GLA and other public and private sector organisations, especially with regard to strategic matters.35
www.lbhf.gov.ukDELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATION
4.2 Landowners and developers will be important partners in the regeneration of the borough. 
Much of the land in the regeneration areas is held by private landowners and their commitment and active involvement is required to implement the regeneration the borough needs. There are ongoing discussions with these key landowners and stakeholders to determine the way forward for development and the council has adopted or is preparing area frameworks for some of the identified regeneration areas. In some cases, there are opportunities to consider joint schemes with private landowners or developers holding adjacent or nearby sites which could involve joint ventures or special purpose vehicles, subject to European Union procurement rules. 
4.3 An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) has been prepared alongside the Local Plan. The IDP 
sets ou
t the borough’s key infrastructure requirements, anticipated costs and expected 
delivery based upon partnership working throughout the Local Plan process. The IDP is a ‘live’ document that the council will monitor and review on a regular basis to reflect the current circumstances and to inform the development management process. The Infrastructure Schedule contained in the IDP sets out an overview of the key infrastructure requirements necessary to support regeneration in the borough. 
Development Management 
4.4 It will be through development management processes, including pre-application discussions 
and R
esident Working Groups and designated Neighbourhood Forums that the council will 
seek to implement many of the policies and proposals in the Local Plan. The council will also consider, when appropriate, the use of compulsory purchase powers to enable land to be developed, redeveloped or improved to help deliver regeneration. The council will usually try to negotiate with the owner, but if the owner refuses to sell, the council can start the process that will allow it to buy the land or property. 
Provision of detailed guidance and encouraging development 
4.5 The council’s pro-active planning approach to regeneration will be supported by a number  
of pla
nning documents and detailed guidance. In particular, the council will prepare other  
Local Plan documents, Supplementary Planning documents (SPDs), joint Opportunity Area Planning Frameworks (OAPFs), Development Briefs, Master Plans and best practice guidance where necessary. 
4.6 More detail on planning frameworks can be found in the relevant sections of the Local Plan  and mo
re detail on the timescale and portfolio of Local Plan documents can be found within 
the council’s Local Development Scheme. 
4.7 The preparation and implementation of area planning frameworks provides a focus for discussions with the landowners and developers and with the infrastructure providers who are key to the delivery of the council’s strategy for each area. They are also important in explaining to local residents and other stakeholders how the strategy for their area affects them and enables them to get involved at an early stage in the regeneration of their area.36
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATION
Viability 
4.8 With regard to viability, the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires local 
planning authorities to, inter alia: 25
• work closely with the business community to identify and address barriers to investment, 
includi
ng viability (paragraph 160); 
• give careful attention to viability and costs in plan-making and decision-taking (paragraph 173); 
• ensure the sites and scale of development identified in the plan should not be subject to suc
h a scale of obligations and policy burdens that their ability to be developed viably is 
threatened (paragraph 173); 
• assess the likely cumulative impacts on development in their area of all existing and pro
posed local standards, SPDs and policies, when added to nationally required standards 
to ensure the implementation of the plan is not put at serious risk (paragraph 174); and 
• consider, where practical, working up and testing Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) cha
rges alongside the Local Plan (paragraph 175). 
4.9 The NPPG on Viability provides further detail and states that the requirement to assess viability “sh
ould not undermine ambition for high quality design and wider social and environmental 
benefit, but such ambition should be tested against the realistic likelihood of delivery” (paragraph 1). 
4.10 In particular, the CIL Regulations 2010 (as amended) require charging authorities to strike an app
ropriate balance between funding infrastructure and the impact on economic viability 
(Regulation 14(1)) and CIL guidance elaborates further on this. 
4.11 The council considers that its policies together with its CIL charges are deliverable and allow developme
nt to be viable as defined by paragraph 173 of the NPPF, i.e. “provide competitive 
returns to a willing land owner and willing developer to enable the development to be deliverable”. The evidence for this is provided in the following documents as well as other relevant background documents: 
• Affordable Housing Viability Assessment 2016 (BNP Paribas for LBHF) 
• LBHF CIL Viability Study (June 2014) (Peter Brett Associates for LBHF); 
• White City Opportunity Area Development Infrastructure Funding Study (WCOA DIFS) Origi
nal Report (September 2012) and Final Report (May 2013) (AECOM and Deloitte for 
LBHF, GLA); 
• South Fulham Riverside Delivery and Infrastructure Funding Study (SFR DIFS) (March 2012) (Cg
Ms for LBHF); and 
• Earls Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area Viability Summary (November 2011) (DVS f
or LBHF, RBKC, GLA).
25  Communities and Local Government, National Planning Policy Framework, March 201237
www.lbhf.gov.ukDELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATION
4.12 The council will apply the principles set out in the Viability Protocol (Appendix 9) when 
receiving and assessing financial viability appraisals submitted with planning applications and in negotiating Section 106 Agreements, to ensure the maximum reasonable level of affordable housing is provided and that other plan requirements are met.
Funding sources 
4.13 The council will allocate council funding and seek monies for projects which support the  
Local Pl
an. More detail on infrastructure funding is provided in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
Much of the funding will be provided through development in the borough, namely through on-site development, the CIL and Section 106 agreements. 
Monitoring 
4.14 To enable the council to know whether the Local Plan policies and programmes for 
infr
astructure are achieving their objectives and targets. Alongside the Local Plan, an IDP has 
been produced. This is considered to be a ‘live’ document that will be monitored on a regular basis to address infrastructure provision and delivery. The council will monitor policies and infrastructure delivery and prepare Authority Monitoring Reports (AMRs) on an annual basis. 
4.15 Section 113 of the Localism Act 2011 sets out the requirements for AMRs. Regulation 34 of The T
own and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 provides 
further detail on these requirements which are also reflected in the National Planning Practice Guidance on Local Plans. The requirements are summarised here. The AMR must: 
• identify the timetable for preparation and stages reached (including adoption and dates) for ea
ch Local Plan document or Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) listed in the 
council’s Local Development Scheme (LDS), and the reasons for any slippage in achieving the timetable; 
• identify the extent to which the council is, or is not, implementing policies in the Local Plan and
, where policies are not being implemented, explain the reasons why and the steps 
intended to be taken to ensure that the policy is implemented; 
• specify the council’s progress in meeting targets for net additional dwellings or affordable dwell
ings for both the period in respect of which the report is made and the period since 
the policy was first published, adopted or approved; 
• detail any made neighbourhood development orders or neighbourhood development plans; 
• contain monitoring information required by the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Reg
ulations 2010 (as amended); and 
• give details of what action the council has taken regarding the duty to cooperate. 
4.16 The detailed monitoring indicators are listed in Appendix 6.38
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATIONSECTION 5 
REGENERATION 
AREA STRATEGIES  
 
  40REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
 
REGENERATION   
AREA STRATEGIES 
5.1  The section below provides detail and policies related to the parts of the borough where the 
mos
t significant growth is expected to take place. 
STRATEGIC POLICY 
REGENERATION AREAS 
The council supports major regeneration and growth in the borough’s four  
regeneration areas and will work with the local community and key stakeholders to  
ensure that within these areas, proposals will: 
• provide new exemplary sustainable communities, delivered to the highest standards of urban 
design, respect for the historic environment, environmental sustainability, social inclusion, and respecting local context; 
• deliver 19,800 new homes in the period up to 2035 to meet local housing needs and enable  
local residents to access affordable homes to buy or rent; 
• deliver 29,500 new jobs in the period up to 2035, providing a range of skills and competencies  
and supported by initiatives to enable local residents to access employment and training; and 
• deliver new physical, social and environmental infrastructure that meets the needs of new residents as well delivering tangible benefits for surrounding communities. 
5.2  The council has identified four regeneration areas (see Table 1), which are anticipated to be the key f
ocus for growth in the borough over the next 20 years. Please note that the former Old 
Oak Regeneration Area is now within the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation.  
Together, these four regeneration areas have the capacity to deliver approximately 19,800  
homes and 29,500 jobs within the plan period and have the potential to tackle physical barriers  
and social deprivation. 
5.3  Two of the regeneration areas are designated as opportunity areas in the London Plan (2016) . 
The Wh
ite City Regeneration Area (WCRA) covers the same area as the White City Opportunity 
Area, which is identified in the Mayor’s London Plan 2016 as having the capacity for 6,000  
homes and 10,000 jobs. The Fulham Regeneration Area includes part of the Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area, which also covers part of the Royal Borough of Kensington  
and Chelsea. The Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area is identified as having the capacity for 7,500 homes and 9,500 jobs. 26
26  Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  41 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Table 1  Regeneration Areas and indicative homes and jobs targets 
Regeneration Area Indicative  
new homes In dicative  
new jobs 
White City Regeneration Area (WCRA) 6,000 10,000 
Hammersmith Regeneration Area (HRA) 2,800 10,000 
Fulham Regeneration Area (FRA) 7,000 9,000 
South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area (SFRRA) 4,000 500 
Total 19,800 29,500 
The figures for the White City Opportunity Area and the Fulham Regeneration Area are consistent 
wit
h the London Plan (2016). In the London Plan (2016), the Earls Court & West Kensington  
Opportunity Area has a minimum target of 7,500 homes and 9,500 jobs across both LBHF and RBKC. It is anticipated that 6,500 homes and 8,500 jobs could be accommodated in LBHF. In  
addition to this capacity in the Earls Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area, the FRA is  
considered to have the capacity to deliver an additional 500 homes and 500 jobs making an  
overall total of 7,000 homes and 9,000 jobs.  
5.4  The regeneration areas represent an opportunity for significant new sustainable place-making  
and w
ill provide the focus for new development in the borough. For each of the regeneration  
areas the council has set out the overall strategy for the area and the proposals for sites of  
strategic importance. In taking forward these proposals, the council will aim to involve all sections of the community in the development of policies and proposals for the regeneration  
of the borough and in planning decisions. Development in each of the regeneration areas will  
need to respect and enhance the existing townscape context and heritage assets both within  
and around the area. 
5.5  A fifth regeneration area, namely Old Oak, now lies within the Old Oak and Park Royal 
Devel
opment Corporation (OPDC). The OPDC act as the planning authority for this area, and 
are preparing a Local Plan and will make decisions on planning applications in the OPDC area. LBHF remains heavily involved; as a partner in the development of the Local Plan and on the decision of planning applications. The OPDC’s policies could result in 25,500 new homes being built and the creation of up to 65,000 jobs over the next 20 years, with Old Oak alone providing 24,000 homes and 55,000 jobs. The council will seek to ensure that the needs of   
the borough, including affordable housing and job opportunities for local people, are appropriately met. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 42 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
White City Regeneration Area 
Context 
5.6  White City Regeneration Area (WCRA) comprises 110ha on the eastern edge of the borough,  
adj
acent to the boundary with the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea (RBKC). The 
WCRA has been designated as an Opportunity Area in the Mayor’s London Plan 2016 . The 
area h
as also been identified as a potential future ‘International Town Centre’ in the London  
Plan (2016). The regeneration area has three distinct sub-areas: White City East, Shepherd’s  
Bush Town Centre and the estates in White City (White City West). 27
5.7  White City East consists of land to the north of Westfield London and to the east of Wood 
Lan
e with the addition of the Media Village site and former BBC Television Centre. Imperial  
College London is developing a new campus to the north of the A40, bringing research and academic uses related to science, technology, enterprise and medicine, together with housing and other uses to this area. 
5.8  White City West comprises LBHF’s largest local authority housing estates – the White City  
Est
ate and Batman Close. This area also includes the Wood Lane Estate, Loftus Road Football  
Stadium and the TA Centre. 
5.9  Shepherd’s Bush Town Centre lies to the south of the WCRA and is an important retail, enter
tainment and cultural centre which includes Westfield London, the W12 Centre and 
Shepherd’s Bush Market. The town centre is designated a Metropolitan Centre in the London  
Plan (2016). 
5.10 There are a number of heritage assets throughout the area. Much of the area is within the Wood La
ne Conservation Area, which centres around the Grade II Listed BBC Television  
Centre, but also includes the White City London Underground Station, which is a building  
of merit. The Grade II Listed DIMCO building is to the south of the conservation area. The Shepherd’s Bush Conservation Area covers Shepherd’s Bush Green and surrounding buildings,  
including the Shepherd’s Bush Empire theatre and the former Odeon Cinema buildings, which are both Grade II Listed. 
5.11 The opportunity exists in the WCRA for substantial mixed-use development which will help to  
reg
enerate the wider area, by providing new housing, including affordable housing, a greater 
range of job opportunities and community and leisure facilities to contribute to the aspirations for the wider West London sub-region, helping to sustain London’s growth. 
27  Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 43 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Policy WCRA  White City Regeneration Area 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 44 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC  
POLICY WCRA 6,000
Indicative additional homes 
WHITE CITY   
REGENERATION AREA  10,000 
Indicative new jobs 
The Council will work to secure the comprehensive regeneration of WCRA, in  
particular the creation of a new high qu ality mixed-use development in White City  
East, along with the creation of a major research/academic facility with supporting 
retail, community facilities and open space; the regeneration of the historic  
Shepherd’s Bush Town Centre; and the phased renewal of the estates. In order to  
achieve this, the council will: 
• work with the GLA, TfL, other strategic partners, and landowners to secure the comprehensive regeneration of the area; 
• actively engage with local residents and community groups to ensure that the regeneration  
delivers benefits for the surrounding area; and 
• work with the community and local enterprises, to establish ongoing partnerships and initiatives to provide sustainable public sector service delivery in the area. 
Proposals for development in WCRA should: 
• contribute to the provision of 6,000 new homes across a variety of tenures and 10,000 jobs, mainly within White City East, but also in smaller scale developments elsewhere in White City  
West and in Shepherd’s Bush town centre; 
• provide commercial uses within a new mixed-use area in White City East, capitalising on   
existing activities in the area including academic and research facilities as well as the  creative, media and bio-technology sectors; 
• include research and academic uses, together with a limited amount of accommodation  for students, researchers and staff; 
• sustain regeneration of the historic town centre, by locating retail activities within the   
town centre. Major leisure and retail that cannot be located within the town centre may  be appropriate north of Westfield on the edge of the existing town centre boundary; 
• improve the vitality of the important Shepherd’s Bush Market; 
• provide appropriate social, physical, environmental and transport infrastructure to   
support the needs arising from the development of WCRA as a whole and create new sustainable communities; 
• support the maintenance of existing open space and encourage the creation of new  open space; 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
  
 
 45 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
• secure economic benefits for the wider community by providing programmes to enable   
local people to access new job opportunities through training, local apprenticeships or   
targeted recruitment; 
• improve connections to existing communities, including between White City West, the town 
centre and east to RBKC to improve both north-south and east-west connectivity within the WCRA and connections to the wider area; 
• ensure that development extends and integrates with the urban grain and pattern of  
development in the WCRA and its surrounding area; 
• ensure that new development recognises the substantial scope offered by the scale and location  
of the White City Regeneration Area to create a new sense of place and range of densities. There may be scope for tall buildings, however any tall buildings would need to be justified by   
a full urban design analysis; and 
• provide further enhancements across the area to ensure high public transport use, along with  
provision for more pedestrian and cycle infrastructure, including an enhanced Wood Lane, a bridge across the A3220 adjacent to the Hammersmith & City and Circle Lines and the provision of an east-west underpass from the Imperial College former Woodlands site to land to the  west in RBKC. 
Justification 
5.12  White City is identified as an Opportunity Area in the London Plan (2016) which contains a sig
nificant area of underused industrial land within close proximity to Central London and key 
transport links. The White City Opportunity Area is identified in the London Plan (2016) for a minimum of 6,000 homes and 10,000 jobs. The Mayor identifies the redevelopment of the opportunity area as having potential for mixed density housing and a focal point for office  
development at or around the tube stations at White City and Wood Lane along with other commercial, leisure, open space, education and retail uses of appropriate scale to support the local community. Housing-led intensification should support local regeneration, enable  
estate renewal and seek a mixed and balanced community. It identifies there may be scope to enhance education and research capabilities in the area, linked in particular to healthcare  
and bio-technology. Development should promote the vitality of the town centre, particularly the Shepherd’s Bush Market, and complement the viability of other west and central London  
centres. 
5.13  The White City Regeneration Area remains an area with one of London’s highest levels of  
dep
rivation in terms of income and employment. It requires further investment within the 
community in order to facilitate opportunities for more residents to enter the workforce,  
through education, training and recruitment. A major catalyst to the improvement in the area has been the introduction of Westfield London Shopping Centre which has brought significant numbers of visitors to the area and improvements to public transport accessibility  
and the surrounding public realm, including Shepherd’s Bush Green. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 46 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.14 There is already an existing large employment focus in the area, particularly with a focus on  
crea
tive industries, with BBC’s presence at the former Media Village (now referred to as White 
City Place) and soon with Imperial College London’s research and development sector. There is  
scope to develop further employment activities in White City East, not only to replace jobs lost  
by the relocation of existing employment activities but for creating additional jobs linked to  
new uses coming forward for development. Imperial College has commenced development on  
the former BBC Woodlands site, for a mix of uses including student accommodation, housing,  
medical research, offices, technology transfer space, and other ancillary uses. Further research 
and academic uses are likely to be brought forward on the former Dairycrest site as part of a wider mix of uses to encourage business start-ups and incubator space. The departure of most  
of the BBC’s activities at the former Television Centre has provided the opportunity to open up  
the site for major refurbishment to comprise a new mixed-use development. 
5.15  Imperial College London is a world-class university which has a reputation for excellence in  
scien
ce, medicine, engineering and commerce and ranks within the top 10 universities in the 
world. The council supports the opportunity to provide a world-class research/academic/ business hub, as it will bring much needed investment to the area. Primary and secondary educational facilities are also encouraged at this location. Some accommodation for students, researchers and staff may be appropriate as part of the overall mix of residential types, sizes and tenures within the WCRA. 
5.16  In recognition of the opening of Westfield London and the improved transport links, the May
or’s London Plan (2016) identifies Shepherd’s Bush as a Metropolitan Centre. The 
London Plan (2016) identifies it as having potential to become an International Town Centre.  
Westfield, along with the W12 Centre and Shepherd’s Bush Market, provide the three key retail anchors for the town centre. Each anchor provides a retail offer that is attractive to  
different communities and cultures and helps contribute to the town centre’s vitality and viability. The W12 Centre on the south side of Shepherd’s Bush Green consists of a two level shopping mall and cinema. The centre has been subject to a rolling programme of  
refurbishment and improvements in recent years, which has led to improved shops and a new hotel. In respect of the Shepherd’s Bush Market, this is likely to be refurbished which will  
further encourage footfall throughout the town centre. The Hammersmith and Fulham Retail  
Needs Study 2016 has projected a need for further retail floorspace in the town centre before  
2031 (see Table 3). A larger scale mixed use scheme has been consented immediately north of the existing Westfield London, from the edge of the existing Westfield London shopping  
centre to the Hammersmith & City Line viaduct. This scheme includes additional retail  
floorspace, substantial leisure facilities and housing. 
5.17 Shepherd’s Bush Market and adjacent land has planning permission for a scheme which int
ends to reconfigure the market space, providing new stalls and shops and an improved  
layout alongside the existing traders and to provide a greater mix of uses with residential units above. The market will provide benefits for existing market traders with a better layout and improved public realm which will in turn attract greater numbers of visitors to the area. This  
investment will ensure the market is sustained for its richness in culture and wide range of  
goods for years to come. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  47 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.18  Development must contribute to the provision of infrastructure necessary to support the 
new s
ustainable community. Because of the scale of development in the regeneration area, 
supporting infrastructure will need to include provision on site towards public open space,  
community, health, sports, arts and leisure facilities, new schools (primary, secondary and nursery provision), junction improvements, bus enhancements and new pedestrian and cycle connections. Where on-site provision is not possible or not feasible, financial contributions will  
be sought. Consideration will need to be given to the capacity of the physical infrastructure, particularly for sewerage and surface water and the ability of the sewerage network to take  
increased foul and surface water drainage generated by new development. Surface water will  
need to be managed as close to its source with run-off minimised through the integration of appropriate Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SuDS), in line with the London Plan  
(2016) drainage hierarchy (Policy 5.13 – Sustainable Drainage). Opportunities should be explored to secure the provision or connection into an existing or planned decentralised  
energy network. In order to deliver the objectives for the area, it is essential that there is a comprehensive approach and that individual private sector site developments contribute to  
wider regeneration in the WCRA as a whole, at the very least providing tangible benefits to  
achieving sustainable communities. This will contribute to many of the key corporate aims, namely, giving more power to local communities, delivering social inclusion, creating more  
opportunities for young people and delivering greater efficiencies in public spending. Any public sector services delivered in the White City Regeneration Area should be discussed with  
the local community. 
5.19 Due consideration will need to be given to the impact of each site within the strategic tra
nsport network, ensuring that future development will not consume a disproportionate  
amount of transport capacity. A Strategic Transport Study prepared in 2012, modelled the impact of the potential increase in population on the local highway and public transport  
network. The study identifies areas recommended for transport investment in and around the regeneration area. The majority of the opportunity area is well served by public transport, however, the area suffers from problems with high volumes of road traffic and also a lack  
of physical connectivity, particularly in White City East where the A40, the A3220 and rail  
infrastructure creates physical barriers restricting access to and from the area. The whole area should be planned to enable easy movement, especially from homes to transport connections,  
employment, shops, schools, open space, leisure and other facilities. Planned and committed TfL improvements to the West London Line services, including both London Overground and Southern Services, will increase public transport capacity. In addition, a Crossrail station  and/or HS2 rail link station in the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation Area would bring great benefits to this area in the long term as it will be likely to relieve pressure   
on the Central Line. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  48 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.20  Census data from 2011 indicates that the unemployment rate was at 7.4% in White City,  
as co
mpared to 5.1% in London overall. The introduction of new employment uses and  
large-scale retail provides an important opportunity for the local community which currently suffers from high levels of unemployment and skills deficits. Proposals that involve substantial new employment opportunities should offer skills training, work placements, apprenticeships and targeted local recruitment campaigns in order to make best use of added value of  
employing local labour. The council will encourage businesses to embrace the London Living  
Wage. Developments should also look to promote local businesses and encourage sustainable  
business enterprise and entrepreneurship especially among young people and business  start ups. 
5.21 East-west pedestrian and cycling connectivity will be improved by the proposed subway under the W
est London Line and A3220 which has been secured as part of the Imperial College 
development. The council’s vision for the area is dependent on improvements and capacity  
in public transport, cycling and walking to ensure a high proportion of trips are made in  
environmentally sustainable ways. 
5.22  The layout of each of the sites and how they relate and connect to one another to overcome barrier
s to movement will be carefully considered. There is an opportunity to create a high  
quality townscape to open up the area to enable easy movement within the area and to the surrounding area (including the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea), especially from  
homes to transport links, employment, shops, open space and other facilities. It should have  
regard to the existing character and pattern of surrounding streets, along with respecting  
nearby quieter streets that wish to retain that character. 
5.23  Development should respect the prevailing scale of the surrounding townscape along its edg
es, and be generally medium rise. However, parts of the area such as alongside the A40 
and A3220 may be less sensitive to the impact of building height due to large pieces of road  
and rail infrastructure that act to separate potential taller elements from nearby lower-rise residential areas. Some other limited locations within the regeneration area may also be acceptable for tall buildings, as long as it can be demonstrated that they are of the highest quality of architectural design, and they enhance and do not have a negative impact on the character and setting of Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas and the local area in general.  
This will also be subject to consideration of other design and amenity policies as set out within  
the Borough-Wide policies within this Local Plan. Where appropriate, the draft St Quintin and Woodlands Neighbourhood Plan will also be considered. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
  
 49 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC SITE POLICY WCRA1 
WHITE CITY EAST 
The council will seek regeneration in White City East for a mixed-use urban quarter 
within a high quality environment. 
Proposals for development in White City East should: 
• be mixed use providing housing, employment, including creative and academic based 
industries, community uses, a major research and academic hub, leisure facilities as well as  small-scale retail; 
• provide large amounts of housing for residents across all tenures, house sizes and affordability; 
• ensure that on sites primarily developed for research/academic purposes, that a mix of uses is  
provided, including non-student accommodation and other non-academic uses; 
• demonstrate how the proposal fits within the context of a detailed masterplan, and how it  
integrates and connects with the surrounding context including land adjacent to the boundary  
with RBKC. There should be improved permeability and access between Westfield and areas north in the WCRA, particularly through areas of public open space including opening up  
arches underneath the Hammersmith and City Line railway viaduct, where appropriate; 
• provide a network of green corridors and public open spaces including a local park located centrally of approximately 2ha; 
• ensure that development provides high quality places for living and working that are well  
integrated with, and respect the setting of, the surrounding area; 
• retain those remaining parts of the former BBC TV Centre which have historic and/or  
architectural interest. The Centre’s setting should be integrated with the surrounding public  
realm, providing connectivity to the east, west and south of the site; and 
• contribute proportionally to the achievement of the objectives and policies for the area; to  
the overall provision of social and physical infrastructure such as: a health centre, educational facilities, public open space, employment training and recruitment programmes, community facilities, a decentralised energy network and other necessary improvements to the transport  
infrastructure to enable the White City Regeneration Area to be developed to its potential. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk 50 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Site Policy WCRA1  White City East 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 51 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Justification 
5.24 This area includes the land to the north of Westfield London on the east side of Wood Lane, 
but a
lso includes the former BBC TV Centre and the BBC Media Village sites. The White City  
East site provides the most substantial opportunity for early regeneration in the WCRA. Development proposals will need to secure an appropriate mix of land uses to provide  the full benefits of regeneration, ensuring that the appropriate number of homes and jobs   
are delivered, that separate planning applications are well related and connected and  provide appropriate social and physical infrastructure to mitigate the impacts of their development. Development proposals must contribute to the provision of social and physical  
infrastructure necessary to support development of the whole area to create a sustainable  
community, including the timely availability of local skilled labour through pre-employment  
and skills training. 
5.25  White City East has the capacity to provide many of the 6,000 new homes for the reg
eneration area, including a range of new affordable housing in different tenures, student 
housing and housing for those in need of care and support. The objective is to create a sustainable community which will include accommodation for families, students and local residents. White City East will secure as much affordable housing as viable, over the next  
15-20 years. New affordable housing could provide opportunities for estate residents in the regeneration area to access accommodation that better suits their needs. Any decision about the approach to this would need to be tested with residents, but it could consider providing: 
• new social and affordable rented housing of the right sizes and types would provide more  
opportunities for transfers to alleviate overcrowding, under occupation or obtain housing more suited to a tenant’s needs. 
• intermediate housing at the right price levels to enable existing tenants who can afford to  
move into home ownership, to do so. 
• similar opportunities for leaseholders living on the estates who would have opportunities to  
move if they consider that new homes are more suited to their needs. 
5.26  Imperial College London has purchased two key sites to the north of White City East, and con
struction is underway on the former BBC Woodlands site to the north of the Westway.   
The council supports the development of these sites to create a research/academic hub,  
together with residential (non-student), employment and local retail and supporting  
infrastructure to ensure that the council achieves its aims for regenerating the area for a mix of  
uses. Student accommodation will be considered on these sites, but it should not compromise the overall housing capacity of the area nor should it create large areas of predominantly student housing. It is important that the area will achieve a mix of housing types and sizes across all sites to ensure the area comprises of a cross-section of people. 
5.27 Westfield London is implementing planning permission for a mixed use scheme including 
lar
ger scale retail uses and residential units on the site immediately north of their existing retail  
store and south of the Hammersmith and City Line viaduct. Although this constitutes larger scale retail, it is located at the south of the railway viaduct and adjacent to the town centre. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 52 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.28 The strategic site covers a large area which is bounded and crossed by roads and railway 
lin
es, but it must not be planned out of context with the surrounding area. Development 
provides the opportunity to connect with and knit together the surroundings while providing a permeable internal layout. Development in White City East should provide north-south and east-west connections to overcome the physical severance experienced across this part of the WCRA. The railway arches situated between the Westfield and Marks and Spencer site are key to delivering the north-south pedestrian flows and should be opened up for circulation and other active uses. There is also potential for providing a new pedestrian and cycle route from the TV Centre to Shepherds Bush Market, alongside the Hammersmith and City Line, which would be a useful addition to permeability and connections. Development of land beside the West London Line and A3220 should provide for east-west pedestrian and cycle connections to encourage sustainable modes of transport. Development on either side of the A40 must be well connected through provision of a primary north-south route, with provision for pedestrians and cyclists, together with additional secondary vehicular roads that link to  
additional east-west links. The area immediately north of Westfield requires careful handling  
in urban design and land-use terms to provide improved permeability and linkages to the north to overcome the barrier effect of the Hammersmith and City Line railway arches. 
5.29 Sufficient public open space for residents and workers should be provided to support the futu
re residential and working population in the area. A local park and open spaces of  
approximately 2 hectares will support the additional population that will come to the area. A central location to the east of Wood Lane would be most beneficial, which as well as  
providing for the needs of development in White City East, would be well located as a space for those people visiting the area for work or shopping in the town centre. The open space will be provided on the development land to the north and south of the Hammersmith and City Line Railway viaduct, owned by St James (M&S site), Transport for London and Westfield.  
Open spaces should be connected to provide a network across the area to encourage biodiversity corridors across the area, including the provision of an ecological corridor along the West London Line. 
5.30  Development should be of a high architectural quality and its scale should be sensitive to  
the s
urrounding context, particularly existing heritage assets and nearby conservation areas. 
White City East is the most appropriate site within the WCRA for taller buildings. This is  
mainly due to the area east of Wood Lane containing buildings with larger footprints with  
significant transport infrastructure routes in between that separate the taller elements from  
lower rise housing in the surrounding area. Tall buildings are likely to be acceptable closest to  
the A40 and A3220 if they can be located sensitively to limit the impact of overshadowing on  
existing and future communities or areas of public realm and open space, and do not have  
an unreasonable impact on views from nearby conservation areas adversely impact upon  
surrounding heritage assets. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 53 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.31  The retained parts of the former BBC TV Centre have been identified as being of special 
arc
hitectural and historic interest, and are statutorily listed as Grade II. It is these buildings that  
form the key focus of the Wood Lane Conservation Area. The former TV Centre is significant to the future of the WCRA because of its location and the potential for linking the western part of the regeneration area with Wood Lane, for the creation of a public realm focus on  
Wood Lane. The development and re-use of the Television Centre includes the retention and refurbishment of the buildings that are of historic and architectural importance. The approved  
development scheme proposes to safeguard the iconic appearance of the former BBC Television Centre from Wood Lane. Preferred uses for this site should be relevant to the nature  
of the historic use and its legacy. 
5.32  Provision of infrastructure is key to ensuring the WCRA is successful, not only to provide for the a
dditional population, but also to bring about benefits for the whole area. This is essential 
to create a sustainable community. The size of the regeneration area and the anticipated development potential may mean that the majority of infrastructure will need to be provided  
on site. It is considered that development will need to provide an area of public open space,  
a community and health centre, leisure facilities, a recruitment and job shop and educational  
facilities (secondary, primary and nursery provision) if it is considered that expansion of  
existing facilities is not a preferred option. Social infrastructure such as contributions for training and employment will be required. Employment and training packages should help  
local residents to access construction and end-user employment opportunities in order to  
achieve the desired social and economic mobility ambitions. Development must also take into  
account the provision of other on site physical infrastructure, particularly new access roads,  
electrical capacity and substations, sewerage and surface water management and the ability  
for the sewerage network to take increased foul and surface water drainage generated by  
this site. Surface water will need to be managed as close to its source as possible, with run-off being minimised as far as possible through the integration of appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), in line with the London Plan (2016) drainage hierarchy. CCTV and  
other secure by design infrastructure will also be required. Development must incorporate the principles of sustainable design and construction, including the consideration of provision or connection into a combined heat and power/decentralised energy network and the sustainable management of waste generated by the development. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
  enable existing residents to remain in the area, providing a more sustainable community 
through provision of new housing with a mix of tenures and sizes of units that enable greater housing choice; 
 
  54 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC SITE POLICY WCRA2 
WHITE CITY WEST 
The council will work with estate residents and other stakeholders to secure the 
renewal of the estates and the creation of a sustainable community.  
Development proposals within this strategic site should: 
• support employment and skills training opportunities to assist residents in obtaining local jobs  
•
• provide an appropriate level of social, environmental, transport and physical infrastructure   
and co-locate facilities where this will make the most efficient use of infrastructure; 
• assist in providing a permeable street pattern that is well integrated with the surrounding  
area; and 
• enable the continuation of some commercial uses in areas less suitable for residential purposes. 
If either the Loftus Road Stadium or Territorial Army (TA) Centre come forward for redevelopment,  the council will seek residential led development. In relation to the Loftus Road site, in particular, there should be re-provision of community facilities and open space in the borough, in accordance  with the other policies in the Local Plan. 
Justification 
5.33  Currently 53% of residents in WCRA live in social rented housing and 28% are living in private ren
ted accommodation (Census 2011). Providing new alternative accommodation will give  
people who live on the White City Estates and who consider they live in less than ideal circumstances (e.g. because of overcrowding or because of mobility issues) the opportunity and choice to transfer to more suitable accommodation in the WCRA. For existing tenants,  
and for their children when they need their own home, whether rented or owned, there would be a much better choice of housing types and tenure in the locality with more  
opportunities for people to realise their aspirations and move into affordable home ownership. 
5.34  The estate has a number of sites providing a range of services to local residents, some of  
whic
h could be co-located, providing opportunities for other sites to come forward for 
redevelopment over the next few years, as well as providing a more coherent and efficient use of services throughout the area, benefiting the local community by making better use of funding. The area does still require significant investment in infrastructure to ensure that  
new developments contribute to the regeneration of the area, and this should be considered  
by any forthcoming Ward Panel, who will be there to ensure quality and local oversight to  
generate cost savings. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 55 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Site Policy WCRA2  White City West 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 56 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.35  There could be a better, more permeable layout within the area to create more attractive,  
usefu
l and easier to maintain amenity spaces and connections. There would be the 
opportunity to design out crime, anti-social behaviour and improve security in and around 
open spaces. All new developments should connect and integrate well with the surrounding residential estates, which could provide clear and safe pedestrian and cycle connections to the east and south of the area. 
5.36  Where areas are not appropriate for replacement housing, commercial development and/or  
sma
ll scale retail may be appropriate to provide further jobs, self employment and enterprise 
opportunities within the local area and better access to facilities. 
5.37 The Queens Park Rangers (QPR) football ground at Loftus Road is a cramped site with limited oppo
rtunity for expansion, and the Club’s ambitions should be considered in planning of this  
area over the next 20 years. The football stadium is a valued community asset for the White City community and the pitch is designated as openspace. Therefore any redevelopment of this site would need to re-provide a sport/community/leisure facility that could achieve substantial benefits for the community as well as open space, on-site or within the borough,  
in accordance with the other policies within the Local Plan. The TA Centre is a low intensity use of land which could be better used given its location. The opportunity for a development to facilitate estate renewal should be considered if the TA facility can be relocated, but  
development must also contribute to the objectives for regeneration of the area, including housing for local people. 
STRATEGIC SITE POLICY WCRA3 
SHEPHERD’S BUSH MARKET   AND ADJACENT LAND 
The council will continue to support and work with existing traders for the retention 
and improvement of Shepherd’s Bush Market to provide a more vibrant mix of town centre uses, retaining accommodation for existing market traders and traders along Goldhawk Road. 
Development proposals for this  strategic site should: 
•  retain and improve the market, including its layout, to create a vibrant, mixed use area; include 
additional leisure uses, offices and residential development to ensure a more vibrant mix; 
• consider including adjacent Pennard Road Laundry site in any development scheme and land  to the west of the market off Lime Grove; 
• assist market traders so they can continue to trade and remain part of the market;  
• provide the opportunity for the re-provision of Goldhawk Road businesses within new high  
quality retail premises within the proposed frontage; and 
• provide affordable housing and affordable workspace in accordance with Policy HO3 and  Policy E1. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 57 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Site Policy WCRA3  Shepherd’s Bush Market and adjacent land 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 58 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Justification 
5.38 Shepherd’s Bush Market is an important and distinctive part of the town centre’s cultural   
and r
etail offer. The council considers that the market requires improvement to secure its  
long-term viability. The layout of the market should be improved to maximise the space within  
the site and provide an improved public realm. 
5.39  A mixed use scheme providing replacement market stalls as well as other uses such as leisure,  
hou
sing and offices, will not only improve the market as a destination but will also help  
regenerate and bring more trade to the town centre. The market traders play an important 
role in maintaining the historical character of the market and any proposals should provide viable and reasonable opportunities for them to stay part of the market. 
5.40 The market currently operates on a cramped site and there are opportunities to consider com
bining it with other land to produce a scheme with wider regeneration benefits. The 
adjacent Pennard Road former laundry land is key to this, and a joint development is a better solution for what is a backland site with limited access. The Peabody Trust and Broadway  
Centre land could be brought into a scheme, subject to agreement on relocation. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  59 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Hammersmith Regeneration Area 
Context 
5.41 The Hammersmith Regeneration Area (HRA) is centred on King Street and Hammersmith 
Broadw
ay, although the southern boundary extends to Hammersmith Bridge and the Thames. 
The HRA includes Hammersmith Town Centre, the A4 and its flyover.  
5.42  Hammersmith has seen a substantial amount of regeneration in recent years with  
scheme
s coming forward for the former Beadon Road NCP car park, Hammersmith Palais, 
Hammersmith Embankment (now known as Fulham Reach) and new housing on Glenthorne  
Road. There has also been significant investment in improvements to the Kings Mall and the Hammersmith Apollo, while works are being carried out to the Lyric Theatre to expand it. The bus station at Hammersmith Broadway has been expanded temporarily pending permanent extension in a future development. The Hammersmith London Business Improvement District  
(BID) is now well established and aims “to inject life and vibrancy into central Hammersmith attracting more people to the area and making it a more desirable place to work in and visit”. The council has also set up a Hammersmith Residents Working Party to assist the council in producing a Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) which will provide a development strategy for how Hammersmith could change over the next 20 years. 
Strategic Policy HRA  Hammersmith Regeneration Area 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
  
  promote the continued regeneration of Hammersmith Town Centre by actively encouraging  
the improvement of the Kings Mall and other retail in this part of the town centre, and the range and quality of independent and specialist shops; 
 
  support proposals for the regeneration of the western part of the town centre in the vicinity   
of the Town Hall; 
 
 
 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
60 
5.43  There is a need to continue the regenerative drive and continue to compete with London’s  
oth
er employment and retail centres. Although Hammersmith has a wide range of town 
centre functions, its major roads, including the A4 flyover and the gyratory, severely impact on 
the centre, significantly reducing environmental quality and restricting pedestrian movement  
between the town centre and the riverside.  
STRATEGIC  
POLICY HRA 2,800
Indicative additional homes 
HAMMERSMITH   
REGENERATION AREA  10,000 
Indicative new jobs 
The council will encourage the regeneration of Hammersmith Town Centre and 
seek development that builds upon the centre’s major locational advantages for office and retail development. Opportunities will be taken to secure more modern accommodation, to continually improve the environment and public realm, and to  improve access between the town centre and the Thames. 
In order to achieve this, the council will: 
• work with the GLA, TfL, other strategic partners, including the Hammersmith BID and 
landowners to secure the regeneration of the area; 
• actively engage with local residents and community groups to ensure that regeneration delivers  
benefits for the surrounding area; 
• support the continuation of Hammersmith as a major town centre with a wide range of   
major retail, office, local government services, leisure, arts, entertainment, community facilities  
and housing; 
•
• promote the continuation of the town centre as a key strategic office location, through 
provision of modernised office blocks; 
•
• support proposals that expand Hammersmith’s arts and leisure offer, capitalising on the existing  
facilities such as Hammersmith Apollo, Lyric Theatre, St Pauls Green, Lyric Square, and the  
river front; 
• promote and support the replacement of the flyover and section of the A4 with a tunnel; and 
• return the Hammersmith Gyratory to two way working provided that this can be done without unacceptable traffic and environmental costs in the neighbouring areas. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
  
 
 61 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Proposals for development in the HRA should: 
• be based on a thorough assessment of the heritage significance of the area and respond 
positively to local character and history, conserving and taking opportunities to enhance the significance of heritage assets; 
•  improve pedestrian and cycle infrastructure, including connectivity with the River; 
• improve the range and quality of independent and specialist shops and services, as well as  
leisure services; 
•  provide appropriate social, physical, environmental and transport infrastructure to support the needs arising from the development of HRA; 
• secure economic benefits for the wider community around the Hammersmith Regeneration  
Area by providing programmes to enable local people to access new job opportunities through training, local apprenticeships or targeted recruitment; 
•  seek the creation of an urban environment, with public spaces, architecture and public realm of  
the highest quality, that is sensitively integrated into the existing context; 
• improve and enhance St Pauls Green and Furnivall Gardens and their connections to the rest of  
the regeneration area. 
Justification 
5.44 Hammersmith is a Major Town Centre providing shopping facilities for a catchment population  
of n
early 46,000 people. Many people commute daily to Hammersmith which is a key office  
location for West London. The town centre is also important for government services with the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham’s Town Hall, Hammersmith Library & Archive Centre, Adult Learning & Skills Service, Hammersmith Police Station and Hammersmith Fire  
Station all located within or close to its boundary. Hammersmith also has a strong tradition  
of arts, culture and entertainment with the Lyric Theatre, a four screen cinema and the Hammersmith Apollo. The Riverside Studios (currently being replaced by improved facilities as  
part of a mixed use redevelopment), the Thames Path National Trail and Furnivall Gardens are outside the HRA Regeneration Area but these also provide a valued contribution to the area’s  
leisure offer. There are also a number of hotels within the town centre and its surrounds. 
5.45  It is important that Hammersmith continues to compete as a retail location. The council will  
sup
port proposals that further enhance the vitality and viability of the centre. The approach  
to regenerating the town centre has two key elements. Firstly, the primary shopping  
area focused on the eastern end of King Street should be strengthened by encouraging development that modernises existing accommodation that attracts a range of varied retail  
and facilities in the area that links well with Lyric Square. Secondly, the council will encourage a general upgrading of the shopping offer at the western end of King Street, up to and around the Town Hall, through the provision of uses which will lead to greater pedestrian  
flows in King Street while not detracting from the core shopping area. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 62 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.46 Hammersmith is an office centre of sub-regional significance, both for the public and private  
sect
or. Its role as an office centre extends to the east along Hammersmith Road to Olympia and  
to the south along Fulham Palace Road. It is proposed to maintain the town centre’s status as  
a primary office location, encouraging its renovation and replacement of floorspace with more  
energy efficient, low carbon and modern office accommodation, particularly in the northern  
and eastern part of the town centre where there is less focus on retail and leisure uses. 
5.47 In the town centre the priority should be for shopping, leisure and offices, but new housing 
dev
elopment is also important and will supplement existing important residential resources 
such as Ashcroft Square. New housing can help bring evening activity and vitality into the town centre and will be expected to contribute to creating a more sustainable community and  
provide housing for people on low to middle incomes. 
5.48  The council also wish to sustain and enhance Hammersmith’s role as a cultural and leisure des
tination. With the possibility of land being freed up by the tunnelling of the A4, there 
is an opportunity to create an arts, leisure and public space precinct that could improve connections between the Hammersmith Apollo, Lyric Theatre and Square, Riverside Studios,   
St Pauls Green and the river front. However, whilst maintaining the important leisure role of  
the centre, the council will seek to ensure that any adverse impact that some leisure uses can have on local residents, such as anti-social behaviour and noise is minimised. 
5.49  Following the emergency closure of the A4 flyover in Hammersmith in 2011, issues have  
been ra
ised about the viability of the flyover, especially in relation to the escalating cost of  
maintenance and the increased risk of failure. The council has undertaken a feasibility study to look at the possibility of removing the flyover and parts of the A4 and replace it with a tunnel . This study has demonstrated that a tunnel is viable, and the proposal has the support 
of loc
al people, the Mayor of London and TfL. The land released through removal of the A4  
would create opportunities to reconnect Hammersmith Town Centre to the River Thames, as  
well as opening up opportunities for development which could help fund the delivery of the tunnel. Much of this land could provide the opportunity for new homes for people to live in  
the regeneration area, in a range of tenures and affordability which will contribute to the key aim of creating sustainable communities. 28
5.50  The possibility of tunnelling the A4 may also open up opportunities to consider the unravelling of th
e one-way system in Hammersmith, which currently covers the Hammersmith Gyratory, 
King Street and Glenthorne Road. The council has been involved in an early public meeting with key stakeholders and residents where a number of different possible tunnelling  
alternatives were discussed. The Hammersmith Gyratory is currently at capacity with long  
queues of traffic often developing along several arms of the junction, especially when there is  
disruption to the road network. A high level feasibility study is being carried out to consider a range of road options for the area, which will also investigate the impact of traffic on the town centre. 
28  Hammersmith Flyunder Feasibility Study, March 2014 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  63 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.51  Pedestrian movement between the town centre and the riverside is currently limited due 
to t
he lack of pedestrian routes, the uninviting environment under the A4 flyover and poor  
signage. There could be potential to provide a high quality, safe and easily accessible public  
realm that will encourage activity toward the Riverside Studios and the Thames Path and uses  
along the river frontage. 
5.52  There is currently investment in Hammersmith Town Centre, with the upgrading of the Kings Mal
l, which has already attracted a number of new shops along King Street and new office  
developments such as 10 Hammersmith Grove. The redevelopment around Hammersmith Town Hall at the western end of King Street will include a public square with new shops,  
restaurants and a replacement cinema. This should lead to greater pedestrian flows along King Street and help to improve the vitality and viability of the western end of King Street. 
5.53  Development must contribute to the provision of infrastructure necessary to support new dev
elopment in HRA. Supporting infrastructure will need to include provision on site towards 
public open space, community, health and leisure facilities, junction improvements, bus enhancements and pedestrian and cycle connections. Where on site provision is not possible  
or not feasible, financial contributions will be sought. It is likely that infrastructure for new schools (primary, secondary and nursery provision) will need to be provided as a contribution  
for the expansion of existing schools in the area. Development must also take account of   
the capacity of the infrastructure for sewerage and surface water management and the ability  
of the sewerage network to take increased foul and surface water drainage generated by   
this site. 
5.54 Regeneration in HRA provides opportunities to secure economic benefits for the wider com
munity. New development will increase local employment opportunities. It will be 
important to put in place schemes to assist people in gaining access to new jobs. 
5.55  The heritage assets of Hammersmith are a key attribute to consider in bringing development for
ward, to positively promote a sense of place and provide a basis for place-making. It is  
important that any new schemes in the town centre are of high quality architecture and design  
which improve the appearance and quality of buildings and respect the local townscape,  
heritage assets and their settings. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
  
 
  
 
 64 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC SITE POLICY HRA1 
TOWN HALL EXTENSION AND ADJACENT LAND, NIGEL PLAYFAIR AVENUE 
The council will work with partners to upgrade the Town Hall Extension and 
neighbouring land to provide refurbished or replacement council offices of high quality design along with a mix of other uses to contribute to the improvement of   the area at street level.  
Proposals will be expected to: 
• include replacement council offices and a mix of town centre uses, including retail, employment  
and housing; 
• provide an active frontage along King Street, complementing the core shopping area and 
helping to improve the economic health of the western part of the town centre; 
• improve the area at street level by either opening up the Grade II listed Town Hall frontage   
and creating a new public space or refurbishing the Extension building and including an area  of civic space; 
• provide space for a cinema; 
• improve links with Furnivall Gardens and the river; and 
• ensure building height is generally consistent with the existing height in the townscape,   
having particular regard to the civic significance of the site and the importance of enhancing  the contribution and setting of the Grade II listed Town Hall building and respecting views along the river. 
Justification 
5.56 This major site at the western end of the town centre is key to the regeneration of this  
area a
nd this end of King Street. In order to realise the regenerative benefits and a suitable  
mix of uses, a comprehensive development based on assembling a sufficiently large site is  
proposed. This could comprise a combination of redevelopment and refurbishment of land and buildings including car park and registry office, cinema, the Town Hall Extension and the Friends Meeting House. However, as the cinema is included on the local register of buildings of merit, it should be included in redevelopment proposals only if the benefits to this part of  
Hammersmith outweigh its loss. 
5.57 Development should include a mix of retail units (shops and restaurants) at ground floor lev
el on King Street. The western part of the town centre currently suffers from poor footfall  
and the provision of a number of retail stores as part of redevelopment proposals could attract shoppers to this end of King Street. Retention of a cinema at this end of King Street is  
required, thereby maintaining a key town centre leisure facility that attracts footfall at different times of the day/evening. Any development should also include residential development above ground floor level, built to meet high standards of access and environmental sustainability. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  65 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Site Policy HRA1  Town Hall Extension and adjacent land, Nigel Playfair Avenue 
Provision for additional housing will help meet the objective for a greater choice of housing  
in the town centre and help regenerate this part of King Street through increased trade for local shops. 
5.58  The Town Hall Extension is outmoded and unattractive and its refurbishment or demolition  
cou
ld improve the setting of the Grade II listed main Town Hall building. The creation of a high  
quality civic campus with new offices and a new public space and potential for arts and leisure events, together with a mix of new retail uses would greatly enhance this part of the town centre. It will also enable improved road access and servicing of the site. 
5.59 The provision of new public spaces can provide an opportunity for improved pedestrian and cyc
le access to Furnivall Gardens and the riverside. This will also help to establish this end of  
the town centre as a destination. The existing underpass could be upgraded and widened, or  
if the A4 was to be tunnelled, access could be provided at street level. 
5.60  Taller buildings are not appropriate for this part of the town centre. An existing permission  
all
ows for development no higher than the existing town hall extension, with the exception 
of a clock tower which is proposed to assist in identifying its civic location and the end of the town centre. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
  improve and enhance St Paul’s Green and Furnivall Gardens and their connections with the  
rest of the regeneration area; 66 
STRATEGIC SITE POLICY HRA2 
A4, HAMMERSMITH FLYOVER, HAMMERSMITH GYRATORY AND ADJOINING LAND 
The council will work with Transport for London and other stakeholders to replace 
the Hammersmith Flyover and sections of the A4 with a tunnel, thereby releasing land for development that will contribute  to the social, environmental and economic regeneration of Hammersmith Town Centre. 
The council will expect any proposal to remove the Hammersmith Flyover and a 
sect
ion of the A4 and replace it with a tunnel to: 
• result in the release of land formerly occupied by the Flyover and its approaches for redevelopment; 
• ensure that there will be no detrimental impact on the flow of traffic on this strategic route and no increase in levels of traffic congestion in Hammersmith Regeneration Area and the  surrounding road network, minimising the displacement impact; 
• develop and improve the quality and safety of pedestrian and cycle routes, particularly those connecting Hammersmith Town Centre to the riverside; 
• improve the quality of the environment of Hammersmith Town Centre and its environs by  
removing high levels of noise, vibration and air pollution; 
• ensure that the tunnel entrances and exits avoid, or where this is not possible, have minimal impact on the amenity of residents and the local environment, including the significance and setting of heritage assets; and 
• minimise disruption during construction. 
Development proposals for the strategic site released by the tunnel should: 
• provide for mixed-use redevelopment, including housing for local people across a range of  
tenures and affordabilities, employment, hotels, retail and arts, cultural and leisure facilities   
and supporting infrastructure; 
•
• provide new areas for public open space and improve physical connections between the  
town centre and the riverside; and 
• be of a coherent urban design that has regard to the setting and context of the regeneration  
area, including in its approach to scale and character, heritage assets and archaeology and should take opportunities to re-unify areas of severed townscape sensitivity. 
In respect of the Hammersmith Centre West Island site, the council will work with Transport for Lo
ndon and other stakeholders to assess and bring forward the redevelopment of this site  
as well as return the Hammersmith Gyratory to two way working and improve the capacity of  
Hammersmith bus station. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
  be designed to help facilitate any future proposals to replace the flyover and A4 with a tunnel. 67 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Development proposals for this site will be required to: 
• provide a state of the art inter-modal interchange that facilitates the safe and efficient movement  
of passengers from buses, taxis and trains, including cycles, into and out of the station; 
• provide for mixed-use redevelopment ,including office, retail, arts, cultural and leisure facilities  
and supporting infrastructure to help retain a strong commercial role for the town centre and 
increase its vitality and viability; 
• include the provision of housing for local people across a range of tenures and affordabilities; 
• ensure that there will be no detrimental impact on cyclists or pedestrians or on the flow of  
traffic on this strategic route, and no increase in levels of traffic congestion in Hammersmith  
Regeneration Area and the surrounding road network, minimising the displacement impact; 
• ensure that building height is generally consistent with the prevailing height in the townscape,  
whilst recognising the scope offered by the scale and location of the regeneration area to   
create a range of densities. Any tall buildings would need to be justified by a full urban design  
analysis; and 
•
Strategic Site Policy HRA2  A4, Hammersmith Flyover, Hammersmith Gyratory and adjoining land 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  68 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Justification 
5.61  The Hammersmith Flyover was opened in 1961. It was constructed with the aim to take traffic  
out o
f Hammersmith Town Centre, but has unfortunately had adverse consequences, cutting 
off Hammersmith Town Centre from the River Thames, severing the traditional Victorian street 
pattern and creating large amounts of traffic moving around the Hammersmith Gyratory  
to get on and off the A4. Other traffic impacts, such as pollution, noise and visual impact  
make the area around it unpleasant. Removal of the flyover and putting a section of the A4  
underground has the key benefit of reconnecting Hammersmith communities separated by the construction of the road, and reconnecting Hammersmith to its riverside. It also has the benefits of creating significant environmental, social and physical improvements, not only through removal of the road infrastructure, but also through the provision of  
new opportunities for redevelopment on land previously occupied by the flyover, including the potential for creation of a new public green open space around the town centre. The additional housing, offices, retail and leisure uses would provide economic benefits for the surrounding area, by delivering much needed new homes and jobs and through enhanced  
retail and leisure offer that development would afford Hammersmith Town Centre. 
5.62  Any proposals would need to ensure that as much through-traffic as possible uses the  
tun
nel to reduce levels of traffic on surface roads, particularly in and around Hammersmith 
Regeneration Area. Proposals would also need to ensure that the traffic that currently uses   
the A4 is not displaced into neighbouring areas. 
5.63  The redevelopment on land freed up by the removal of the flyover and the A4 provides  
the o
pportunity to improve pedestrian and cycling links between Hammersmith Town 
Centre and the River Thames, encouraging the use of more sustainable modes of transport. Redevelopment also provides opportunities to enhance the quality and quantity of public  
open space in Hammersmith, providing better opportunities for leisure and recreation for new and existing residents and workers. 
5.64  The tunnelling of the A4 provides opportunities to enhance the environmental quality in  
Ham
mersmith through the improvement in noise and air quality. Government targets for nitrogen  
dioxide are high within Hammersmith Broadway and have been above target for the last five years. 
5.65 While the tunnel would significantly improve the air quality where the stretch of A4 will be move
d underground, the air quality, noise and vibration implications at new entrances and 
exits will need to be investigated carefully. However, with adequate tunnel ventilation using  
technological best practice, much can be done to mitigate this impact. 
5.66  The initial feasibility study carried out in 2013/14 by the council considered the level of traffic  
dis
ruption throughout the construction phase. Traffic flow along the A4 is assumed to be 
disrupted for approximately 18 months (half of the construction time), with lane closures, tidal flow, night-time and weekend closures and construction traffic. Any project that comes forward will need to carefully consider this in detail against the construction methodology and design of any tunnel to ensure these impacts are minimised. This will also have to be weighed up against a do-nothing scenario, which would involve substantial traffic disruptions associated with regular maintenance or upgrading of the flyover. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 69REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.67 The land freed up by the A4 and flyover will provide opportunities for development to help  
fin
ance the tunnel. Within Hammersmith Town Centre, development should be mixed use.  
Around St. Paul’s Green, development proposals should increase the size of the green and 
provide new town centre uses. To the east of the town centre around the Ark office building, there will be opportunities for commercial led development, helping to further anchor the predominant office based uses in this location. Outside of the Hammersmith Town Centre  
boundary, development should be residential led. Development proposals should result in an  
enhancement to the size and quality of Furnivall Gardens. Proposals should also deliver strong  
connections between Furnivall Gardens and St. Paul’s Green, linking the two spaces together visually and through the creation of new green infrastructure. 
5.68 The tunnelling of the A4 and flyover provides substantial opportunities for development pro
posals to re-knit together the Victorian street pattern that was severed during its 
construction and reconnecting Hammersmith Town Centre to the River Thames. The opportunity would also be created to rebuild and improve public access across Hammersmith Broadway. Re-linking the centre, north-south and east-west routes is consistent with the Mayor of London’s Road Task Force criteria for the future of strategic road improvements.  
5.69 Development proposals would need to be of a sympathetic scale and height to neighbouring  
bui
ldings and the surrounding context. There are also a number of Grade II and II* listed  
buildings in Hammersmith such as St. Paul’s Church and Hammersmith Apollo. Development would need to sensitively respond to these heritage assets as well as the character of nearby  
Conservation Areas. 
5.70 Hammersmith Centre West Island Site is located in the heart of Hammersmith, bounded by  
the H
ammersmith Gyratory. The site currently operates as an important transport interchange 
in Hammersmith Town Centre. Given the scale of the site along with its wider role as a key transportation node, this site presents an opportunity for the delivery of an improved  
gyratory and transport inter-change, as well as opportunities for improved town centre uses  
and housing. The Hammersmith Gyratory is a complex junction in the local and strategic road network, connecting the A4, A406,King Street, Beadon Road, Shepherd’s Bush Road, Hammersmith Road and Fulham Palace Road. The junction is further complicated by it  
surrounding Hammersmith’s key public transport interchange for underground and buses and acting as a barrier to pedestrians accessing Hammersmith. TfL has removed other similar gyratory systems to return them to two-way working over the last few years to the benefit of road and pedestrian users. Their current work programme includes a proposal to deliver a safer and more direct east-west cycle route through Hammersmith Town Centre, which would involve a number of changes to cycle and pedestrian infrastructure at the gyratory. Any proposals to redevelop the Hammersmith Centre West Island Site and return the Hammersmith Gyratory to two way working should be designed to help facilitate any future  
proposals to replace the flyover and A4 with a tunnel. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 70 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Fulham Regeneration Area  
Context  
5.71 The Fulham Regeneration Area (FRA) covers a total of 47 hectares and comprises Fulham   
Town Cen
tre and the Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area. 
5.72 Fulham Town Centre is designated in the Mayor’s London Plan (2016) as a Major Town Centre.  
It pr
ovides a wide variety of shopping facilities, which serve the needs of the surrounding 
communities. The centre is generally healthy with low vacancy rates, although retail on North 
End Road in the north of the centre has seen higher vacancy and less investment. 
5.73 The Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area is identified in the Mayor’s London   
Plan (
2016). The Opportunity Area is partially within the Royal Borough of Kensington and 
Chelsea and, in total, is identified in the Mayor’s London Plan (2016) as having the capacity  
for 7,500 homes and 9,500 jobs. The Opportunity Area is primarily split into three key land 
holdings, namely the Earl’s Court Exhibition Centre, the Lillie Bridge London Underground depot and the West Kensington and Gibbs Green housing estates. 
5.74 The area is well served by public transport. To the south, Fulham Town Centre is served  
by F
ulham Broadway District Line station and a number of bus routes. To the north, the 
Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area is served by West Kensington (District line), Earl’s Court (District and Piccadilly Lines) and West Brompton (District Line, London  
Overground and Southern Services). 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 71 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Policy FRA  Fulham Regeneration Area 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 72REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC  
POLICY FRA 7,000
Indicative additional homes 
FULHAM   
REGENERATION AREA 9,000 
Indicative new jobs  
There is a substantial opportunity for regeneration within the Fulham Regeneration 
Area (FRA) and for the development of strategic sites to benefit the wider community.  In order to achieve this, the council will: 
• work with the GLA, Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, other strategic partners and landowners to secure the regeneration and renewal of the area; and  
• actively engage with local residents and community groups to ensure that regeneration delivers benefits for the surrounding area.  
Development proposals should:  
•contribute to the provision of 7,000 homes and 9,000 jobs;    
• enhance the vitality and viability of Fulham Town Centre, particularly on North End Road and explore opportunities to secure the long term future of and enhance the North End Road   street market; 
• provide for the improvement of the West Kensington, Gibbs Green and Registered Provider estates, including the potential for renewal of and additions to all or parts of the estates; 
• secure economic benefits for the wider community around the Fulham Regeneration Area to  
enable local people to access new job opportunities through training, local apprenticeships or   
targeted recruitment; 
• provide appropriate social, physical, environmental and transport infrastructure to support the needs arising from the area as a whole; 
• demonstrate a high quality of urban design and public realm; and  
• preserve or enhance the character or appearance and the setting of heritage assets   
including the Grade II* listed Fulham Town Hall and the Grade I Historic Park and Garden  at Brompton Cemetery. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 73 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Justification  
5.75 Most of the FRA overlaps with the Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area, which 
is id
entified in the Mayor’s London Plan (2016) and also covers land within the Royal Borough 
of Kensington and Chelsea. In order to secure the greatest benefits from regeneration, the council will work closely with the Greater London Authority and Royal Borough of Kensington  
and Chelsea to ensure that a holistic approach is taken to the future planning of the opportunity area and will work with residents, businesses, landowners and other interested  
parties to ensure that development in the opportunity area secures wider benefits for the  local community. 
5.76 The FRA benefits from a high level of public transport accessibility due to the four London  
Und
erground stations within or near to its boundary. This high level of public transport  
accessibility, together with the facilities and services in Fulham Town Centre provides the opportunity for the delivery of a substantial number of new homes and jobs. The largest development opportunity within the FRA is in the Earl’s Court and West Kensington  
Opportunity Area, which is identified in the London Plan (2016) as having the capacity to  
deliver 7,500 homes and 9,500 jobs across both LBHF and RBKC. It is anticipated that 6,500 homes and 8,500 jobs could be accommodated in LBHF. In addition to this capacity in the Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area, the FRA is considered to have the capacity to deliver an additional 500 homes and 500 jobs making an overall total for the  FRA of 7,000 homes and 9,000 jobs. 
5.77 Fulham Town Centre will be supported to re-establish its historic role in the locality and  
mai
ntain its status as a Major Town Centre in the London Plan (2016). Further shopping and 
leisure uses will be encouraged in the town centre and at an appropriate scale within the Opportunity Area. 
5.78 The North End Road Market is important to the vitality and viability of the town centre and sho
uld remain. Regeneration in the Earls Court & West Kensington Opportunity Area may 
present new opportunities for enhancing the market. Any enhancement of the market will   
be in consultation with the market traders. 
5.79 The FRA and its surroundings are dominated by a number of large council housing estates. The re
development of the Earls Court Exhibition Centre could provide the opportunity for 
improvements to the West Kensington and Gibbs Green estates, including the potential for renewal of and additions to all or parts of the estates, to enable improved housing opportunities for local residents and to support economic regeneration in this area. 
5.80 As a whole, the north Fulham area (West Kensington together with the area around and inc
luding the northern part of the town centre) remains one of the most polarised in  
the borough in social, economic and physical terms. Regeneration in the FRA provides  
opportunities to secure economic benefits for the wider North Fulham community. New employment would be expected to stimulate considerable investment in the surrounding area and in town centre businesses. All this will, in turn, increase local employment opportunities. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 74 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.81 New social, physical, environmental and transport infrastructure will be necessary to support 
the n
eeds of the growing residential and worker community in the FRA. It is anticipated that  
most infrastructure will be needed to support development within the Earl’s Court and West  
Kensington Opportunity Area. Financial contributions will be sought for the delivery of off 
site improvements where the on site delivery of infrastructure cannot be secured. Substantial improvements to the public transport network and highway network will also be necessary,  
including improvements to London Underground and Overground station, new and more  
frequent bus routes and new bus stops, and junction and road capacity improvements. Opportunities should be explored to secure the provision of a decentralised energy network,  
particularly within the Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area. Development must  
also take account of the capacity of the physical and environmental infrastructure, particularly for sewerage and surface water. 
5.82 Development within the FRA should be of the highest quality of design and respect surr
ounding heritage assets. The FRA is bounded by a number of conservation areas and 
statutory listed and locally listed buildings. There will be opportunities for higher density development in the Opportunity Area, including the potential for tall building, subject to  
detailed design and analysis. Architecture within the FRA should be of the highest quality and opportunities should be explored to improve connectivity through the FRA, especially within  
the Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 75 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC SITE POLICY FRA1 
EARL’S COURT AND WEST KENSINGTON OPPORTUNITY AREA  
The Council will support the phased mi xed use residential led redevelopment  
of the Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area. Development  
proposals should: 
• provide a mix of land uses, including housing, employment, hotels, leisure and associated  
facilities, retail and cultural facilities. Cultural facilities should include a major arts, leisure or  
entertainment activity; 
• provide adequate social, physical, environmental and transport infrastructure to support the needs of the area as a whole; 
• provide for improvement to the West Kensington, Gibbs Green and Registered Provider estates,  
including the potential for renewal of and additions to all or parts of the estates, as part of the comprehensive approach to the regeneration of the Opportunity Area; 
• provide green corridors and public open spaces including the provision of a centrally located local park of at least 2 hectares; and 
• recognise the substantial scope offered by the scale and location of the Opportunity Area to create a new sense of place and range of densities. There may be scope for tall buildings,   
however any tall buildings would need to be justified by a full urban design analysis. 
Justification  
5.83 The Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area covers approximately 37 hectares  
acr
oss both the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham and the Royal Borough of  
Kensington and Chelsea. 
5.84 The Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area is identified in the Mayor’s London  
Plan (
2016) as having the capacity to deliver 7,500 homes and 9,500 jobs. It is estimated that  
6,500 homes and 8,500 jobs could be accommodated within Hammersmith and Fulham. In  
order to realise this development potential, the council will expect a comprehensive approach   
to be taken to the improvements to and the redevelopment of the FRA Opportunity Area.  
This approach will have benefits in terms of: 
• a comprehensive approach for the whole area would provide the opportunity to create a permeable layout for the whole area, with a good range of facilities and useful open space and better connections to rail and underground stations. It will also provide the potential to  enable the inclusion of new road links between the A4 and Lillie Road that will help improve the local highway network (in LBHF and RBKC) as well as better servicing the development.  There would be a holistic approach to design issues across the area; 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 76 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
• a phased development would underpin regeneration of the surrounding area through a 
greatly increased demand for local shops and services. It would help regenerate North  End Road; 
• there would be significant scope for new commercial development and development of   
a new major visitor destination with associated hotel and leisure development. This   
would provide more local employment opportunities and the scope for training and apprenticeship schemes; 
• a comprehensive approach to all the area would enable estate renewal and provide more  
scope for development of an appropriate mix and a more even distribution of housing tenures across the Opportunity Area. 
5.85 Development should be primarily residential led, but the size of the FRA Opportunity Area all
ows for a range of supporting uses to be provided. The quantity of office floorspace will  
need careful assessment in relation to the role of Hammersmith Town Centre as a preferred office location and the proposals for the Old Oak and White City Opportunity Areas. 
5.86 The Earls Court & West Kensington Opportunity Area will be expected to deliver a range of  
oth
er commercial uses, for example retail, leisure, culture and hotels. Retail and leisure uses  
will need to ensure that they have no significant adverse impact on existing centres. Earls  
Court has been a cultural destination for a significant period of time. Despite the loss of the Earl’s Court Exhibition Centre, this legacy should not be lost and development proposals brought forward within the opportunity area should provide a arts, leisure or entertainment venue which should help to continue the area’s cultural legacy. 
5.87 The size of the site and the anticipated development potential will mean that the majority   
of soci
al infrastructure provision can be provided on site. It is considered that development 
may need to provide educational facilities (secondary, primary and nursery provision),  a health centre, a community centre which could potentially include a library, an affordable   
leisure centre and a police station as well as public open space. 
5.88 The majority of the Opportunity Area is well served by public transport including bus routes   
and r
ailway stations linked to the District, Piccadilly and West London lines, but access to  
public transport will need to be improved. Planned and committed TfL improvements to  
services will greatly increase public transport capacity. However, traffic congestion limits  
the capacity of the highway network consequently new development will need to be 
based on very high public transport use. Development is likely to need a range of transport improvements including, potential improvements to the highway network. 
5.89 Development must also take account of the capacity of the physical infrastructure, particularly for sew
erage and surface water management and the ability of the sewerage network to  
take increased foul and surface water drainage generated by this site. In addition, the West  
London Line railway corridor is designated partly as a green corridor and partly as a nature  
conservation area of borough wide importance. It is important that these ecological resources are protected and enhanced. Opportunities should also be explored for the provision or  
connection into a decentralised energy network. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 77 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Site Policy FRA1  Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area 
FRA 1 Earls Court and West Kensington 
Open spaces i:: Borough boundary 
~ 
ice nee No. LA 10019 223 Vm_~,~ 
 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 78 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.90 The West Kensington and Gibbs Green housing estates lie to the west of the Opportunity 
Area
. The West Kensington Estate was built between 1972-74 and includes 604 properties  
in 5 tower blocks, low rise flats, maisonettes and terraced houses. Gibbs Green Estate has 98 properties built in 1961 and comprising 7 medium-rise blocks. There are also pockets of  
newer Housing Association development across the estates. The eastern boundary is formed   
largely by the TfL depot which has an adverse effect on the estate environment. 
5.91 The council will encourage comprehensive redevelopment proposals for the Opportunity Area t
hat include improvements to the West Kensington and Gibbs Green estates. This could 
potentially include renewal and additions to parts of the estates. There should be no net reduction in the amount of social rented housing in the opportunity area. Mixed and balanced   
communities should be created across the opportunity area and the existing community should be supported and strengthened through the provision of a variety of housing,  
including affordable housing, made available to local people. 
5.92 The FRA Opportunity Area has a strong physical, social and economic context provided by the  
surr
ounding communities, and the existing urban grain, form and pattern of development of the  
surrounding residential areas, conservation areas, and town and local centres. New development  
must be planned having regard to and respecting this setting and should reflect the high quality  
residential conditions found in the vicinity in both boroughs. Also, owing to the size and scale  
of the opportunity area, new development should realise the scope for delivering new places of  
different character, including varied urban form and density. Development should be permeable  
and provide new connections to improve the existing local highway, pedestrian and cycle  
networks. This will help to ensure that the potential regeneration benefits to the surrounding  
area are optimised and that people living in both boroughs will benefit. 
5.93 In principle, some tall buildings may be appropriate in the FRA Opportunity Area. However,  
tal
l buildings will need to be put in context as part of full urban design analysis that considers,  
in particular, local and longer distance views (e.g. from the riverside), as well as examining the impact on the rest of the Opportunity Area and Conservation Areas in the surrounding area in both boroughs. Overall, the design, layout, massing and density of development should  
have regard to the local context and setting of local heritage assets. Care needs to be taken to protect and enhance the character and appearance of Brompton Cemetery in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea which is a Grade I Registered Historic Park and Garden of  
Historic Interest. 
5.94 In 2013, planning approval was granted for the redevelopment of the Earl’s Court Exhibition  
Centr
e, Lillie Bridge transport depot and the West Kensington and Gibbs Green housing 
estates to provide a mixed use residential led development. Separately, in 2012 planning  
permission was granted to redevelop the Seagrave Road car park. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 79 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
South Fulham Regeneration Area  
Context  
5.95 The South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area (SFRRA) is located in the south of the borough,  
nex
t to the River Thames. The area has a south facing river frontage of 1,700m, which is the 
most defining feature of the area. It is bound by the Hurlingham Club and the Broomhouse 
Drawdock on the west and the West London Line embankment in the east. The northern boundary generally follows the line of Carnwath Road and Townmead Road, extending north to include the Imperial Gasworks National Grid site. 
5.96 The area comprises a mix of land uses and includes underutilised and vacant riverfront  
com
mercial sites that sit alongside new large residential developments. The area is in  
fragmented ownership, and access to the riverside is limited, restricted to isolated passages  
around large plots of land. The area has been designated a regeneration area because it is  
capable of a substantial increase in homes and jobs along the riverfront. 
5.97 The majority of the SFRRA lies within the Sands End Conservation Area, designated to protect the Riv
er Thames and riverside from unsympathetic development. Part of the north and 
eastern part of the SFRRA is included within the Imperial Square & Gasworks Conservation  
Area. On the Gasworks site there are a number of listed structures including the Gasholder (circa 1830), believed to be the oldest surviving gasholder in the world. The Cremorne Bridge, also known as Battersea Railway Bridge – built between 1861 and 1863 – is listed as Grade II*,  
it is considered to be the most complete of the early railway bridges across the Thames in  
inner London. The River Thames is a nature conservation area of metropolitan importance. 
5.98 The construction of the Thames Tideway Tunnel along Carnwath Road is a major project in   
the S
FRRA. The Thames Tideway Tunnel was granted development consent, by virtue of   
the Thames Water Utilities Limited (Thames Tideway Tunnel) Order on 12 September 2014, which came into force on 24 September 2014. Whiffin Wharf, Hulingham Wharf and Carnwath Road Industrial Estate will combine to form a ‘drive site’ from which a tunnel boring machine (TBM) will be received from Kirtling Street and a further TBM will be given to Acton Storm Tanks in London Borough of Ealing. Works on the site will last up to 7 years, commencing in Summer 2016.  
www.lbhf.gov.uk REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
80 
Strategic Site Policy SFRRA  South Fulham Regeneration Area 
t::J South Fulham Riverside Regene ration Area 
CJ Open Spaces © Crown copyright. All rights reserved. 
L. B. HAMMERSMITH & FULHAM 
Licence No. LA100019223 2014 
 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  81 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC  
POLICY SFRRA 4,000
Indicative additional homes 
SOUTH FULHAM   
RIVERSIDE  REGENERATION AREA  500 
Indicative new jobs  
The council will work with landowners and other partners to secure the phased  
regeneration of the area to become a high quality residential area together with a 
mix of other uses. In order to achieve this, the council will work with: 
• neighbouring boroughs, strategic partners, and landowners to secure regeneration of the SFRRA; and 
• actively engage with local residents and community groups to ensure that regeneration   
delivers benefits for the surrounding area. 
Proposals for development in SFRRA should:  
• predominantly be for residential purposes to contribute to the South Fulham Riverside target  of 4,000 additional dwellings by 2035;  
• include employment based uses that will meet local business needs and are compatible with  
residential development in the most accessible parts of the area, particularly in the vicinity of   
Imperial Wharf Station and on sites close to the Wandsworth Bridge Road, Townmead Road  
and Carnwath Road junction; 
• include appropriate small scale retail, restaurants/cafe’s and leisure uses to support day to  
day needs. These uses are likely to be appropriate on the Thames frontage to provide activity  
adjacent to the river. Opportunities for river related uses will be encouraged in accordance with  
the objectives of the Local Plan River Thames policies; 
• create a high quality urban environment. On the riverside, a very high standard of urban design will be necessary. Opportunities will be encouraged that maximise the permeability  and connectivity between sites, including the extension of the Thames Path National Trail and provision of open spaces that create interest and activity; 
• demonstrate how they integrate and connect with the surrounding context, particularly  the river; 
• support the implementation of a pedestrian and cycle bridge that will provide access to the south of the river; 
• provide appropriate social, physical and environmental infrastructure to support the needs arising from development and the area as a whole; 
•secure economic benefits for the wider community around the South Fulham Regeneration  
Area by providing programmes to enable local people to access new job opportunities through training, local apprenticeships or targeted recruitment; 
Continued over 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 82 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
• be acceptable in terms of their transport impact and contribute to necessary public transport  
accessibility and highway capacity in the SFRRA and surrounding areas; and 
• be sensitively integrated with the existing townscape, ensuring no substantially harmful impact  
on heritage assets, and respect for the scale of the surrounding residential buildings. Building  
height can be gently stepped up toward the riverside, to provide a presence and give definition  
to the river frontage. 
The council will work with Transport for London and other stakeholders to seek a new Crossrail 2 
sta
tion at Imperial Wharf. 
Justification  
5.99 The South Fulham Riverside, along Carnwath and Townmead Roads, is in a variety of  
use
s: residential, commercial and industrial, retail and leisure. Many sites in the SFRRA,  
including Imperial Wharf, Chelsea Creek, Baltic Sawmills, Lots Road and Fulham Wharf,  
have planning permissions for development, but there has been limited new employment  
development for light industrial, office or storage uses whereas considerable residential development has taken place. The overriding need is for new homes and much of the area is not accessible enough for significant new employment space. The Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) identifies capacity for nearly 4,000 additional homes in  
the plan period, up to 2037. Individual development sites may need to be supported by  
Transport Assessments which detail the impact of any scheme on the highway, walking and cycling networks, public transport routes and taking into consideration any committed developments within the area. 
5.100  With much of the area having a low PTAL rating, it is important that employment space 
sho
uld be located in the most accessible parts of the regeneration area, being Imperial  
Wharf Station, with a secondary location around the junction at Wandsworth Bridge Road, Townmead Road and Carnwath Road where it is closest to a number of bus routes that  
run both along Wandsworth Bridge Road and along Townmead Road. With many previous employment sites being redeveloped for housing, it is important that some replacement employment opportunities are provided in new development schemes to create a mixed use area and provide jobs locally. 
5.101 Small scale retail, restaurants and cafes should be provided as part of mixed use dev
elopments, primarily to meet local need, particularly on the riverfront to provide a vibrant 
and high quality environment that will increase riverfront activity along the Thames Path  
National Trail. The riverside walk should connect to a series of public spaces along its length to  
accommodate active uses and interest along the linear spaces. The council does not consider that it is appropriate for additional major stores to be considered in the area. Any additional  
floorspace in the area should primarily cater for local needs in order to sustain the town centres. The majority of the SFRRA is within the Thames Policy Area where specific design  
policies apply, as set out in the borough-wide policies. It is also a key priority to extend and improve the Thames Path National Trail, together with pedestrian routes linked from the river and canal to the surrounding area. The riverside walk should be at least 6 metres wide. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 83 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Much of this will depend on the development of vacant and underused riverside sites. The 
River Thames also has a significant potential for water based activities that can increase opportunities for sport and recreation in the borough.  
5.102  A holistic approach to the regeneration of SFRRA will provide opportunities to improve local con
nectivity in the area. The whole stretch should be dealt with in a comprehensive way. The 
area was shaped by its industrial heritage and this pattern remains apparent today. Without consideration of how the schemes relate to one another and have regard to its setting and context, there is a danger of isolating communities The council will expect developers  
to demonstrate how the development approach will optimise the site for development,  
accessibility and recreational benefit, along with how it will benefit neighbouring  
developments and local residents. Each development should identify key spaces and nodes where routes intersect or are prominent. Connections to and from Imperial Wharf West  
London Line Station will be key for providing direct access to the key transport connections. 
5.103  There are three safeguarded wharves, with only Comley’s Wharf still in use for waterborne  
freig
ht transport. The adjoining Swedish Wharf is still used as an oil storage depot but does  
not currently use the river for transport. Hurlingham Wharf is currently vacant and has not been used as an operational wharf for 16 years. 
5.104  The London Plan (2016) and the Port of London Authority seek to protect safeguarded 
whar
ves for cargo handling uses. The Mayor of London’s Safeguarded Wharf Review 
in 2011/12 contained, among other things, recommendations to continue to safeguard Hurlingham, Swedish and Comleys wharves. However, the Secretary of State has not yet reported on the Mayor’s recommendations which were submitted to the DCLG in March 2013 for approval. 
5.105 Hurlingham Wharf and adjoining sites are required as a main drive site for the construction of  
the Th
ames Tideway Tunnel. The construction of the Thames Tideway Tunnel was approved  
by the Secretaries State for Communities and Local Government and for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in September 2014 and will limit regeneration in the Carnwath Road area for the next 10 years. On 24th September, the Thames Tideway Tunnel Order 2014 came into  
force and Hurlingham Wharf and adjoining sites have been safeguarded for the construction  
of the tunnel under provisions set out in article 52 of the Order. 
5.106 The council will protect the three safeguarded wharfs in accordance with London Plan Policy  
7.2
6. However, it is the council’s view that vacant and under-used wharves should continue  
to be comprehensively assessed by the Mayor of London approximately every 5 years to  
determine their longer term use. The council will continue to promote the consolidation of wharf capacity downstream of Wandsworth Bridge on Swedish and Comleys Wharves,  
where road access to the strategic road network can be improved. Any proposals for non-river use on the safeguarded wharf sites will need to be supported by viability assessments in accordance with the London Plan (2016) policy 7.26 ‘Increasing the Use of the Blue Ribbon   
Network for Freight Transport’. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 84 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.107 A new pedestrian and cycle bridge would provide a key link to allow more people to access 
the so
uth of the river and the Clapham Junction Town Centre. Pedestrians and cyclists could 
use either side of the river, providing alternative leisure and commuter routes, and will be likely to increase the number of pedestrians and cyclists using the Thames Path National  
Trail. Planning permission has been approved for a footbridge adjacent to Cremorne  
Bridge, as it is located most centrally between the other crossing points of Wandsworth  
Bridge and Battersea Bridge, which are approximately between a 1km and 1.2km walk in  
either direction. Proposals will have to be carefully considered in relation to any impact the footbridge may have on the setting of and views toward the Grade II* Listed Cremorne Bridge. 
5.108 It is anticipated that most physical and social infrastructure capacity required by the increase in r
esident and worker population will need to be provided on site or in close proximity to  
the development. This will need to include facilities such as primary and secondary school  
places, contributions toward health facilities, public open space, play space, a community centre and policing. There will also be requirements for highway network and public  
transport improvements throughout South Fulham Riverside particularly at the Wandsworth  
Bridge Road junction. 
5.109 Regeneration in the SFRRA provides opportunities to secure economic benefits for the  
wid
er community in the borough. Training and employment funding and initiatives, 
including through pre-employment support activity and local recruitment campaigns will  
be important. New employment would be expected to stimulate considerable investment in  
the surrounding area. All this will, in turn, increase local employment opportunities. It will be important to put in place schemes to assist people in gaining access to new jobs. The council will encourage businesses to embrace the London Living Wage. 
5.110 The amount and type of development will depend on the capacity of public transport and the r
oad network in this and surrounding areas and the potential for their improvement.  
Public transport accessibility is generally at a low level with most of the area being at least a 10 minute walk from an underground or rail station. However, bus services have improved  
in recent years and the Imperial Wharf West London Line (WLL) station has improved  
accessibility in the eastern part of the area. The WLL is set for a platform extension and TfL will be improving bus services in the area through s106 contributions as and when demand dictates. The council will work with transport partners to carry out further public transport  
improvements in this area. The extension of the river bus service will be encouraged to call  
at Chelsea Harbour Pier. It currently runs at peak times between Putney and Central London. In addition, the council supports Crossrail 2 and will seek a new station at Imperial Wharf.  
This will provide better transport links in this part of the borough and will support the new homes and jobs planned for the area. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  85 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.111 The majority of the South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area lies within the Sands End 
Cons
ervation Area, while part of the north east section is included within the Imperial Square   
and Gasworks Conservation Area. The townscape analysis prepared as part of the previous Core Strategy SPD for South Fulham Riverside suggests that the area has two key focal points  
of townscape significance, the first being at Fulham Wharf where the supermarket provides a draw and focus of activity. The second is at Imperial Wharf/Chelsea Harbour, which is based around the new development, park and station. These areas, in particular, in view of the townscape significance could accommodate increased massing and height. However, such  
developments should consider any potential impacts of increased height and/or massing on  
heritage assets in the surrounding area, including any impact of the view from the Brompton  
Cemetery. The general scale height and massing of any development along the edges of  
the regeneration area should have a closer relationship to the existing townscape. There is a variation in building height in the area, and it would be appropriate for new development to  
adopt a similar variety of scale, ensuring that development on the river front provides a clear edge to the riverside walk in order to provide some presence and enclose the area fronting  
onto the river. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
    
  
 
 86 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
STRATEGIC SITE POLICY SFRRA1 
IMPERIAL GASWORKS NATIONAL GRID  
The council supports comprehensive reside ntial-led development of the site with 
supporting community facilities and open  space. Development proposals for this  
site should: 
• be predominantly residential with supporting social, physical, environmental and transport  
infrastructure; 
• provide for a link road through the site connecting Imperial Road through to the New Kings 
Road together with a network of pedestrian and cycle connections; 
• aim to provide a pedestrian access under the West London Line at the southern end of the site  
connecting to Lots Road; 
• provide an area of public open space to support the needs of the development and contribute  
to reducing open space deficiency in the area; 
• be of high quality design which respects the character and appearance of the Imperial Square  
and Gasworks Conservation Area and protects the Grade II Listed Gasholder and its setting and other heritage assets in the surrounding townscape; 
• ensure building height and massing has an acceptable impact on the skyline and views from  
and to the riverside and waterways and heritage assets in the area, and contributes positively  to the surrounding townscape context; and 
• ensure any remaining gas operations that may be required are designed in such a way to ensure   
that that may be required health and safety requirements are met and integrated into the high  
quality design for the area with minimal impact. 
Justification  
5.112 The Imperial Gasworks National Grid site has been mainly used for a gas storage facility and is  
now d
ecommissioned. The site has potential to come forward for a residential-led development  
to increase the quantity of new housing in the borough, in line with the overall SFRRA policy.  
Ancillary uses such as small scale retail for day to day needs will also be appropriate, along with  
social and physical infrastructure to adequately provide for the additional population. 
5.113  A new link road will be required to enable development of this site and facilitate the 
reg
eneration of South Fulham Riverside by easing capacity at the Bagley’s Lane junction, as  
tested and modelled in the Strategic Transport Study. Further work will be required to assess any link road options and the impact that increased traffic would have on nearby junctions,  
including those in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea. The site must also be designed to ensure increased permeability through to the Chelsea Creek development which is currently under construction. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 87 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
Strategic Site Policy SFRRA1  Imperial Gasworks National Grid  
5.114  A network of pedestrian and cycle links should be encouraged, to provide access through 
the s
trategic site to the Chelsea Creek development and on to the Thames Path National Trail,   
but also improve connections under the West London Line which currently acts as a barrier to pedestrian movement and connect the site to Lots Road. Such a connection could be provided immediately north of the Counters Creek/Chelsea Creek. 
5.115  The area is located in an area of open space deficiency, therefore an area of public open spac
e should be provided as part of any proposal for this site. A larger park could be 
provided at this site which could include a variety of spaces that will provide vitality and interact with its surrounding environment. The open space should feel generous and  well-designed so that it feels safe and accessible. 
5.116 Part of the site lies within the Imperial Square and Gasworks Conservation Area. There is a rich h
istory of industrial archaeology on the Gas Works site including statutory and locally 
listed buildings, some of which make a key contribution to the character and appearance  
of the conservation area must be retained and integrated into the design of any new development. Where non-designated heritage assets cannot practicably be retained on site, the building or structure should be fully recorded. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 88 REGENERATION AREA STRATEGIES 
5.117 New buildings should respect the scale and amenity of nearby residential properties. There 
may be po
tential for taller buildings and an increase in massing away from the edges of the 
site particularly at the south-eastern end of the site near to the neighbouring taller buildings at Chelsea Creek, however this would need to be of very high quality design and would be subject to detailed views analysis. 
5.118 Any remaining activities relating to the gas works facility should comply with environmental poli
cies, particularly borough wide policies on hazardous substances and control of  
potentially polluting uses if any related activities to gas storage are to be retained on site. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 SECTION 6 
MEETING HOUSING 
NEEDS AND  
ASPIRATIONS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
90 
MEETING HOUSING NEEDS  
AND ASPIRATIONS 
6.1In addition to the regeneration area policies, there are a number of borough wide and locally 
spe
cific policies to deliver the spatial strategy and to ensure that development both within and 
outside the proposed regeneration areas contributes to meeting the council’s objectives. The borough wide policies set out below are relevant to development throughout the borough,  
including the regeneration areas. Over the plan period, a substantial number of new homes will  
be delivered providing a local ladder of affordable housing opportunity, supported by leisure,  
green space, schools, community and other facilities.   
POLICY HO1 
HOUSING SUPPLY  
The council will work with partner organisations and landowners to exceed the 
London Plan (2016) minimum target of 1,031 additional dwellings a year up to 2025  and to continue to seek at least 1,031 additional dwellings a year in the period up to  2035. The new homes to meet London’s housing need will be achieved by: 
a. the development of strategic sites identified within the Local Plan;  
b. the development of sites identified in the London SHLAA Strategic Housing Land Availability  
Asse
ssment (SHLAA); 
c. the development of windfall sites and the change of use of buildings where there is no  
rea
sonable prospect of that site and/or premises being used for that purpose; 
d. the provision of new homes through conversions;  
e. the retention of existing residential accommodation and improvement in the quality of private 
rent
ed housing; and 
f. working to ensure that all new homes are occupied and vacant homes are returned to use to  
meet lo
cal and London needs; 
g. where possible, supporting applications for self and custom builds that are in accordance with   
the r
elevant Local and London Plan policies. 
6.2 Table 2 shows the estimates of the likely increases in new housing in different parts of the boro
ugh. The estimates are based on identified sites. Due to the smaller nature of the sites 
outside of the Regeneration Areas, there are no major development sites that are expected  
to come forward outside of Regeneration Areas in the longer term. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 91 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
Table 2  Indicative Housing Targets  
Area 2016/21 2021/26 Total  
10 ye
ars 2026/31 2031/35 Total for 
Plan Pe
riod 
(up to 2035) 
White City  
Regene
ration Area/ 
Opportunity Area **  2,200 3,500 5,700 100 200 6,000 
Hammersmith  
Town
 Centre 700 0 700 1,050 1,050 2,800 
Fulham  
Regene
ration Area **  1,100 600 1,700 5,300 0 7,000 
South Fulham River
side 2,700 800 3,500 200 300 4,000 
Rest of the borough 2,000 200 2,200 0* 0* 2,200 
Total 8,700 5,100 13,800 6,650 1,550 22,000 
Average/year 1,740 1,020 1,380 1,330 310 820 
*The estimates are based on identified sites. Due to the smaller nature of the sites outside of the 
Reg
eneration Areas, there are no known sites that are expected to come forward outside of the 
Regeneration Areas in the longer term. 
**The figures for the White City Opportunity Area and the Fulham Regeneration Area are 
con
sistent with the London Plan 2016. In the London Plan 2016, the Earls Court & West  
Kensington Opportunity Area (ECWK OA) (which forms part of the Fulham Regeneration Area) 
has a minimum target of 6,500 dwellings. In the figures above, 7,000 dwellings have been allocated to that part of the ECWK OA within LBHF and 1,000 to the area that is within RBKC. 
 Justification  
6.3 The council’s housing target in the London Plan (2016)29 is 1,031 additional homes a year in the 
period up to 2025. The figure of 1,031 additional homes was developed through collaborative working with the Mayor of London on the London Housing Capacity Study 2013 and through further work on the council’s and London’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment
30. 
The 1,031 additional homes does not include student housing and is monitored separately.  It should be noted that the figure of 1,031 pre-dates the establishment of the Old Oak and  Park Royal Development Corporation and that a new housing target for the borough will need  
to be set by the Mayor in the proposed review of the London Plan due to begin in 2016. 
29 Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016   
30 The London Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) 2013 
www.l
bhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 92 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
6.4 Table 2 indicates that the council would expect housing provision to exceed the London  
Plan (
2016) target for additional homes for the period 2015 up to 2025. Recent experience  
indicates that even though sites are developable and have the benefit of planning permission, 
housing completions do not come forward at the anticipated rate. The council will monitor the annual completion of dwellings and will work with developers to ensure that sites with  
residential planning permissions are developed. 
6.5 Housing capacities in the two opportunity areas in White City and Earls Court & West  
Kens
ington are based on planning permissions and on guidance included in the Core Strategy 
2011 Supplementary planning documents namely, the White City Opportunity Area Planning  
Framework and Earls Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area Joint Supplementary Planning Document. 
6.6 The indicative housing targets are based on the assessment methodology set out in the Londo
n SHLAA. The actual numbers of houses built on any site will be considered through the 
planning application process. This process will take account of the site setting, urban design  
of housing areas, appropriate housing mix, transport capacity and other factors as set out in  
policies in the Local Plan and other guidance. 
6.7 In addition to the significant amounts of new housing proposed in the regeneration areas,  
add
itional housing will come forward on sites throughout the borough as a result of changes 
of use of non-residential buildings and the conversion of larger houses to two or more   
smaller dwellings. 
6.8 In addition to the provision of new housing to meet both local need and London’s need for more h
ousing, it is essential that housing is not lost to other uses and that it is not allowed 
to remain vacant. There is evidence from the 2011 Census and from other sources that some flats and houses, particularly those that have been recently completed, are unoccupied. Properties are being purchased by investors and being left vacant and therefore are not contributing to meeting London’s housing need. The Mayor of London is seeking to address this by encouraging developers to sign up to his New Homes for Londoners Concordat which commits them to making homes in their developments available for sale to Londoners before  
or at the same time as they are available to buyers from other countries. The council will  
therefore work with developers and land owners to ensure that new dwellings are marketed  
and occupied as homes by local and UK residents. More details of measures to encourage occupation and discourage vacancy will be included in a supplementary planning document  
to the Local Plan. 
6.9 The Mayor of London’s Supplementary Planning Guidance on Housing
31 should be read in  
conjunction with this policy. 
6.10 The Build to Rent or Private Rent sector has the potential to boost the supply of private rental  
acc
ommodation across the borough. The SHMA identifies that private renting is high and is  
increasing in the borough; between 2001 and 2011 the private rented sector increased from  
23% to 33%. Bearing this in mind, Build to Rent may offer a greater range and choice to  
private renters. 
31 Mayor of London’s Housing Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) – March 2016 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 93 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
6.11 The council recognises that the financial model of Build to Rent is different to traditional, 
priva
te market housing and there will be separate viability concerns when considering build to 
rent schemes. Nevertheless, a range of tenures will be expected to provide accessible housing for all, subject to viability. On such schemes, affordable housing may be delivered by discount  
market rent using the London Living Rent (or lower) as the Council’s preferred benchmark.  
The Council’s Housing Strategy may also be used in setting appropriate rent levels to  ensure  
schemes are affordable locally. The quantum of affordable housing units will be subject to  
the specifics on a scheme. Long-term covenants will be required on any scheme to ensure  
developments are rental for at least 15 years with a “clawback” mechanism in place where units  
are sold out of the Build to Rent sector during the covenant period. Importantly, affordable  
housing should be maintained in perpetuity and managed by the Build to Rent provider.  
6.12 An integral part that makes Build to Rent development different is the management of the 
sit
e. The council will expect that any developers will identify a suitable, long term, experienced 
management team in place when coming forward with any applications that will deliver  high-quality housing for its residents. 
6.13 When considering Build to Rent schemes, it will be important to consider the nature of Build to Ren
t development. Higher turnover is anticipated in Build to Rent schemes which may have 
a wider impact in terms of the sense of community in the area and other high-street parking issues and impacts. Evidence of mitigating these issues and/or ways of managing these issues  
may be required by the council.  
6.14 The Self-Build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 requires local authorities to keep a register of i
ndividuals and associations of individuals seeking to acquire serviced plots of land to build 
houses for those individuals to occupy as homes. Self-build typically refers to individuals seeking to build their own home and to occupy them. The council has produced a self-build  
register, where individuals may register their interest. 
6.15 Self Build and Custom Housebuilding refers to individuals or groups of individuals interested in  
buy
ing land and building a home to occupy. The London SHMA found that self-build provides  
4% of all new homes in England. In London, the figures indicate that self-build accounts for 1.9% and 3.5% of annual housing output in London. The London SHMA has found that a survey  
conducted in 2013 that 13% of adults in London were actively researching self-build, in line with  
the national average. Results from the same survey found that 2% of adults in London were  
doing something about this in terms of acquiring land, submitting a planning application,   
or starting construction. Those likely to complete a self-build project within a year was 1%. 
6.16 There are a number of broad barriers to delivering or undertaking such a project which ind
icates why there are such low output levels in London and nationally: the high cost of  
land, access to finance – self-build is considered as relatively risky, which in turn favour high-density development and builders able to capitalise on economies of scale. Self build typically takes place in small infill sites, end of terrace spaces, backland sites, gardens, garages, and small industrial sites. In parts of London where land values are lower, sites which would not have interest from developers, such as those on the fringe of industrial sites, there are greater opportunities to take place. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 94 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
6.17 In Hammersmith and Fulham, where land prices are high and the supply of available land for 
developme
nt is so competitive, these factors do not provide the best conditions for self-build 
or custom housebuilding to take place. Whilst the council is supportive in principle, this will  
continue to be monitored and assessed through the AMR and self-build register.  
POLICY HO2 
HOUSING CONVERSION AND RETENTION  
The council will:  
a. Permit conversions of existing dwellings into two or more dwellings where: 
 –  t he net floor area of the original dwelling is more than 120m2; 
 –  a t least 50% of the proposed units consist of two or more bedrooms; 
 –  ho u
sing appropriate for families has access to any garden or amenity space; and 
 –  t h
ere is no adverse impact on on-street parking stress.  
b.
 Resist proposals which would result in a net loss of permanent residential accommodation as   
a res
ult of redevelopment or change of use without replacement (measured by floorspace),  
including to short stay accommodation. 
c. In streets where there is less than 10% night-time free space the number of additional  
dwell
ings may be restricted or conditioned to allow no additional on-street parking. 
Residential conversions that result in an increase in the number of high quality family size dwellings 
wil
l be supported, particularly where the reinstatement of a family house can be achieved. 
Justification  
6.18 In order to achieve the council’s housing target of an additional 1,031 dwellings per annum,   
it is i
mportant that as well as provision of new housing there should be no net loss of the 
existing housing stock through change of use or redevelopment for other uses. 
6.19 The smaller terraced houses in the borough provide a source of accommodation suitable   
for f
amilies and it is important to ensure that this stock is not unduly reduced because of   
conversion into flats or larger HMOs. 
6.20 The requirement for at least 50% of the proposed units in conversions to be of two or  
more be
drooms will allow for the retention of a mix of units offering the possibility of  
accommodation to be provided for families. Larger schemes will allow for a possible net increase in the amount of family sized accommodation in the borough. 
6.21 Some areas of the borough are likely to be considered less suitable for family accommodation,   
inc
luding areas adjacent to busy roads where there is little opportunity to provide amenity 
space, in town centres or where there are residential premises above shops. In these instances, there will be more flexibility in the approach to conversions, although each case will be assessed on a site by site basis. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   95 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
6.22 Over the years many houses have been converted into two or more smaller flats which are 
gener
ally not suitable as family accommodation. In order to increase the supply of family 
housing in the borough, the council may support the de-conversion of smaller flats in order to   
enable the reinstatement of a single family dwelling. 
6.23 Because conversions can give rise to a demand for additional on-street parking space, it will  
be impo
rtant to ensure that parking stress is not exacerbated. In streets where there is less 
than 10% night-time free space, the number of additional dwellings may be restricted or  
conditioned to allow no additional on-street parking. 
6.24 The loss of existing housing, particularly affordable housing, will be resisted unless the hou
sing is replaced at existing or higher densities with at least equivalent floorspace  
in accordance with London Plan (2016) policy 3.14 – Existing Housing. Short stay  
accommodation (defined as housing let for less than 90 days) is primarily intended for visitors  
and does not meet the need for additional permanent housing in London and will be resisted. There is evidence that at least 225 flats and houses in the borough are being used as short stay accommodation for visitors to London. 
POLICY HO3 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING  
Housing development should increase the su pply and improve the mix of affordable 
housing to help achieve more sustainable communities in the borough. 
For developments of 11 or more self-conta ined dwellings, and on sites with the 
capacity
 for 11 or more such dwellings, affordable housing should be provided in line 
with the following: a. a borough wide target that at least 50% of all dwellings built should be affordable;  
b. 60% of additional affordable housing should be for social or affordable renting, especially for 
fam
ilies and 40% should be a range of intermediate housing; 
c. affordable dwellings should be located throughout a new development and not concentrated  
on on
e part of the site; 
d. the provision of affordable rented and social rented housing in ways that enable tenants to   
move in
to home ownership. 
In negotiating for affordable housing in a proposed development, the council will seek
 the maximum reasonable amount of affordable housing and take into account:  
• site size and site constraints;  
• financial viability, applying the principles set out in the Viability Protocol (Appendix 9);  
• individual circumstances and characteristics of the site;  
• site specific infrastructure; 
Continued over 
www.lbhf.gov.uk   
 
  
 
 
 96 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
• availability of public subsidy; and  
• CIL charge.  
Planning applications for developments of 11 or more self-contained dwellings, 
and with
 the capacity for 11 or more such dwellings, will not be required to provide 
viability information, where they: 
• deliver 50% or more affordable housing on site;  
• are consistent with the relevant tenure split within this policy (see also paragraph 6.39); and  
• meet all of the other relevant Local Plan policy requirements and obligations.  
For the avoidance of doubt, in circumstances where the three requirements set out immediately abo
ve are satisfied, the council will regard that affordable housing provision as “the maximum”  
reasonable amount of affordable housing. 
In exceptional circumstances, a financial contribution may be required to provide affordable   
hou
sing off-site where other sites may be more appropriate or beneficial in meeting the  
borough’s identified affordable housing needs. 
In addition, there should be no net loss of social/affordable rented housing as part of any 
developme
nt proposals. 
Justification  
6.25 A key aim of the Local Plan is to meet local housing need by increasing housing supply, part
icularly the supply of affordable housing. In order to achieve this strategy Hammersmith 
and Fulham will seek to increase the amount of affordable housing in the borough by setting an affordable housing target of at least 50% of all dwellings. 60% of the affordable housing should be social or affordable rented housing and 40% should be intermediate housing available  
to households who cannot afford to buy and/or rent market accommodation in the borough. 
6.26 In order to maximise affordable housing supply, the council will seek affordable housing con
tributions on schemes of 11 or more dwellings. In addition, on schemes of 10 or less  
dwellings that have a maximum combined gross floorspace of more than 1,000 square   
metres (gia), the council will also seek for affordable housing where there is considered to  
be capacity for more units. In determining capacity, the council will take into account the guidance included in London Plan (2016) policy 3.13 and supporting supplementary planning  
guidance. The affordable housing proportion should be calculated in relation to gross rather than net provision i.e. it should be based on the total number of units proposed in the  final development. 
6.27 In some circumstances it may be appropriate to redevelop social/affordable rented housing  in or
der to improve the quality of the housing stock or to provide a better mix of housing.  
Where this is appropriate, the local community should be fully involved and there should be no net loss of social/affordable rented housing in terms of numbers of dwellings or habitable rooms provided. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 97 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
Income and the cost of housing  
6.28 As outlined previously, some parts of Hammersmith and Fulham are very deprived and other 
area
s have some of the most prosperous neighbourhoods in London. There are four Lower 
Super Output Areas32 within the 10% most deprived nationally; and, 25 Lower Super Output  
Areas, or 23% of the borough, amongst the 20% most deprived nationally. The most deprived 
neighbourhoods are also those with the highest levels of social rented housing.  
6.29 House prices and private sector rents are well above the London and the West London average.  
Ham
mersmith and Fulham has the 4th highest house prices in the country. The average 
property price in September 2014 was £795K which is 73% above the London average. Also house prices have been increasing much faster in London than elsewhere in the country
33. 
6.30 Rents in the private sector are also high compared to the rest of London. The average rent in the bo
rough is £1,886 per month, the 8th highest in London and over twice the average for 
England as a whole34.  
6.31 The very high cost of market housing both for owner occupation and for rent impacts on who can a
fford to live in the borough. Using the 3.5x earnings as a measure of affordability and the 
current lower quartile income house price for the borough (£360,000), a household would need an income of £103,000 to purchase an ‘entry level’ property in the borough.  
6.32 Although private sector rents are high in comparison to incomes they are significantly more  
aff
ordable than owner occupation. The number of households living in private rented housing 
has risen from 17,650 (23.4%) households in 2001 to 26,800 (33.3%) in 2011, about a 50% increase in 10 years. In 2011, 34% of households live in owner occupied housing which is a significant reduction since 2001, when 44% of households were in owner occupation.  
6.33 Although the stock of intermediate affordable housing has increased in the last 10 years, the 201
1 Census recorded only 1,257 households living in shared ownership housing compared  
to 706 households in 2001. The census does not provide data on the number of households  
living in other forms of intermediate housing, such as discounted market sale housing. These  
households are all included in the owner occupied sector. 
6.34 Social rented housing has increased from 24,630 (31.7%) in 2001 Census to 25,133 (31.1%) in 20
11 Census. In some parts of the borough, particularly in the north the proportion is  
significantly higher.  
32 A Super Output Area (SOA) is a geographical area designed for the collection and publication of small area statistics. 
There are 111 SOAs in Hammersmith and Fulham each comprising about 700 households  
33 September 2014 Land Registry. Market Trend Data  
34 Valuation Office Agency, May 2016 – Table 2.7: Summary of monthly rents recorded between 1 April 2015 and 
31 March 2016 by administrative area for England)   
www.l
bhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 98 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
Need for affordable housing  
6.35 The analysis of income and housing costs above highlights the very high cost of housing both  
for o
wner occupation and private renting in relation to household incomes in the borough.  
The need for more affordable housing in the borough is demonstrated by the number of  
households on the Housing Register – (as of February 2017) there were 1,950 applicants on  
the housing register and approximately 1,374 households in temporary accommodation. Also, 
17% of households in social rented housing in the borough are overcrowded. Hammersmith and Fulham is ranked 12th in terms of boroughs with the most overcrowded properties.  
6.36 In addition to the number of households requiring social/affordable rented housing, there are also a
pplicants on the Homebuy Register seeking intermediate affordable housing to buy. As  
house prices and market rents are so high in the borough, affordable rented and intermediate  
housing needs to be affordable to a broad range of incomes. The income range of households that should be eligible for new intermediate affordable housing in Hammersmith and Fulham  
is £21,100 to £80,000 for households that require three or more bedrooms.  
6.37 The council will seek the maximum reasonable amount of affordable housing on any dev
elopment. Vacant Building Credit (VBC) was introduced by Central Government in 2014 to 
incentivise the redevelopment of disused and vacant buildings on brownfield sites by offering developers a financial credit equivalent to the existing gross floor space when calculating the affordable housing contribution. Any increase in floorspace, affordable housing contributions will be required. When assessing applications, it is important to apply the Government’s  
intended purpose for VBC.  
 
 
6.38 In an area of high affordable housing need, VBC has the potential to decrease the affordable hou
sing supply across the borough. In order to mitigate against this potential loss, VBC will  
not be applicable where there is evidence of the following:  
• The building is not covered by an extant planning permission or recently expired planning permission for the same or substantially the same development;  
• The building has been left vacant for the sole purpose of redevelopment; and,  
• The building, at the time of application, is not in any legal use . 
Negotiating for Affordable Housing  
6.39 In considering the mix of tenure that is appropriate for additional dwellings to be built in the 
boro
ugh, the council has had regard to the London Plan (2016) affordable housing policies  
and to our own assessment of the housing market, including housing need and how this can be met. In considering appropriate rent levels for the various tenures, the council will be led by our Housing Strategy to ensure that all new affordable homes are affordable to people who live or work in the Borough.  
6.40 It is recognised that in negotiating for affordable housing specific site constraints and  
fin
ancial viability may affect the amount of affordable housing that can be achieved on  
that site. The council encourages pre-application discussions with applicants which should  
include information on financial viability appraisals. The council will apply the principles and requirements set out in the Viability Protocol (Appendix 9) when receiving and assessing  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 99 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
financial viability appraisals submitted with planning applications and in negotiating Section 
106 Agreements, to ensure the maximum reasonable level of affordable housing is provided  and that other plan requirements are met. Financial viability appraisals will not be required  where a proposal will deliver 50% or more affordable housing on site, has a tenure split in line with our policy and meets all other relevant Local Plan policy requirements and obligations.  
6.41 The government is considering measures that would require councils to promote Starter Homes an
d allow developers to include Starter Homes in development schemes as an  
alternative to more traditional forms of affordable housing. Starter Homes are seen by the government as a way to help first-time buyers under 40 buy their own home and will need  
to be offered at a discount of at least 20% below market value and, in London, cost no more  
than £450,000. The council considers that a supply of Starter Homes in the borough may have some potential to retain middle-income households that would otherwise have to move  
elsewhere to satisfy aspirations for owner-occupation, but will do little to meet the aspirations of lower income households in housing need. The council favours traditional intermediate  
housing products such as shared ownership which can provide properties that remain  
affordable over a longer period of time. The council will therefore weigh the needs of different groups when considering development proposals.  
6.42 Affordable housing should normally be provided on-site. In exceptional cases where it can be demon
strated that this is not appropriate in terms of the policies in this Plan, it may be 
provided off-site. A cash in lieu contribution will only be accepted where this would have  
demonstrable benefits in furthering the affordable housing and other policies in this Plan.  It will be ring-fenced and, where appropriate, pooled to secure additional affordable housing either on identified sites elsewhere or as part of an agreed programme for provision of  
affordable housing.  
6.43 Mixed tenure housing developments should be tenure blind, meaning that it should be  
diff
icult to spot the difference in the architectural quality of market and affordable properties. 
It is important for the council to ensure that housing developments are inclusive for all residents. The council recognises that spreading of affordable housing units may not be practical in all schemes. For example, separate service cores may be necessary between private and all affordable housing units in order to maintain affordable service charges and to aid good housing management when locating affordable tenures. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
100 
POLICY HO4 
HOUSING QUALITY AND DENSITY  
Housing Quality  
The council will expect all housing development to respect the local setting and context, provide a 
hig
h quality residential environment, be well designed internally and externally, be energy efficient 
and (subject to the size of scheme) provide a good range of housing types and sizes. 
All new housing must take account of the amenity of neighbours (see also Design and 
Con
servation policies) and must be designed in accordance with London Plan internal  
space policies unless it can be shown that not building to those standards is justified by the circumstances of a particular site.  
Ground level family housing should have access to private gardens/amenity space. Family housing on u
pper floors should have access to shared amenity space, children’s playspace, and/or a 
balcony or terrace subject to acceptable amenity and design considerations.  
Housing Density  
In existing residential areas, new housing will be expected to be predominantly low to medium  
rise co
nsisting of developments of houses, maisonettes and flats, and modern forms of the 
traditional mansion block and other typologies of residential development that may be suitable  
for its context, with gardens and shared amenity space in street based layouts (see also Policy OS1 Parks and Open Spaces).  
High density housing with limited car parking can help ensure housing output is optimised and m
ay be appropriate in locations with high levels of public transport accessibility (PTAL 
4-6) provided it is compatible with the local context and the principles of good design and is satisfactory in all other respects. Acceptable housing density will be dependent primarily on  
an assessment of these factors, taking account of London Plan policies and subject to public  
transport and highway impact and capacity.  
Justification  
6.44 The Local Plan seeks to improve the quality and mix of new housing in the borough. A key element o
f the strategy is to provide a significant proportion of new housing as low to  
medium rise housing with gardens and shared amenity space.  
6.45 It is not only important for new housing to meet standards on matters such as room size  
and a
menity space, but changes to the existing stock should also be fit for purpose. The 
London Plan (2016) has identified minimum space standards for new development outlined  
in Table 3.3, developers are encouraged to exceed these, to assist in providing a mix of sizes. The London Plan (2016) is accompanied by a Housing SPG
35 which provides more guidance  
on the implementation of London Plan (2016) Policy 3.5 ‘Quality and Design of Housing Developments’. In addition the council will prepare an SPD to provide relevant guidance   
35 Housing Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) – March 2016 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
101 
regarding local issues. It will be easier for new housing to meet size and other quality criteria, 
but a level of flexibility will be appropriate to take into account on-site circumstances. A level of flexibility will also be appropriate for conversions and change of use, where adaptation of  existing stock means that it can be difficult to meet the same standards as for new build.  
6.46 The need for developments to take into account residential amenity of neighbours and impact  
on the envi
ronment is very important in new high density schemes and in other developments  
in a built up borough such as Hammersmith and Fulham where developments are often juxtaposed with their neighbours. 
6.47 Access to outdoor amenity space, particularly green space, is important for quality of life, for biod
iversity and to provide playspace for children and young people. Additional green 
space is also important for mitigating flood risk in this borough. Although the provision of  
balconies can provide outdoor amenity space for the occupants of flats above ground floor level, they should always be designed to respect amenities of neighbours and be designed to complement the character of surroundings.  
6.48 Residential density ranges set out in the London Plan (2016) are important for assessing 
the dev
elopment potential of sites, but they are only one factor to be taken into account in 
considering the appropriate scale and intensity of development.  
6.49 The London Plan and the Mayor’s Housing SPG36 provides policy guidance to ensure that  
housing output is optimised for different types of location and Table 3.2 of London Plan (2016), Policy 3.4 identifies density ranges related to setting in terms of location, existing building  
form and massing, and public transport accessibility. ‘Central’ areas are defined as areas with  
very dense development, a mix of different uses, large building footprints and typically buildings of 4-6 storeys, located within 800m walking distance of an International, Metropolitan or Major town centre. Although most of Hammersmith and Fulham is within 800m of a Metropolitan or Major town centre, only limited areas meet the remaining criteria of the ‘central’ areas definition. Much of the development in Hammersmith and Fulham, including within and around the town centres, is primarily residential with small building footprints and buildings of less than 4 storeys. Therefore the higher density ranges of the London Plan (2016)  
‘Central’ setting will only be appropriate in those parts of the regeneration areas and strategic sites identified in the Local Plan as being suitable for higher density development.  
 
6.50 Small development sites can often be problematic and the council will especially resist  
attem p
ts to overdevelop which often leads to adverse effects on neighbours and the locality. 
In large schemes, such as in regeneration areas, there is more scope to achieve higher density housing and as long as there is still a good mix of housing types overall, some high rise non-family residential may be acceptable. Such large schemes will need to be supported by  
appropriate social infrastructure.  
 
36 Housing Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) – March 2016 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
102 
POLICY HO5 
HOUSING MIX  
The council will work with Registered Providers and other house builders to increase 
the supply and choice of high quality residential accommodation that meets local residents’ needs and aspirations and demand for housing. In order to deliver this accommodation there should be a mix of housing types and sizes in development schemes, including family accommodation.  
Developments should aim to meet the follow ing mix subject to viability, locational 
charact
eristics and site constraints being considered on a site by site basis:  
a. for social and affordable rented housing approximately:  
1  bedroom: 10% of units;  
2  bedrooms: 40% of units;  
3  bedrooms: 35% of units;  
4+  bedrooms 15% of units;  
b. for intermediate housing approximately:  
1  bedroom: 50%;  
2  bedroom: 35%;  
3  or more bedrooms: 15% of units; and  
c. for market housing, a mix of unit sizes including larger family accommodation.  
Justification  
6.51 There is a particular need in this borough for more family sized housing (three or more  
bedr
ooms), particularly affordable housing. The council’s SHMA has found that 42% of the 
current affordable/social rented accommodation is one bedroom properties, predominantly flats, and only 24% of properties with three or more bedrooms. Furthermore, 42% of all affordable social rent sector are occupied with children, higher than owner occupied and private rented sector. However, some sites may be more appropriate for families with children, particularly sites with safe access to amenity and playspace, than other sites that are in town centres where access may be more difficult.  
6.52 For affordable homes larger than one bedroom, it will be important for accommodation to  
come i
n a variety of sizes and bedrooms to assist in meeting housing needs. For example,  
with two bedroom affordable rented homes, the council will encourage developers to provide half of these with capacity for four persons (with the other half for three persons). The same approach should be applied to three bedroom properties with 50% being capable of  
accommodating five persons and six persons and so on for larger properties.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
103 
6.53 Although there is a recognised need for larger house sizes in the intermediate housing market, 
cos
ts of larger units can mean that that the level of subsidy required to make three or more  
bedroom houses affordable can make it difficult to achieve a higher proportion of the other affordable family dwellings. In addition, the council’s SHMA has identified a high need for  1 bedroom properties (64%) and 2 bedroom properties (30%), based on the council’s HomeBuy Register. Therefore the focus of the policy is on one and two bedroom dwellings whilst ensuring that schemes should also include larger family homes. As set out within the policy, this will be negotiated on a site by site basis.  
6.54 Market housing should provide for a variety of house sizes and opportunities for family as well as no
n-family households to purchase new housing in the borough.  
POLICY HO6 
ACCESSIBLE HOUSING  
The council will seek to secure high quality accessible homes in all developments 
that include housing, in particular we will require that:  
a. 90% percent of new housing should meet Building Regulation requirement M4(2) ‘accessible 
and a
daptable dwellings’ and where feasible, additional dwellings resulting from conversions, 
changes of use and dwellings formed from extensions or floors added to existing blocks of   
flats should also meet this requirement;  
b. 10% percent of new housing should meet Building Regulation requirement M4(3) ‘wheelchair 
user dw
ellings’ designed to be wheelchair accessible users. ‘Wheelchair user dwellings’ should 
be provided in proportion to the tenure mix of the development.  
Accessible width car parking spaces should be provided to meet the needs of blue badge holders 
in ac
cordance with Local Plan Policy T5 and British Standards.  
Justification  
6.55 Over the next 20 years it is estimated that there is likely to be a 58% increase in the popul
ation aged over 65 and the population aged 85 and over is projected to more than  
double over the same period37. Improved life expectancy and a gradual shift towards longer 
periods of time spent with chronic and disabling conditions, services are focusing more on  
community based support to keep people in their own homes. Currently three quarters of  
the council’s general needs housing stock is flats with nearly half having no ground floor entrance and many having no lift access. It is therefore essential for Hammersmith and Fulham to increase the supply of both wheelchair accessible and wheelchair adaptable housing across all tenures.  
37 Population projections SHLAA capped, GLA 2015 
www.l
bhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
104 
6.56 The government has produced optional Building Regulations which can be used to increase 
the a
ccessibility of new homes to people with mobility difficulties. The optional Building  
Regulations in approved document Part M4 include Category 2 for “accessible and adaptable dwellings”. This is known as M4(2), and is broadly equivalent to satisfying Lifetime Homes criteria. Approved document Part M4 also includes Category 3 for “wheelchair user dwellings” known as M4(3). Part M4(3) further distinguishes between “wheelchair accessible” dwellings (homes readily useable by a wheelchair user at the point of completion) and “wheelchair adaptable” dwellings (homes that can be easily adapted to meet the needs of a wheelchair user).  
 
6.57 London Plan (2016) Policy 3.8 ‘Housing Choice’ seeks to ensure that 90% of new housing meets Bu
ilding Regulation requirement M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable dwellings’. To comply 
with this requirement, step free access must be provided. Generally a lift will be required  
where a dwelling is accessed above or below the entry storey. Although most new build housing will be built to meet this requirement, the council considers that new dwellings resulting from a change of use, conversion or extension to existing residential building, should also aim to meet the M4(2) requirement. It is recognised that there may be circumstances  
where it is not possible to achieve all the full M4(2) requirements. The policy therefore allows  
for some flexibility in achievement of the criteria, but the council will require assessments to  
show why the requirements cannot be met.  
6.58 The requirement for 10% of all new housing to be built to Building Regulation requirement 
M4(
3) ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ designed to be wheelchair accessible, or easily adaptable 
for residents who are wheelchair users is in accordance with the London Plan (2016) Policy  
3.8. When providing ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ in a development, it is important not only to ensure an increase in accessible homes within the borough but also to ensure that where there are mixed tenure schemes that the provision of ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ are provided in equal proportion to the tenure mix of the development.  
6.59 ‘Wheelchair accessible dwellings’ which are designed to be readily useable at the point of  
com
pletion will only be required for those dwellings where the council is responsible for 
allocating or nominating a person to live in that dwelling. The remaining dwellings should be ‘wheelchair adaptable’ and built to be easily adapted to meet the needs of a household that  
includes a wheelchair user.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
  
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
105 
POLICY HO7 
MEETING NEEDS OF PEOPLE   WHO NEED CARE AND SUPPORT  
The council will encourage and support applications for new special needs and 
supported housing, including specialist housing for older people, if it meets the following criteria:  
a. there is an established local need for the facility;  
b. the standard of the facilities are satisfactory and suitable for the intended occupants;  
c. there is a good level of accessibility to public transport and other facilities needed by the residen
ts; and  
d. the impact of the proposed development will not be detrimental to the amenity of the local are
a or to local services.  
Applications for development that would result in the loss of special needs housing will only be gra
nted permission if it can be demonstrated that there is no longer an established local need  
for this type of accommodation or that the current facility is unfit for purpose, or that it will be replaced elsewhere. 
Where relevant, any evidence of need should consider the full range of special needs, including the 
frai
l elderly, people with physical and learning difficulties, and people needing short term support.  
Justification  
6.60 Special needs housing covers all housing types with an element of care and support such as, ext
ra care housing, housing for people with learning disabilities and nursing homes, sheltered 
housing and residential care homes with on-site home and medical care. The council considers that elderly residents should have the opportunity to access special needs housing located in  
the borough. The council aims to create more sustainable communities to enable residents to  
remain in their communities through different stages of their life. 
6.61 Where appropriate, it will be necessary for any evidence of need to consider the full range of spe
cial needs, including the frail elderly, people with physical and learning difficulties, and 
people needing short term support, although some accommodation may not be suitable for all groups without significant investment.  
 
6.62 The London Plan (2016) includes an indicative benchmark for specialist housing for older peop
le in Hammersmith and Fulham of 60 additional dwellings per annum. This includes   
45 specialist dwellings for private sale and 15 for intermediate sale. The council is working with residents, the NHS and other providers to deliver new types of private and social  
sheltered housing which will include on-site home and medical care
38. To ensure that new 
specialist housing can meet local needs, applications for new provision will be assessed in   
38 Hammersmith and Fulham Strategic Housing Market Area Assessment 2016 
www.l
bhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
106 
relation to the identified local need for the facility and its potential impact on the provision of  
services to the local community, such as health and social care. Special needs accommodation 
that serves a London-wide or a sub-regional need can put additional pressure on these local services. Also, some special needs housing can impact on the amenity of the local area, for example through people coming and going, and this needs to be taken into account in  
considering the scale and location of such developments.  
6.63 Special needs housing should normally be located in areas accessible to public transport and 
oth
er local facilities for the benefit of residents and visitors. 
POLICY HO8 
HOSTELS AND HOUSES IN MULTIPLE OCCUPATION  
The acceptability of planning applications for new houses in multiple occupation 
(HMOs) or hostels or for the loss of existing HMOs or hostels will be considered in relation to the following criteria:  
a. the quality of the accommodation that is proposed or might be lost;  
b. the impact of the accommodation on the locality; and  
c. the local need for the proposed or existing HMO or hostel accommodation.  
Justification  
6.64 HMOs may be classified as either small (housing three to six people) or large (housing more  
tha
n six people). The former are classified as class C4 in the use classes order, whereas the 
latter are sui generis. There are permitted development rights for all changes between small HMOs (class C4) and residential (class C3) without the need for planning applications.  
6.65 The council recognises the role that hostels and HMOs play in providing accommodation for sin
gle people who cannot afford self contained accommodation. Despite this, a number of  
existing premises are considered to be in a poor state of repair and do not provide adequate  
accommodation, for example in terms of size and condition, for people on low incomes. The council will therefore assess any application that would result in a loss of a large HMO or  
hostel against the criteria listed above. The loss of such accommodation may be acceptable  
where the standard of accommodation can be improved, and/or any adverse impact on the surrounding area reduced. The council may permit new hostels and HMOs that meet an  
identified need and which do not have an adverse impact upon residential amenity. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
107 
POLICY HO9 
STUDENT ACCOMMODATION  
The council recognises the London-wide need for student accommodation, and to  
assist in meeting this need it will support applications for student accommodation 
as part of mixed use development schemes within the White City and Earls Court and West Kensington Opportunity Areas. Applications for student accommodation outside of these areas will be assessed on a site by site basis, however the council will resist proposals which are likely to have adverse local impacts.  
An application for student accommodation will need to show that: 
a. the site is in an area with good public transport accessibility (normally PTAL 4-6) with access 
to loc
al convenience services and the proposal would not generate additional demands for  
on-street parking;   
b. there would be no loss of existing housing;  
c. the development does not have a detrimental impact on the local area, and should include a man
agement and maintenance plan for the accommodation to demonstrate how the amenity 
of neighbouring properties will be protected and what steps would be taken to minimise the impact of the accommodation on neighbouring uses;  
d. the accommodation is of high quality, including size of units, daylight and sunlight standards; 
e. wheelchair accessible accommodation is provided to meet the needs of disabled students in 
acco
rdance with relevant British Standards; and  
f. the student accommodation should be secured for occupation by members of specified 
Londo
n-based educational institutions or an element of affordable accommodation in  
accordance with the London Plan.  
Justification  
6.66 The borough is home to a number of university and higher education institutions, principally Imperi
al College, which has teaching facilities at Hammersmith Hospital and Charing Cross 
Hospital and proposals for development in the White City Opportunity Area. A number of  
these higher educational institutions have expressed a need to increase their capacity, as have  
many other higher educational institutions across London, buoyed by London’s international  
status and reputation as a global centre for higher education. This has put pressure on  
conventional housing to accommodate students and there is a need to increase the capacity  
of student accommodation in London in order to ensure that there is a suitable choice of  
available purpose built accommodation. 
6.67 The council considers that the borough’s largest and most deliverable regeneration areas off
er an opportunity to help deliver a significant quantum towards addressing this student 
accommodation shortage for local institutions. It considers that student housing in these areas will be best provided within major new developments as part of mixed use schemes. 
 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
108 
All applications will need to demonstrate satisfactorily that the proposals will have a positive  
impact on the overall strategies for the opportunity areas and will not adversely impact on  
residential neighbours or town and local centres. Applications will need to be accompanied  
by a management plan, setting out how the impact upon neighbours and the amenity of the 
borough’s existing residents will be managed.  
6.68 The management plan should set out how any impact upon its neighbours and the amenity of the bo
rough’s existing residents would be minimised, including any impact from move-in 
and move-out dates at the beginning and end of terms and the impact of possible alternative use during the vacations.  
6.69 Outside of the opportunity areas, applications for student accommodation will be assessed  
on a s
ite by site basis. It is acknowledged that students can create benefits for an area, for  
example by adding vibrancy and vitality to the local economy. However, concentrations of  
students can also have a negative impact. In particular, the council is concerned about the direct impact of noise and comings and goings on neighbouring properties, and the indirect  
impact of the growth in facilities such as bars and takeaways that can themselves cause a nuisance, especially late at night. The council will consider all applications on their own merits, but the primary consideration will be the amenity of the borough’s existing residents and the strategy to direct student accommodation schemes to the opportunity areas.  
6.70 In order to ensure that students are able to travel to and from their area of study, it  
is impo
rtant that the development is located within an area of good public transport 
accessibility within the regeneration areas.  
6.71 Although student accommodation does not need to meet the internal space standards  
requ
ired for permanent housing, the accommodation must be high quality and meet the 
needs of all potential students, including the needs of wheelchair users and other disabled  
students. In determining the number and design of accessible bedrooms, kitchen areas and other communal facilities the developer is expected to take account of BS8300:2009 “Design of buildings and their approaches to meet the needs of disabled people. Section 12:Individual Rooms, Para 12.8.1 also recommends 10% of bedrooms in communal residential buildings should be accessible to students with an additional 5% capable of being adapted in the future to accessibility standards.  
6.72 To ensure that accommodation specifically designed for the occupation by students is not 
subs
equently used for general residential use, or some other form of hostel accommodation,  
there will need to be a planning agreement ensuring that the accommodation is occupied  
only by students of specified educational institution(s), normally a London based education institution in easy commuting distance of the accommodation. As student housing is not subject to the affordable housing policy, this will also ensure that student housing is not proposed to avoid this policy. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
109
POLICY HO10 
GYPSY AND TRAVELLER ACCOMMODATION  
The council will seek to address the joint Gypsy and Traveller accommodation needs 
over the Plan period, as identified in the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs Assessment (2016).  
 
The council will work closely with the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, and any other rel
evant partners to protect, improve and, if necessary, increase the capacity of the existing gypsy 
and traveller site at Stable Way.  
Applications for additional sites should meet the requirements set out in the Planning Policy for Tra
veller Sites (2015)39.  
Justification 
6.73 The council and the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea (RBKC) jointly provide a site   
for 2
0 travellers’ pitches on land in RBKC to the east of the White City Opportunity Area  
(1 is taken up by a community centre). Following engagement with the local traveller community an assessment of the need for traveller pitches was carried out. The assessment  
identified that 3 additional pitches are required in the first five years, 9 in total over the plan  
period. Both authorities are working together to determine how best to meet this identified  
need. The council will seek to address the findings from its assessment and to meet its needs by undertaking a Site Appraisal Study in 2017 and producing an options paper thereafter.  The council and RBKC will explore all available options in meeting the objectives of national  
policy in order to identify a National Planning Policy Framework compliant supply of sites during the course of 2018, if not earlier. Sites identified will be assessed against the agreed  
methodology with RBKC, in accordance with the NPPF and the PPTS. Any subsequent planning applications should be considered against the criteria set out in the PPTS along with other relevant planning policies and guidance.  
39  Communities and Local Government, Planning Policies for Traveller Sites, August 2015 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
110 
POLICY HO11 
DETAILED RESIDENTIAL STANDARDS  
The council will ensure that the design and quality of all new housing, including new 
build, conversions and change of use, is of a high standard and that developments  provide housing that will meet the needs of future occupants and respect the principles of good neighbourliness.  
To achieve a high standard of design, the following considerations will be taken into account:   
a
. floor areas and room sizes in new build dwellings, conversions and changes of use, including meeti
ng ‘Nationally Described Space Standards; 
b. accessibility for disabled people;  
c. amenity and green garden space provision;  
d. a safe and secure environment;  
e. vehicle and cycle parking;  
f. flood protection measures and attenuation of surface water run off;  
g. sustainable energy measures that provide resilience to climate change impacts;  
h. use of durable construction materials to construct low maintenance dwellings with low envir
onmental impacts;  
i. provision of waste and recycling storage facilities;  
j. noise insulation and layout to minimise noise nuisance between dwellings; and  
k. protection of existing residential amenities, including issues such as loss of daylight, sunlight, priva
cy and outlook.  
Proposals for extensions will be considered acceptable where it can be demonstrated  
that ther
e is no detrimental impact on: 
• privacy enjoyed by neighbours in adjoining properties;  
• daylight and sunlight to rooms in adjoining properties;  
• outlook from windows in adjoining properties; and  
• openness between properties.  
The council has prepared a Planning Guidance SPD that provides further guidance on these and oth
er residential amenity issues referred to in this Local Plan.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 111 MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
Justification  
6.74 Once the principle of residential development has been established through land use policies, 
ther
e is a need to assess planning applications against detailed standards to ensure that a 
development is of high quality, well designed, accessible and that it will not be detrimental to the amenities of residents in the surrounding area, including loss of daylight, sunlight and privacy for existing residents. These standards are often subject to on-site judgement, but a departure from the standards needs to be justified by the circumstances of a particular case.  
6.75 It is important for new housing to meet standards on matters such as minimum dwelling and room s
ize and on the amount of amenity space. The government is proposing to introduce a 
Nationally Described Space Standard which as a minimum new dwellings in the borough will  
be expected to meet. Where changes to the existing stock are proposed, including basement accommodation, they should also be fit for purpose. It will be easier for new housing to  
meet size and other quality control criteria, but a level of flexibility is appropriate to take  
into account on-site circumstances. This is even more so with conversions and change of  
use, where adaptation of existing stock means that it is difficult to meet similar standards  
as for new build. The council has adopted detailed residential standards in the Planning  
Guidance SPD. The detailed guidance in this SPD will take account of the London Plan (2016)  
and the Mayor of London’s Housing SPG
40 which includes detailed standards for housing 
that have been gathered from a number of sources, for example Lifetime Homes, Lifetime Neighbourhoods and Secured by Design.  
 
6.76 It is always necessary for developments to take into account the residential amenity of  
nei
ghbours and the impact on the environment. However, this is especially important in a 
densely built borough such as Hammersmith and Fulham where developments are often juxtaposed with their neighbours. In particular, changes to terraced properties, including extensions and roof terraces, can impact on neighbours if not carefully designed, for  example, through overlooking and visual intrusion, and can also impact upon flooding,  
for example through surface water run off, if not consistently managed under sound environmental principles.  
40 Mayor of London’s Housing Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) – March 2016 
www.lbhf.gov.uk MEETING HOUSING NEEDS AND ASPIRATIONS 
112 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 SECTION 7 
LOCAL ECONOMY 
AND EMPLOYMENT  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 LOCAL ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT 
114 
LOCAL ECONOMY  
AND EMPLOYMENT 
POLICY E1 
PROVIDING FOR A RANGE OF EMPLOYMENT USES  
The council will support proposals including mixed use schemes for new employment 
uses, especially those that recognise the existing strengths in the borough in creative  industries, health services, bio-medical and other research based industries, such as those at Imperial College in Shepherd’s Bush.  
The council will also support the retention, enhancement, and intensification of  
exist
ing employment uses. It will require flexible and affordable space suitable for 
small and medium enterprises in large new business developments, unless justified 
by the type and nature of the proposal and subject to viability. When considering  new employment floorspace or the extension of existing floorspace the council will 
also take into account:  
 
a. whether the scale and nature of the development is appropriate, having regard in particular 
to loc
al impact, the nature of the surrounding area, and public transport accessibility;  
b. impact upon small and medium sized businesses that support the local community;  
c. scale and nature of employment opportunities generated in the new development;  
d. whether there will be displacement of other uses such as community facilities or housing; and  
e. the Hammersmith and Fulham Economic Growth  Plan and the council economic strategies.  
The borough’s three town centres and the White City and Earl’s Court and West Kensington  
Oppor
tunity Areas will be the preferred locations for new office development above 2,500m2. 
Proposals outside of these areas for large new office development (above 2,500m2) will generally 
be discouraged unless it can be demonstrated that provision cannot be provided within the town centres or the White City and Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Areas. 
Justification  
7.1 The borough has many positive attributes which support economic development, over the years
, the borough has proved to be an attractive location for many multi-national companies,  
including the BBC and Earls Court and Olympia Group, and the continued presence of large businesses is welcome because of their contribution to the local economy and in providing  jobs and opportunities to residents. However, as well as being favoured by major companies,  
often located in the town centres or regeneration areas, the strength of the local economy is also buoyed by the very many local office and industrial businesses which are scattered throughout the borough and often provide services direct to residents or to other businesses   
in the borough. This range of employment uses goes across the scope of employment land uses,  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  LOCAL ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT 
115 
including some sui generis uses (as defined in the glossary). The Council’s Employment  
Study41 identified a number of sub-markets within the borough, including a lot of smaller 
businesses in SW6 in the Putney Bridge and Parsons Green and and Peterborough Road sub 
markets. Creative industries such as TV and music companies are a particular strength, which the council is keen to encourage, and there is also the opportunity to build on the presence  of Hammersmith Hospital/Imperial College and Charing Cross Hospital by encouraging bio-medical and other related companies. In addition, the council will use its economic strength  to encourage local business when procuring and hiring contractors. The Council’s Economic  Growth Plan and economic strategies provides further details of these and other economic  development initiatives. 
7.2 Many of the borough
 ’s businesses are small or medium sized and there is a demand for 
accommodation from such enterprises42. Figures show that between August 2014 and  
August 2015, 62% of requirements were for businesses between 93 and 465m2. Therefore,   
it is important that new and refurbished business developments as well as mixed use schemes provide accommodation that can meet the needs of a variety of activities, including start  
up businesses; are flexibly designed to meet a variety of types and sizes of businesses, and adaptable to changes in working practices in the future, and the provision of affordable business units, so that the rich mix of businesses in the borough can continue. In addition, the replacement of existing, well used small business premises will be sought in redevelopment schemes.  
 
7.3 As there is a large proportion of small to medium sized enterprises in the borough, the council is keen to p
rovide a wide range of workspace to support existing and new businesses as well  
as respond to the changing behaviours of doing business. The overall loss in B1 land use across the borough has resulted in increased rents. A significant loss of B1 office space has been from smaller buildings – 74% of permitted development has been from the conversion of office  
buildings below 100 sq m to residential use. The council is therefore keen to provide a range of workspaces in terms of size, cost and leasing arrangements.  
 
 
7.4 Applications for new business development schemes will be expected to provide affordable  
workspa
ce. For example, flexible leasing arrangements, cross subsidised rent through S106 
agreements, reduced rent arrangements, provide co-hubs or start up space. The council will  
consider the requirement for affordable workspace in regard to viability and the impact it could have upon delivery.  
7.5  Successful working of affordable workspace will require an understanding of the occupant and the type of spa
ce required. Therefore, the council will expect developers to engage with workspace 
providers in order to manage the space and/or to identify the future occupants of the space.  
7.6 The council will ensure that its own stock of business premises continues to meet the needs of the loca
l economy, and it will support new local enterprise partnerships and encourage local 
credit union finance.  
41 Employment Study Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham 2016  
42 See the Council’s Employment Study – February 2016 
www.lbh
f.gov.uk  
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
 LOCAL ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT 
116 
7.7 The council wants to strengthen the economic base of the borough, ensure there is sufficient  
land a
nd floorspace to meet the economic growth requirements and is well located in relation  
to other amenities and transport infrastructure to serve the requirements of the development.  
The London Office Policy Review 2014 projected a likely requirement of an additional 290,000m2 
(gross) of office floorspace within the borough to 2036. However, the council’s Employment  
Study predicts a higher need of between 383,000 and 511,000m2 based on 1 person per 9m2.  
7.8 Where applications include replacement employment uses on existing employment sites,  
the r
eplacement employment uses should not be of a lesser quality than at present. Where 
possible, the proposed scheme should be of a higher quality and seek to meet the needs of   
the employer. The replacement employment uses should not affect the long-term functioning 
of the employer in terms of either the proposed scale and/or location of the employment use on the site.  
POLICY E2 
LAND AND PREMISES FOR EMPLOYMENT USES  
The council will require the retention of land and premises capable of providing 
continued accommodation for employment or local services. Permission will only be granted for a change where:   
1. continued use would adversely impact on residential areas; or 
2. an alternative use would give a demonstrably greater benefit that could not be provided on 
ano
ther site; or  
3. it can be evidenced that the property is no longer required for employment purposes.  
Where the loss of employment use is proposed in line with sub para.3 above, 
the co
uncil will have regard to:  
• the suitability of the site or premises for continued employment use with or without adaptation;  
• evidence of unsuccessful marketing over a period of at least 12 months;  
• the need to avoid adverse impact on established clusters of employment use; and  
• the need to ensure a sufficient stock of premises and sites to meet local need for a  range of types of employment uses, including small and medium sized enterprises, in appropriate locations.  
The mixed use enhancement of employment sites will be considered acceptable where these are und
erutilised, subject to the satisfactory retention or replacement of employment uses in the 
scheme where this continues to be appropriate.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 LOCAL ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT 
117 
Justification  
7.9 Employment use is defined as all Class B Uses and similar uses that are classified as sui generis 
(To
wn and Country (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended)).  
7.10 Notwithstanding the council’s desire to protect valuable sites and promote economic   
gro
wth in sustainable locations, there has been a loss of B class stock in the borough. The 
Council’s Employment Study estimates a loss of 149,000m2 since 2012, partly as a result of  
permitted development and partly through planning permission. In order to ensure that  
future loss is managed effectively, the council will apply a criteria based approach to assessing change of use and redevelopment planning applications based on site characteristics and market demand.  
7.11 In general, where there is a planning application for a site or building for change of use out of  
emplo
yment, the council will require supporting evidence. When determining applications for 
an alternative or change of use, the council will give consideration to any extensive, on-going  
issues with neighbouring uses, and the existing and future impact upon neighbouring amenity. Where there is a long-standing history between the current use and established residential areas, evidence will be required to identify whether any measures have been taken by either party to manage the particular concern and how well they have performed.  
7.12 Applications for an alternative use will be expected to demonstrate the manner in which the 
alt
ernative use provides a demonstrably greater benefit than the current use. The following 
considerations may apply, but is not limited to, the amount of full time equivalent jobs  
generated against the current use, the types of employment and how it accords with the H&F Economic Development Strategy. Applicants will also be expected to include details on alternative sites, the search process and how the current site does not fulfil its current or  
future purposes.  
7.13 The council adopts the GLA’s Agent of Change principle, where the applicant is expected to  
mit
igate their development in order to accommodate the existing, surrounding development. 
This therefore puts the onus on new development and should contribute to the protection of  
employment uses in the borough.  
7.14 In respect of demonstrating that a property is no longer required for employment use, a rea
sonable marketing exercise will include continuous marketing generally over a period of at  
least 12 months with at least two recognised commercial agents. Evidence of this marketing will be required to be submitted along with the two agents’ views as to why the property is  
not letting. The council will expect this marketing to be at prices similar to that pertaining in  
the local area for similar premises. 
7.15 The loss of employment use may also be permitted where continued use of a site or building  
whe
re evidence is provided to show that it is no longer viable by virtue of poor location or site 
characteristics. In addition, where accommodation is poorly suited to meet the requirements  
of modern occupiers and where the cost of modernisation cannot be justified, the council may grant change of use. Robust evidence will be required to support change of use on this  
basis in the absence of marketing information.  
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
    
 
  LOCAL ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT 
118 
7.16 The council will also consider the impact of any proposed loss of employment use on existing  
emplo
yment areas and the provision of a satisfactory range of type of employment uses. 
The council will have regard to regular monitoring undertaken by itself and the Mayor of  
London and to supplementary planning guidance to the London Plan. The London Plan  
identifies White City as an area where transfer of industrial and warehousing land to other 
uses should be “restricted (with exceptional planned release)”. Applications for change of use of industrial and warehousing (Use Classes B1(c), B2 and B8) sites and premises will be subject to consideration of this classification. The council also wishes to ensure that the future of its preferred office location at Hammersmith town centre continues to offer a range of modern office facilities and is not adversely affected by a loss of office uses. Where premises are part  
of a complex of employment uses, regard will be taken of the impact of the introduction of   
an alternative use on the satisfactory functioning of the employment cluster. 
7.17 There may be some sites in employment use that are capable of more intensive use to  
acc
ommodate additional uses, particularly residential. Where this is appropriate, the council 
will seek to ensure that floorspace is retained within mixed use schemes for employment  
uses for which there is a demonstrable need. This will include adequate replacement accommodation for small businesses.  
POLICY E3 
PROVISION FOR VISITOR  ACCOMMODATION AND FACILITIES  
Permission will be granted for new visito r accommodation and facilities or the 
extension of existing facilities within the three town centres, the Earl’s Court and 
West Kensington and White City Opportunity Areas subject to:   
• the development being well located in relation to public transport;  
•the development and any associated uses not having a detrimental impact on the local area;    
• no loss of priority uses such as permanent housing;  
• provision of adequate off street servicing and pick up points for the type of facility proposed;  
• at least 10% of hotel bedrooms designed as wheelchair accessible;  
• the facility being of a high standard of design; and  
• the scheme adding to the variety and quality of visitor accommodation available locally. 
Outside of the identified areas, the following will be considered appropriate, subj
ect to meeting the above criteria:   
• small scale hotels; and  
• visitor accommodation related to major visitor attractions of sub-regional or greater significance in accordance with the provisions of London Plan.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 LOCAL ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT 
119 
Justification  
7.18 The London Plan (2016) seeks 40,000 additional hotel bedrooms by 2036 located primarily 
in Lo
ndon’s town centres and opportunity areas. It also seeks a greater dispersal of  
accommodation outside London’s central area. An improvement in the range and quality of  
provision is also encouraged, as well as accommodation that meets the needs of businesses.  
7.19  In recent years a number of additional hotels have been built and there are some permitted add
itional hotel rooms to be completed. The existing and committed stock is considered  
adequate to meet the borough’s share of anticipated growth within London within the next  
few years. Any further proposals for new hotels will be directed to the three town centres or  
the identified opportunity/regeneration areas in line with London Plan policy (2016). These areas are considered the most appropriate to accommodate visitor accommodation with   
the least impact and where there is the availability of complementary town centre uses.  Small hotel schemes, normally not in excess of 50 bedrooms, will be considered in other areas of the borough where the scale is appropriate to public transport accessibility and surrounding uses. In many areas, a scale of less than 50 bedrooms is more likely to be appropriate.  
Proposals for extensions of existing hotels will be considered having regard to the criteria set out in Policy E3 subject to the primary focus of new visitor accommodation to be the town centres and opportunity/regeneration areas identified in the policy.  
7.20 The council will also seek adherence to the London Plan (2016) requirements of at least 10% whe
elchair accessible bedrooms and submission of an Accessibility Management Plan.  
POLICY E4 
LOCAL EMPLOYMENT, TRAINING AND  SKILLS DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVES 
The council will require the provision of appropriate employment and training 
initiatives for local people of all abilities in the construction of major developments  and in larger employment generating developments, including visitor accommodation and facilities, when these are completed. Local businesses will be encouraged to  adopt the London Living Wage. 
Justification  
7.21 The borough currently faces real socio-economic difficulties, including acute affordable  
hou
sing need and high levels of deprivation. Continued economic growth in the borough will  
require a growing work force. These jobs will not go to unemployed residents in the borough unless they have the necessary qualifications and skills. Where major developments come forward that do not employ and/or train local people in their construction/operation, they will  
aggravate this situation. This is because local unemployed people will not be moving into the local labour market, and the growth in jobs related to those developments will have to be met by workers from outside the local area. This will aggravate existing circumstances by increasing  
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 LOCAL ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT 
120 
pressure on the already overstretched supply of housing, and on local transport infrastructure. 
It will also fail to address the social inequalities across the borough. Accordingly, in order for  major developments to be sustainable, particularly having regard to the social and economic  strands of sustainability, they must comply with the policy. 
7.22 A priority of the council is to understand and address skills shortages and it will negotiate Secti
on 106 planning obligations with developers proposing large scale employment generating  
activity (usually over 200 jobs), including visitor accommodation and facilities, skills training, work  
placements, apprenticeships and targeted local recruitment campaigns in order to make best use  
of the added value of employing local labour. Initiatives should be brought forward through: 
i.  production of a local labour, skills and employment strategy; 
ii. an employment training and education action plan; and  
iii. a local business charter. 
7.23 There are many agencies involved in training, such as the Ealing Hammersmith & West London  
Colle
ge (EHWLC) and Job Centre Plus (JCP) and the voluntary & community sector (VCS),  
but the council has a central role in ensuring that learning and skills provision for adults in  
Hammersmith and Fulham is delivered in a coherent and effective way. 
7.24 The council will encourage developers to work in partnership with the Council’s Economic  
Develo
pment Team to maximise job opportunities for local people including: employment, 
training, apprenticeship opportunities, outreach programmes including schools to raise  
aspirations and awareness of job opportunities, including during construction phases. In  
doing so, the council will ask them to commit to programmes to enhance business and area 
competitiveness as well as maximising opportunities for local entrepreneurship and enterprise. This will be secured through associated S106 agreements as part of larger developments  
including those within the opportunity/regeneration areas. Further guidance is available in the regeneration area policies and the supporting SPDs for the opportunity/regeneration areas whilst the Economic Development Plan 2016-2019 sets out priorities for the early years of the Local Plan. The council will also encourage the London Living Wage which it believes is good for businesses, good for the individual and good for society.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 j \ 
SECTION 8 
TOWN AND  
LOCAL CENTRES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   require a retail impact assessment for out of centre retail proposals which are in excess 
of 300m2 (gross); TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
122 
TOWN AND  
LOCAL CENTRES 
POLICY TLC1 
HIERARCHY OF TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
The council will work with the Mayor of London and other stakeholders, such as 
Business Improvement Districts, to enhance the vitality and viability of the borough’s hierarchy of three town centres, 5 key local centres, 15 neighbourhood parades and  6 satellite parades (see Appendix 2 and Map 5 for details). In particular the council will: 
a. support the regeneration of the town centres for a mix of town centre uses, including 
resi
dential development on appropriate sites; 
b. maintain the predominant retail function of primary shopping areas;  
c. support the night time economy in town centres;  
d. support the conversion or redevelopment of unused or underused space above ground  floor un
its for new residential accommodation (subject to the requirements of other  
relevant policies); 
e. seek a mix of shop sizes and types, with independent as well as national traders, that are 
acce
ssible to local residents, workers and visitors; 
f. ensure that new developments for town centre uses are appropriately located, are of an  
accep
table scale, and do not negatively impact on the existing hierarchy, in accordance with 
national and regional policy and local need (see Table 3);  
g.  
h. require a sequential test for out of centre retail development proposals in accordance with 
the NPPF;  
i
. promote the provision of shopmobility schemes; 
j. safeguard local shops and other local services within local centres to meet local need;  
k. support and protect local markets and clusters of specialist shopping; and  
l. negotiate planning obligations where appropriate, feasible and viable to mitigate the loss of, and/
or secure or support, affordable retail space to encourage small or independent traders. 
 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
123 
Map 5  Shopping Hierarchy  
• 
• 
• 
• • 
• •• • • 
• 
• 
• • • • 
• 
• • Satellite Parades 
• Neighbourhood Parades 
• Key Local Centres 
OPDC Area • • • • • • • • Town Centres 
Areas not within 400m of a centre 
• 
• 
• •• • • • 
© Crown copyright and database rights. 
2017 Licence No. LA100019223 
• 
www.lbhf.gov.uk TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
124 
Justification  
8.1 The council wants to encourage the regeneration of Hammersmith and Fulham’s town centres 
to i
mprove their viability and vitality as well as sustain a network of supporting smaller centres. 
It is aware that, in the context of economic, demographics, retail supply and social changes,  
some centres will require substantial extra retail space and others will need to plan for a more  
static and in some cases possible decline in retail space. A key aim in relation to the town centre and local centre hierarchy is to ensure that there is sufficient capacity for new retail  
floorspace in line with identified need and that surplus capacity does not lie vacant. The council will encourage other uses where appropriate, including health and leisure facilities. It is also important to ensure that there are supporting complementary facilities in towns, including arts, culture and entertainment. 
8.2 Regional studies prepared by Experian on behalf of the Mayor of London  provide a range of  
qua
ntitative outputs which the council will consider when responding to retail proposals. The 
most recent council retail study  has identified future estimated retail need in the borough and 
spe
cifically within the borough’s three town centres up to 2031 as set in Table 3 below: 4443
Table 3  Estimated Retail Need up to 2031  
Borough-wide  
(Sq m gross) Hammersmith  
(Sq m gross
) Fulham   
(Sq m gross
)  Shepherds  
Bush 
(Sq m gross
) 
Comparison 35,700 11,100 4,300 
Convenience * 3,400 2,000 3,600 
*Convenience figures based on supermarket sales densities 
(So
urce: Hammersmith and Fulham Retail Needs Study 2016)   
 
 
 13,900 
- 900 
8.3 The council aims to meet future need primarily within the established shopping hierarchy so as  
to m
aximise opportunities to obtain goods, services, jobs and leisure activities in places that are  
convenient to where people live and work. A number of development sites have been identified  
for future retail growth in the town centres, but there will be some new provision to support growth in the identified regeneration areas, particularly the White City Opportunity Area and the Earls Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area. The Hammersmith and Fulham retail  
needs study  estimates are based on London Plan (2016)  population growth projections  
and t
he estimates will need to be considered in the light of the potential local growth in  
regeneration areas. 46 45
43  Consumer Expenditure and Comparison Goods Retail Floorspace Need in London, Experian – October 2013 
44  Hammersmith and Fulham Retail Needs Study 2016  
45  Hammersmith and Fulham Retail Needs Study 2016 
46  Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
125 
8.4 The council’s policies will assist in ensuring a good range of convenient and accessible local 
fac
ilities and services for borough residents, which is an important part of what makes a decent  
neighbourhood. The policies will also discourage the further increase of businesses such as  
pay day loan shops, betting shops, pawnbrokers and hot food takeaways which are already well represented. Supporting policies will seek a range of shopping and other facilities in these centres and where development takes place, it may be appropriate to seek affordable space and agreements with developers so that a proportion of space can be offered to independent small retailers. In town centres, the council will encourage uses that contribute to the night time economy. 
8.5 A key council priority is to capture the regenerative benefits of Westfield in the original  
Shep
herds Bush town centre. Planning permission was granted in April 2014 as part of a 
mixed use scheme for Westfield to extend the town centre retail and leisure offer to the north of Westfield towards the Hammersmith and City Line Viaduct. The council considers that  
these uses will assist in regenerating the town centre as well as achieving many additional  
objectives for the White City Opportunity Area. Other key proposals for Shepherds Bush include strengthening the western part of the town centre through the regeneration of the Shepherds Bush Market as well as maintaining the W12 shopping centre as an important retail anchor.  
These initiatives will help strengthen the convenience offer in Shepherds Bush and assist in  
meeting local needs as well as enhance Shepherd’s Bush’s function as a metropolitan centre. 
8.6 Hammersmith will continue to be a major town centre and the council will support dev
elopment that improves the vitality and viability of the centre and strengthens its role  
as a centre for offices, local government and for arts, culture, leisure and services as well  
as shopping. Key sites in meeting this objective, as well as providing new housing are: the Town Hall and adjacent land in Nigel Playfair Avenue and King Street, Kings Mall car park, and the remaining part of the Hammersmith Island Site currently occupied by the temporary bus station. The proposed “Hammersmith Flyunder” (see Strategic Policy for Hammersmith Regeneration Area) could potentially release existing highways land for redevelopment which could significantly improve the town centre’s offer. 
8.7 Fulham Town Centre will be supported to re-establish its historic role in the locality and  
mai
ntain its status as a major town centre in the London Plan (2016). The Local Plan policies  
will seek to provide further shopping and leisure uses at an appropriate scale to meet locally generated needs. Regeneration in this locality should link with the regeneration of the Earls  
Court/West Kensington Opportunity Area. 
8.8 In key local centres, the aim is to ensure a greater variety of uses than in neighbourhood para
des. However, in both types of centre the council’s policies will seek to retain a 
predominance of shopping over other uses. These centres can help contribute towards the identified estimated need for further low and mid ranking comparison and convenience retail  
floorspace to meet the needs of the local population. The council will work with its partners  
to try to coordinate service provision based on these centres. The council will consider the designation of further local centres or parades within the WCOA and ECWK Opportunity Areas if this is required to meet the needs of the new development and is supported by capacity  
studies (see also policies for these individual areas). 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
126 
8.9  Those centres that adjoin or are in close proximity to town centres are known as satellite 
para
des. The purpose of these parades is to provide local services, but they also provide 
opportunities for a variety of uses that will support the nearby town centres. 
8.10 In shopping parades, other than those identified in the hierarchy, particularly where shops and p
remises have been vacant for a long time, there will be more limited protection of  
shopping facilities, and possible alternative uses could include small offices, health facilities and A class uses other than those falling within class A1. These alternative uses would need to be compatible with adjoining uses and therefore in some more residential locations, uses such as  
restaurants, pubs and bars may not be appropriate. 
8.11 Prime retail frontages are where retail development is concentrated and generally comprise the m
ain component of primary shopping areas in town centres. In all the centres and 
shopping areas there will be planning controls to maintain appropriate levels of retailing,  local services and other uses. 
8.12 In addition to the hierarchy described above, there is one superstore in Sands End,   
ano
ther on Shepherds Bush Road and a small number of shed based retailers, mainly at  
Wandsworth Bridge. There continues to be pressure for new supermarkets of different sizes  to be established throughout the borough, both in and outside centres included in the hierarchy. Whilst small supermarkets may expand the choice in local shopping centres, large stores can have potential for adverse impacts on town or local centres and increase local traffic. In order to ensure that smaller foodstores that compete directly with local centres are assessed, the council has set a local threshold for retail impact assessments of 300m
2 gross.  
Assessments of impact should be proportionate to the development proposed and it will be necessary for applicants to agree the scope of any assessment at an early stage of any pre-application engagement. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
  the nature and characteristics of the proposed use are complementary to the shopping frontage; TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
127 
POLICY TLC2 
TOWN CENTRES 
In the designated town centres (as shown on the Policies Map and defined in Table 4), 
changes from A class use at street level will be permitted for alternative uses which can be shown to be complementary to the shopping frontage, maintain or increase the vitality and viability of the town centre and do not have an adverse impact on the local area. In particular, permission for changes of use will be considered on the following basis:  
1. no more than 40% of the length of the prime retail frontage as a whole will be permitted to  
chan
ge to non-class A1 uses; 
2. additional A4 and A5 uses (pubs, bars and takeaways), betting shops, pay day loan shops,  
amus
ement centres, mini cab offices and residential uses will not be permitted on the ground 
floor of the prime retail frontages; 
3.  
4. the proposed use contributes to the function of the centre in terms of the size of the unit, the le
ngth of its frontage and the location of the unit within the centre;   
5. planning conditions will be imposed in any permission for such changes of use to secure  
prov
ision of a shop style fascia, and window display at street level, and to control the hours 
of opening of class A3-A5 uses; and  
6. consent will not be granted for residential use within the ground floor frontage.  
In non prime retail frontages, criteria 3-6 above will apply. In all calculations of the proportion   
of th
e frontage in class A1, the lawful use and unimplemented extant permissions for changes of  
use will be taken into account. 
Justification 
8.13 In respect of the shopping frontages, the council has defined prime and non-prime retail  
front
ages in order to assist in safeguarding and managing the distribution of retail uses  
and related facilities and services within the three town centres. In addition, it is considered  
appropriate to continue the approach of controlling the amount of class A1 retail and  non-A1 businesses by limiting the amount of frontage that can be in non-retail uses. This has  
proved to be a workable management tool in the past and one that allows some flexibility   
for change of use within the frontages and the achievement of a good mix of uses. As some malls are subject to specific planning consents that permit changes within Use Class A, the quota policies will not apply to these frontages. The council will use retail survey data, the lawful use and unimplemented extant permissions to help calculate the length of frontage  
and the proportion of frontage in A1 use. The council’s retail survey data is available on the council website. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
128 
Table 4  Shopping frontages by Town Centre 
Town Centre Frontage 
Shepherds Bush 
Hammersmith Centre 
Fulham Centre Uxbridge Road: North Side – Nos. 54-202  
South S
ide – Shepherds Bush (West 12) Centre 
King Street: North Side – Between No.2. and No. 94, including 
King
s Mall, South Side – Nos. 1-131. 
Hammersmith Broadway: Broadway Centre (excluding Queen Caroline Street frontage) – subject to Planning Permission (31.3.89) which permits A1 and A3 uses 
North End Road: West Side Nos. 276-406 
East
 Side Nos. 373-471 
Jerdan Place: North Side Nos. 1-19a; South Side Nos. 2-24 Fulham Road: North Side 480 and 498-504 
8.14 For a town centre to operate successfully, it is necessary for shops to group together. Intrusion 
of no
n-retail uses on too large a scale can inhibit this process, reducing the attractiveness of  
a centre and damaging its trading position. Non-retail uses for these purposes are defined to  
include all uses other than those included within class A1 of the Use Classes Order 1987.  
8.15 Some non-retail uses, such as a bank, restaurant or pub, are complementary to the town cent
res’ primary shopping function because they may provide a vital local service, are essential 
to the operation of the shops, or are heavily used by shoppers. However, the retail function  
will be adversely affected if the mix of uses is affected by too great a loss of shops, and by  
making comparison shopping more difficult through dispersal of those which remain. 
8.16 The quota is intended to permit a variety of uses whilst protecting the predominance of  
reta
il in prime retail frontages. However, the growth in class A3, A4 and A5 uses and the 
rationalisation of many A2 financial uses has led to some frontages where frontage is  
predominantly A3-A5 uses and/or where there is a high concentration of betting shops and pay day loan shops. There are cumulative effects arising from the clustering of these uses, such as “dead frontages” at certain times of the day and adverse impacts on residential amenity outside normal shopping hours. 
8.17 In certain cases, where there is clear evidence that particular types of use will have serious effec
ts on residential amenity or the environment, the council will consider imposing conditions 
that restrict future changes of use which the Use Classes Order would otherwise allow. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
  
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
129 
8.18  The clustering of non-retail uses may create dead frontages because of a lack of interesting 
wind
ow displays and for this reason all premises in the prime retail frontage should provide 
appropriate window displays. In addition, the avoidance of blank frontages, such as, office  
or residential uses can be a major contribution to retaining pedestrian activity, retaining commercial life in the area, and to crime prevention. Although new ground floor residential use will not be permitted in the prime retail frontages, access to residential upper floors will  
be encouraged. 
8.19  The non-prime retail frontages in the town centres have an important function. They provide loca
tions for more specialist retailers, businesses that cannot afford prime location rents 
but sell goods appropriate to the town centre, such as activities in the A2, A3, A4 and A5  
use classes, and health and other services. It is desirable, therefore, to maintain the stock of premises suitable for these uses in order to maintain the vitality and viability of the town centres and the range of facilities available. It will normally not be appropriate to allow changes to other uses, including residential at ground floor level, that do not contribute to the vitality of the shopping frontages or the town centre as a whole and which reduce the stock of accommodation for uses that do have this role. In addition, in respect of betting shops and pay day loan shops, it is important that too many do not concentrate in any area and detract  
from the vitality and viability of the centres. 
POLICY TLC3 
LOCAL CENTRES 
The council has designated key local centres, neighbourhood parades and satellite 
parades to provide accessible shopping and service facilities to meet local needs  (see Policies Map and Appendix 2). In these centres, changes of use will be permitted subject to the proposed use being shown to be complementary to the function of the centre, enhancing the centre’s viability and vitality and not having an adverse impact  on the local area and where it meets the quotas set out below: 
• Neighbourhood Parades: no more than 40% of the neighbourhood parade frontage as a whole will be permitted to change to non-class A1 uses.  
• Key Local Centres: no more than 50% of the length of the key local centre frontage as a whole will be permitted to change to non-class A1 uses. 
• Satellite Parades: no more than 60% of the satellite parade frontage as a whole will be permitted to change to non-class A1 uses. 
Where a proposal does not meet the quotas set out above and where the premises have
 been vacant for at least 1 year with evidence of marketing, the council may 
consider granting permission taking into account other factors such as: 
• the contribution the unit makes to the function of the centre in terms of the size of the unit   
and the length of its frontage; 
Continued over 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
  
 
 
 
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
130 
• the nature and characteristics of the proposed use and evidence of need; 
• the location of the unit within the centre; and 
• the shop front appearance. 
In all calculations of the proportion of the frontage of street blocks in class A1 and non-A1   
use
s, the lawful use and unimplemented extant permissions for changes of use will be taken 
into account.   
Consent will not be granted for any ground floor residential frontages, however residential may be 
app
ropriate at the rear of premises, subject to satisfactory evidence that neither shopping policy  
nor the long term viability of the retail unit will be prejudiced. 
Justification 
8.20 Although the council recognises that non-retail uses can contribute to the vitality and viability  
of lo
wer tier centres, it also recognises that too many non-retail uses can undermine the 
retail base of the centre and can have a detrimental effect on the environment and nearby  
residents, for example through parking pressures, ambient noise levels and smells from  
cooking food. The extent to which non-retail pressures threaten the existing function of  
individual centres varies, with some being more capable of accommodating change than  
others. The council will use retail survey data, the lawful use and unimplemented extant  
permissions to help calculate the length of frontage and the proportion of frontage in A1 use.  
The council’s retail survey data is available on the council’s website. 
8.21 The additional non-quota criteria such as vacancy and marketing evidence, to be used in  
asse
ssing other uses, will allow flexibility in the consideration of uses within the centres. Class 
A3, A4 and A5 uses may still be limited to ensure that shopping parades retain their shopping function for the local community, but other uses such as community services or small businesses could be permitted.  
8.22 Allowing non class A1 uses within local centres, neighbourhood parades and satellite parades,  
wil
l add to the diversity of the centres. Because key local centres and satellite parades are 
larger and offer a greater range of services than neighbourhood parades, it is appropriate that a greater range of non-class A1 uses are allowed in these centres. Where proposals are contrary to the quotas, the council will consider the criteria set out in the policy, such  
as nature and characteristics of the use and evidence of need, to see if there is a case for approval. Residential use will not be permitted on ground floor frontages because this  
will impact upon the function of the centres. However, there may be circumstances where shopping and service use floorspace at the rear of a premises is surplus to requirements. In  
these situations, residential may be appropriate, but the council will require evidence that  
neither its shopping policies nor the long term viability of the retail unit will be prejudiced. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018   
 
  
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
131 
POLICY TLC4 
SMALL NON DESIGNATED PARADES,  CLUSTERS AND CORNER SHOPS 
Outside town centres, key local centres, neighbourhood parades and satellite parades, 
the council will seek to retain shops and other local services to meet local needs. Residential use and changes to other non class A uses will be permitted, except where this will result in a demonstrable shortage of class A1 uses in the locality.  
In assessing an application in a non design ated parade or cluster for a change of use 
from a class A1
 use to any other use, the council will take into account: 
a. the proximity and the range of shops in the locality to meet local needs (where town centres, key l
ocal centres, protected parades and satellite parades are not within 400 metres);  
b. the length of time that the application premises may have been vacant and the marketing of  
the p
remises; and 
c. the number of existing non-A1 uses that may adversely impact on the quality of the parade  
or clus
ter. 
Corner shops are important for meeting local needs and will be protected for continued retail use (cl
ass A1). Changes of use of corner shops from retail use will not be permitted where there is a 
shortage of alternative shopping (where town centres, key local centres, protected parades and satellite parades and non-designated parades and clusters are not within 400 metres). 
In all calculations of the proportion of the frontage of street blocks in Class A1 and non-A1 uses, 
the c
ouncil will take into account the lawful use and unimplemented extant planning permissions 
for changes of use. 
Justification 
8.23 A substantial amount of the borough’s retail floorspace is located outside of the Local Plan  
ret
ail hierarchy. These un-designated retail premises can provide important goods and  
services for local residents and the council does not wish to see a significant reduction in   
the stock of such premises. The quotas will normally be applied to the whole non designated  
parade or cluster, although the council may also take into account any shopping provision in  
nearby locations. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
   
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
132 
POLICY TLC5 
MANAGING THE IMPACT OF FOOD,  DRINK AND ENTERTAINMENT USES 
Planning permissions for use class A3, A4 and A5 food and drink establishments as 
well as arts, culture, entertainment and leisure uses will be subject to conditions controlling hours of operation, as follows: 
a. except in predominantly commercial areas, such as parts of town centres – premises shall not 
be open t
o customers later than the hour of 23:00; and 
b. within predominantly commercial areas, such as parts of town centres – premises shall not be 
open t
o customers later than the hour of 24:00. 
Extended opening may be permitted where: 
• the activities would not be likely to cause impact especially on local residents, and that, if there is potential to cause adverse impact, appropriate measures will be put in place to prevent it; and 
• there will not be any increase in the cumulative impact from these or similar activities, on an  
adjacent residential area; and 
• there is a high level of public transport accessibility to and from the premises at appropriate times; and 
• the activity will not be likely to lead to a demonstrable increase in car parking demand in  
surrounding residential streets and roads forming part of the Strategic London Road Network or the London Bus Priority Network.  
In addition, subject to the location of the proposals, the council will consider the type of activities  
app
ropriate to the class A3, A4 and A5 premises, and apply conditions on uses where these  
are appropriate. 
Where a use will impact on local amenity, the council may also set an appropriate start time.  
Justification  
8.24 Hammersmith and Fulham has an extensive evening and night time economy which is  
cent
red in the three town centres. The council wishes to encourage this activity, and further 
opportunities to enhance the night time economy in the regeneration areas as part of mixed 
use developments. Activities such as restaurants, bars and pubs, cinemas and theatres, add variety and vitality to the town centres and, together with facilities in local centres, also provide services for the local community and visitors to the borough. In addition, these uses can provide important employment and economic development opportunities for the community. However, some of the uses and activities associated with this economy can, if not  
properly managed, detract from creating a high quality residential environment. In particular, the traffic and car parking generated, particularly in the evening and anti-social behaviour associated with some licensed premises can cause considerable problems for local residents. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   the level of public transport accessibility for customers either arriving or leaving the premises  
and the likely means of public or private transport that will be used by customers; and TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
133 
The appearance of ventilation ducts, and the noise and smell generated by restaurants, 
can also be a major problem, particularly in conservation areas, or where they are in close proximity to residential areas. 
8.25 In order that the council can control the number and distribution of class A3, A4 and A5 uses, there a
re controls on the length of frontage that will be permitted to change to these uses in  
town centres and other parts of the borough. To manage the impact on residential amenity,  
the council will also control the scale and nature of new proposals, including how premises  
are managed, notably through regulation of opening and closing times. In addition, because of the impact that some uses may have on amenity, planning conditions may be applied to  
control hours of early morning opening. 
8.26  Exceptions to the normal closing times may be possible provided that the policy clauses are met. In loo
king at these clauses, the council will consider a number of factors, including: 
• the type of use and the number of customers likely to attend;  
• the proposed hours of operation;  
•
• the means of access to premises, the level of likely car parking demand on surrounding streets  
and the cumulative impact of uses in the area, and the scope for mitigating any impact. 
8.27 In certain cases, where there is clear evidence that particular types of use will have serious 
effec
ts on residential amenity or the environment, the council will consider imposing conditions 
that restrict future changes of use which the Use Classes Order would otherwise allow.  
8.28 The council’s planning policy is complemented by its licensing policy which is designed to  
main
tain a dynamic, innovative and attractive place to live, work and relax. The council works 
closely with the police, the fire authority, local businesses, community representatives and local people in meeting these objectives. The licensing policy recognises that certain types of  
licensed premises can lead to an increase in anti-social behaviour and the policy is designed  
to assist in prevention of crime and disorder in safeguarding public safety, in the prevention of public nuisance and in the protection of children from harm.  
8.29 The council requires alcohol licence applicants to have planning permission before applying for  
a licen
ce, and this allows the planning consent to determine the licensed hours of operation 
thereby helping to protect surrounding residential uses. There is additional guidance available from the council relating to the provision of tables and chairs on the public highway. 
8.30 The council has also introduced a special policy relating to cumulative impact under section 182 of
 the Licensing Act 2003 (paragraphs 13.24 to 13.39) as well as the council’s Statement 
of Licensing policy dated January 2011 at Annex 4 for parts of Fulham Town Centre, focusing  
on Fulham Broadway and Shepherds Bush. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
   
 
 
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
134 
8.31 Where premises do not require planning permission or already have consent, it will not be 
possi
ble to control hours of operation through the planning process. Through town centre  
management initiatives the council will endeavour to ensure that the night time economy is  
managed in a way that benefits residents, visitors and businesses. 
POLICY TLC6 
BETTING SHOPS, PAWNBROKERS AND PAYDAY LOAN SHOPS AND HOT FOOD TAKEAWAYS 
To ensure that shopping areas remain diverse and balanced, the council will seek to  
manage the concentration of betting shops, pawnbrokers and payday loan shops. 
Any proposal for a new betting shop, pawnbroker and payday loan shop will be 
consi
dered against the provisions of Policy TLC2 and TLC3 and may be granted 
permission in accordance with the quotas that apply, and where it can be demonstrated that the proposal: 
• will not impact adversely on the amenity, character and function of an area; 
• will add to the vitality of the existing shopping parade or cluster; and 
• will not result in negative cumulative impacts due to an unacceptable concentration of such uses in one area.  
When considering proposals for hot food takeaways (class A5), and in addition to the quota poli
cies that will apply, the council will take into account the location and nature of the proposal 
with regard to the proximity of existing hot food takeaways, its compatibility with surrounding uses and, as applicable, available evidence relating to health impacts.  
Justification  
8.32 Hammersmith and Fulham has a high concentration of betting shops, pawn brokers and payda
y loan shops per capita. There are notable concentrations on North End Road and 
in our designated town and local centres. Local retail health checks confirm that the over representation of such uses is especially high in the most deprived parts of the borough. 
8.33  The over representation of betting shops, pawn brokers and payday loan shops in the most  
dep
rived parts of the borough can restrict the retail choices available to the more vulnerable  
members of the local community and can have an impact on their health and finances. 
8.34 To ensure that shopping areas remain diverse and balanced, the council is seeking to limit the amo
unt and concentration of betting shops, pawnbrokers, and payday loan shops in areas 
of high concentration. This will also help the council address strategic and borough wide  
objectives in relation to health and regeneration. The council will resist applications for such  
uses where they would cause unacceptable harm to the character, function and amenity of an  
area or negatively impact on the health and well being of the borough’s residents. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
135 
In assessing the likely impacts of a proposal, regard will be had to the type of use, proposed  
opening hours, size of premises and operation and servicing. The council will also consider 
whether the proposal is likely to increase or create a negative cumulative impact in the surrounding area (generally within a radius of 400 metres of the site). 400 metres is  
considered to be a standard benchmark for walking distance equating to approximately  5 minutes walk. Proposals will be resisted that would result in unreasonable negative  
cumulative impacts that cannot be adequately mitigated. The council’s licensing policy will   
be a key consideration in assessing potential impacts of proposals. 
8.35 Although hot food takeaways provide a service for the community, the council is concerned abo
ut the potential health impacts of hot food takeaways, particularly on children and young 
people. In the case of proposals for class A5 uses (hot food takeaways), consideration will  
be given to the proximity of schools and similar facilities, the prevalence and clustering of  
takeaways and relevant evidence relating to potential health impacts arising from the type  of use proposed. 
POLICY TLC7 
PUBLIC HOUSES 
1.  The council will only permit the change of use or redevelopment of a public house  
(A4)
 after consideration of relevant town and local centre retail policies and an  
assessment of the following: 
 a.  a vi ability report that demonstrates to the council’s satisfaction that the public house is no  
lon
ger economically viable, including evidence of active and appropriate marketing for a 
continuous period of at least 12 months; 
 b.  t he role the public house plays in the provision of space for community groups to meet 
and wh
ether the loss of such space would contribute to a shortfall in local provision;  
 c.  t he design, character and heritage value of the public house and the significance of   
the c
ontribution that it makes to the streetscape and local distinctiveness, and where 
appropriate historic environment, and the impact the proposal will have on its  
significance; and 
 d.  t he ability and appropriateness of the building and site to accommodate an alternative  
use o
r uses without the need for demolition or alterations that may detract from the 
character and appearance of the building. 
2. Where the evidence demonstrates to the council’s satisfaction that a public   
house is not ec
onomically viable, but where the building is assessed as making a 
significant contribution to the local town scape and streetscape, or is assessed   
as making a positive contribution to the historic environment, the council will  
require the building to be retained. 
Continued over 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
  the proposal has been assessed against parts 1c and 1d of this policy and the impact of the 
proposal on these features; and TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
136 
3.  The proposed change of use of a ground floor of a public house for residential  use will only be ac
ceptable where: 
 a.  t he premises are not within a town centre, key local centre, satellite parade or  
neig
hbourhood parade; 
 b. 
 c.  t he council is satisfied that residential use is acceptable, the accommodation to be provided 
will
 be of high quality and it meets the requirements outlined in residential standards.  
4. The applicant will be required to carry out an assessment of the needs of the 
communi
ty for community facilities to show that the existing or former public  
house is no longer needed and that alternative provision is available in the area. 
Justification 
8.36  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  identifies public houses as a community 
faci
lity that contributes to enhancing the sustainability of communities and residential 
environments. As such, pubs should be safeguarded and retained for the benefit of the 
community and planning policies and decisions should guard against any unnecessary loss. 47
8.37  This approach is supported by the London Plan (2016) Policy 3.16 ‘protection and enhan
cement of social infrastructure’ which cites the protection and enhancement of social  
infrastructure, which can include pubs. In addition, it is supported by changes to policy 4.8 (supporting a successful and diverse retail sector and related facilities and services) of the London Plan (2016) which recognises the important role that London’s public houses can   
play in the social fabric of communities. 
8.38 The council identified over 100 traditional pubs in the borough in 2014 after discounting premi
ses that operate as bars and clubs. Over recent years the borough, like the rest of  
London, has seen a number of pubs change to other uses, including retail and residential.  
There is increasing public concern at this loss, however the General Permitted Development Order currently allows public houses (A4 Use Class) to change to some other uses including retail, professional and financial services, and restaurants without the need for planning  
permission. In instances where planning permission is required, the council will resist the loss of public houses as they can fulfil the following important community role: 
• a social role in supporting local community interaction and activities to help maintain  
sustai
nable neighbourhoods; 
• an  economic  role in contributing to the vibrancy and vitality of shopping and commercial 
areas
, and the vibrancy of residential areas contributing to a mix of land uses; and  
• an  environmental  role in their intrinsic value to the cultural and historic heritage of   
loca
l neighbourhoods. 
47  Communities and Local Government, National Planning Policy Framework, March 2012 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
137 
8.39 In order to ensure that the council can make a sound assessment when a change of use is  
prop
osed, applicants will be required to submit a viability report. The council will require 
supporting evidence that indicates that despite efforts to find a user for the premises it  
remains vacant. A reasonable marketing exercise will include continuous marketing generally 
over a period of at least 12 months with at least two recognised commercial agents. Evidence  
of this marketing will be required to be submitted along with the agents’ views as to why the property is not letting. Marketing evidence will be expected to show that the rent or property  
value of the pub is a fair reflection of the going rate and not artificially inflated. It could for example, compare the property with other examples of properties that are occupied as pubs  
or have been recently let as pubs to ensure the marketing exercise has been fairly undertaken. 
8.40 The use of pub space for community groups can be a valued resource and evidence will be requ
ired demonstrating consultation has taken place with local community and voluntary 
organisations. Where there is local need, this use should be retained or replaced within the building, unless an alternative approach can be identified and agreed. 
8.41 The retention of the ground floor for non-residential use will normally help maintain street acti
vity and a mixed use neighbourhood. 
8.42 When nominations are received, the council may also consider adding certain public houses   
to the R
egister of Assets of Community Value if the community support for their retention  
is significant. 
8.43 The townscape, streetscape and heritage significance of the public house will need to be assesse
d, where relevant. This will mean submitting a report prepared by a suitably qualified 
professional, and where the heritage significance needs to be assessed, the submission  
of a heritage statement assessing the heritage values of the building as set out in English  
Heritage’s Conservation Principles , including a townscape appraisal. 48
8.44 Where the building is deemed significant, but the retention of the public house use is shown not to
 be economically viable, then the building itself or the identified significance will need   
to be retained. 
48  English Heritage’s Conservation Principles: Policies and Guidance (2008) 
www.lbhf.gov.uk TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRES 
138 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 SECTION 9 
COMMUNITY  
FACILITIES, 
LEISURE AND 
RECREATION  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
140 
COMMUNITY FACILITIES,  
LEISURE AND RECREATION 
POLICY CF1 
SUPPORTING COMMUNITY   FACILITIES AND SERVICES 
The council will work with its strategic partners to provide borough-wide high quality 
accessible and inclusive facilities and services for the community by: 
1. Seeking to ensure high quality healthcare and the retention and enhancement of existing  
hea
lthcare facilities, such as accident and emergency departments, including Charing Cross 
Hospital; and 
 a. a ssisting in securing sites and buildings for future healthcare provision or reorganisation   
of pr
ovision, including local hubs for a wide range of health services in the north, centre  
and south of the borough, including new provision in the regeneration areas; and 
 b. s upporting renewal of existing GP premises and other healthcare facilities where this  
is re
quired. 
2. Seeking the improvement of school provision, including: 
 a. i mprovement and/or expansion of secondary schools; 
 b. i mprovement and/or expansion of primary schools through the primary school  
capi
tal programme; 
 c. su pporting the creation of new free schools; 
 d. r equiring the building of new primary schools as appropriate and applicable to the 
nee
d generated by development proposals and available existing capacity in the White 
City Opportunity Area, the Fulham Regeneration Area (including Earls Court and West  
Kensington Opportunity Area); 
 e. w orking with and supporting the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation in  
the p
rovision of school facilities to meet the need arising from proposed development  
in the OPDC area; 
 f. s upporting the provision of schools and facilities for those with special needs; and 
 g. s upporting provision of childcare nurseries. 
3. Improving the range of leisure, recreation, sports, arts, cultural and entertainment 
facilitie
s by:  
 a. pro tecting existing premises that remain satisfactory for these purposes; 
 b. s upporting re-provision of facilities for existing users in outworn premises where 
oppo
rtunities arise; and 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
141 
c. se eking new or enhanced facilities where appropriate and viable, including as part of major 
developme
nt proposals, in particular: 
–  m ajor new leisure, arts, sports and recreation facilities in the White City Opportunity Area, 
espe
cially east of Wood Lane and in Shepherds Bush town centre, in the Earls Court and 
West Kensington Opportunity Area; and  
–  wa ter related sports and educational facilities in riverside developments. 
4. Supporting the continued presence of the major public sports venues for football, athletics and 
tenn
is, subject to the local impact of the venues being managed without added detriment to  
local residents; 
5. Enhancing sport, leisure and cultural provision for schools and public use in suitable local parks; 
6.  Protecting all existing community facilities and services throughout the borough unless there 
is c
lear evidence that there is no longer an identified need for a particular facility or service, or  
where that facility or service can be appropriately replaced or provided elsewhere in the locality;  
7. Supporting the Metropolitan Police Service, the London Fire and Emergency Planning   
Aut
hority and Her Majesty’s Court Service and action to deal with safety, crime and anti-social 
behaviour; and 
8.  Requiring developments that increase the demand for community facilities and services to  
mak
e contributions towards, or provide for, new or improved facilities. 
Justification  
9.1 In a built up borough like Hammersmith and Fulham where there are many competing uses, it is i
mportant to maintain, manage and enhance community facilities. Such uses include 
education, health, leisure, places of worship, recreation facilities, and 3rd sector uses, but may also embrace uses such as pubs where they provide a valued community asset (see glossary  
for full definition). These community facilities can play an important part in the social fabric  
of communities and are an important element of what makes a decent neighbourhood. The council will work with partners to keep aware of needs, assist with the implementation of  
agreed programmes by allocating sites for specific uses and ensure that further requirements   
as a result of new development are taken into account. 
9.2 Community facilities need to be located so that they have maximum accessibility for their 
poten
tial users. It will be appropriate for some facilities that attract people from a large area 
to be located in a town centre or key local centre, and the council’s policies allow for this  
possibility. Other local facilities may be better located close to the communities they serve.   
The council will seek to co-locate community facilities for which it is responsible and will  
encourage others to do so in order to provide services that are better integrated with both  
public and private sectors. The council believes that establishing community hubs in areas of  
the borough where there are high levels of deprivation will better meet the accommodation needs of the 3rd sector. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
    
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
142 
9.3 The council’s strategy for the regeneration of the borough will see a rise in the borough’s 
pop
ulation as well as more visitors to the borough. This growing population will increase  
the demand for community services and facilities and will impact on all providers of social  
infrastructure, such as the Metropolitan Police Service and the NHS Clinical Commissioning Group. Finding sites for new facilities to support this growth can be difficult, but the council will ensure that the strategies for the borough’s four regeneration areas fully take into account the need to provide appropriate education, health and other community facility infrastructure. Elsewhere, when new developments result in an increase in the demand for community facilities, they will also be required to make appropriate provision for new or improved facilities, to create sustainable development. Where there is pressure to redevelop existing facilities the council will protect these, unless it can be shown that a need no longer exists or that facilities  
can be appropriately replaced or provided elsewhere. The application of the need test, which includes the acceptability of proposals involving replacement/alternative appropriate provision,  
is contained within the wording of Policy CF2. 
9.4 The current situation regarding known planned community service provision is set out below.  
Schools and other educational and training facilities 
9.5 The council’s key educational priorities are to:  
• meet the council’s statutory responsibility to meet demand for school places; 
• progress the schools of choice agenda for expansion of popular schools;  
• increase the percentage of resident children choosing the borough’s schools; and 
• deliver the Special Schools Strategy.  
9.6 There will need to be an increase in primary and secondary school places in the north of the 
boro
ugh to meet the anticipated increase in child population. At secondary stage, the council  
is committed to the provision of adequate school places to meet local need, for instance the on-going expansion of Lady Margaret School, the on-going expansion of Sacred Heart School,and the recently completed new accommodation for Queensmill School, and is  
supportive of the development of post 16 learning. The council also supports the government’s new Free Schools policy which it considers will improve the educational choices of children in the local community. The following Free Schools have been established in the Borough:  
West London Free School (Primary and Secondary); Earls Court Primary; Ark Conway; Fulham  
Boys School (C of E) Secondary and new Ark Primary School within the grounds of Burlington  
Danes Academy. Redevelopment of existing buildings as well as the provision of a new build is expected to be completed in December 2019. Delivery of the above strategy will result in  
improved education and training so that young people will be better able to take advantage  of local jobs.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
     
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
143 
9.7 The following school improvements have been committed to in the Council’s Primary,  
Seco
ndary and Alternative Provision Strategy for 2016/17 and beyond with funding from   
the Children’s Services Capital Programme: 
• Expansion of Pope John Primary School (on site 2015) 
• Expansion of Holy Cross RC Primary School 
• Expansion of Holy Cross Bilingual provision at Clancarty Road  
• Development of an improved Alternative provision at the Bridge Academy 
• William Morris Sixth Form – enhanced SEN provision (on site 2015) 
• New special needs centre offering 19+ Provision at Queensmill School 
9.8  In addition the council will generally support developments that improve independent 
edu
cational, further educational and training facilities in the borough.  
Leisure, recreation, sports, arts, culture and entertainment facilities  
9.9  The borough has a rich and varied range of leisure, recreation, sports, and arts, culture and en
tertainment facilities. The responsibility for the provision of these facilities, including 
investment and maintenance, falls to a number of organisations, including the council. As the facilities give residents and visitors to the borough the opportunity to participate in a range of activities that help to improve quality of life, health and well being, the council will seek to  
protect existing uses, such as the Apollo, the Lyric Theatre and Linford Christie Stadium, and assist in providing new facilities. Where there is a recognised deficiency in the provision of  
any facility or activity, the council will seek to readdress this situation through the application of Local Plan policies, particularly in the regeneration areas where there are identified  
development sites (see also policies for these areas). 
9.10 In respect of sport and leisure, this covers a wide range of facilities in the borough, including ind
oor sports and leisure facilities such as sports halls, swimming pools and health and 
fitness centres as well as outdoor facilities such as sports pitches, playing fields, tennis courts  
and basketball/netball courts. The council undertook a comprehensive needs assessment of  
sports and leisure facilities across the borough which focused on swimming pools, sports  
halls, health and fitness centres, synthetic turf pitches, athletics, indoor tennis and climbing  
facilities. This identified several areas of the borough where there are deficiencies in certain types of facilities, as well as the types of facilities where improvements and/or new provision is needed to support future growth. In particular, a significant need for sports halls was identified. The council have also prepared a Community Sports and Physical Activity Strategy, which sets out the main priorities for increasing participation in sports and leisure activities. 
9.11 The council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan provides further details of the future requirements  
for s
ports and leisure provision in the borough. A number of schemes have been identified to  
improve and enhance existing sports facilities. In the council’s regeneration areas there will be opportunities for new sports and leisure facilities such as sports halls to be provided as part  
of major developments, which includes proposals for new provision within the White City  
Opportunity Area and the Earls Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
144 
9.12 The council’s Open Space Audit and subsequent update papers provide a detailed assessment  
of ou
tdoor sports provision in the borough which found general deficiencies in the level of  
outdoor sporting facilities across the borough. Given the limited amount of open space in the 
borough, it is important that the use of existing open space is maximised, including better use of the River Thames is made for water sports, with new facilities negotiated as part of  
redevelopment schemes where appropriate. 
Health  
9.13  The council wishes to see the improved health and wellbeing of the community and will work wit
h the Imperial College Healthcare NHS and other partners to achieve this objective. The 
council recognises there are changing health needs as a result of factors such as people living  
longer and more people living with long-term conditions like diabetes, heart disease, asthma  
and dementia. However, whatever the needs, the priority must continue to be to improve the health of all residents, to reduce health inequalities and to deliver new and improved health  
facilities in the borough. 
9.14 The Imperial College Healthcare NHS’s strategy has led to the reorganisation of hospital facilities  
and o
ther health services in the borough, including the closure of A&E services at Hammersmith  
Hospital. The council is concerned that such changes should not lead to the reduction of NHS  
services and particularly supports the continuation of A&E services at Charing Cross. The council  
supports the enhancement of existing facilities and provision of new services with capital  
receipts from sales of land and buildings where release has been justified. 
9.15 In terms of secondary care, the three main hospitals operating in the borough (Queen Char
lotte’s Hospital, Hammersmith Hospital and Charing Cross Hospital) are managed by the 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust which is one of the largest NHS trusts in the country.   
As part of the ‘Shaping a Healthier Future’ service re-modelling, due to be implemented in  
2017, it has been announced that Charing Cross Hospital will become a world-class elective  
(non-emergency) surgery centre and will retain its local Accident and Emergency (A&E) service, along with other changes. The council will continue to work with its health delivery  
partners to protect hospitals and A&E units and to ensure adequate services are provided to  
support the existing and future population of the borough. 
9.16  In terms of primary care, the Hammersmith & Fulham Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG)  is re
sponsible for commissioning local health care services in conjunction with NHS England. 
The CCG commissions local community and acute services and works with GPs to support primary care. The ambitions of the CCG are set out in its Out of Hospital Care Strategy  2012-2015 which aims to shift the emphasis towards providing more care in GP surgeries, people’s homes, local communities, and in children’s centres and schools. NHS England develops and oversees all CCGs and directly commissions primary care services and some specialised services.  
9.17 In terms of primary care property and estates, the Department of Health has set up NHS Prop
erty Services Limited (NHS PS) to provide expert management of a large portion of the 
NHS estate which owns and manage all PCT estate that was not transferred to NHS providers in March 2013. It also manages ‘surplus’ NHS and government estate. The focus of its role  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
   
  
     
  
 
   better sexual health across Tri-borough with a focus on those communities most at risk 
of poor sexual health. COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
145 
centres on delivering and developing cost-effective property solutions for community and primary care health services. NHS PS works with the new commissioning bodies and the Health & Wellbeing Boards (HWBs) to ensure that estate needs of the local NHS can continue  to be met. 
9.18 The Local Plan also recognises the contribution that other elements of the plan have on the heal
th of residents (“public health”), including access to parks and play areas, recreation  
facilities, the opportunities to walk and cycle, community safety, access to shops selling fresh foods, controls on hot food takeaways, educational attainment and access to employment, the borough’s air quality and noise and light pollution. Public health functions and statutory duties are managed by the Tri-Borough Public Health Department (jointly between LBHF, RBKC  
and City of Westminster). It works with and supports other council services in delivering public  
health benefits, including recognising the influence planning and the built environment has on  
improving health and wellbeing and reducing health inequalities. 
9.19 The council also has a Health & Wellbeing Board (HWB) which has statutory duties including prom
oting integrated working, the production of a Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA)  
and a Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy (JHWS) which is informed by the JSNA. The JHWS has been developed which sets out the following priorities: 
• integrated health and social care services which support prevention, early intervention and reduce hospital admissions;  
• delivering the Park View Centre for Health and Well Being to improve care for residents and regenerate the White City Estate;  
• every child has the best start in life; 
• tackling childhood obesity;  
• supporting young people into Healthy Adulthood; 
• better access for vulnerable people to Sheltered Housing; 
• improving mental health services for service users and carers to promote independence  
and develop effective preventative services; and 
•  
9.20 In the council’s regeneration areas it will be important for new health services to be provided  
as part o
f supporting social infrastructure. The council will also seek other ways of of  
improving the health of residents, including access to new and existing parks and play areas,  
recreation facilities, opportunities to walk and cycle, community safety, access to shops,  
controls on hot food takeaways, educational attainment and access to jobs, and management  
of air quality and noise and light pollution. It is also important to the council that existing  
health and community facilities are protected and improved, such as those at Park View Centre for Health and Wellbeing, Parsons Green Health Centre, White City Community Centre  
and Milson Road Health Centre. 
9.21 Further details on proposals for specific new or expanded health facilities are provided in the Infrastr
ucture Schedule in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
146 
POLICY CF2 
ENHANCEMENT AND RETENTION  OF COMMUNITY USES 
Proposals for new or expanded community uses should meet local needs, be 
compatible with and minimise impact on the local environment and be accessible  and inclusive to all in the community they serve. 
The provision of new or expanded community uses should be provided as part of the necessary 
sup
porting social infrastructure for significant new housing and other development proposals. 
Where it is not appropriate to provide community uses on site or as part of a development scheme, a contribution to new and/or enhanced uses in the locality will be sought. 
In any development proposal, existing community uses should be retained, enhanced or replaced, 
unl
ess there is clear evidence that there is no longer an identified short or long term need for a 
particular facility or service, or where the existing facility or service can be appropriately replaced  
or provided elsewhere in the locality. In assessing need and viability, the council will: 
• take into account the role the facility plays in the provision of space for community groups and whether the loss of such space would contribute to a shortfall in local provision; and 
•  require a viability report that demonstrates to the council’s satisfaction that the facility or  
an alternative community use is not economically viable, including evidence of active and appropriate marketing for a continuous period of at least 12 months. 
Justification 
9.22  Buildings and land used for community uses constitute a major community resource, pro
moting social inclusion and community cohesion. Community uses cover a variety of  
activities (see Glossary for definition) ranging from schools and churches to some public  
houses and often need to be sited in locations that are readily accessible to the users of  
a specific service, particularly where it serves a local community. However, whilst some community uses will have a local catchment, others may attract users from a much   
wider area. 
9.23  Where new or expanded community uses are provided, they should be designed to meet nee
d and should be accessible, affordable and adaptable, and where appropriate offer flexible  
accommodation that can be used for a variety of uses. In those circumstances where it is not appropriate to provide new facilities as part of a development scheme, for example because the development is not large enough or because there are other nearby schemes also liable to  
provide social infrastructure, it may be more appropriate to provide funding towards new or  
expanded facilities to be provided in the locality. 
9.24 The loss of buildings and land for community uses will only be acceptable where there is no i
dentified need for the facility and satisfactory marketing has been undertaken for 
appropriate alternative community uses. An assessment of short term and long term need  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
147 
should be provided together with evidence of viability in such circumstances where the loss 
of community uses is proposed and where the existing use is capable of being tested for economic viability. The assessment should include how this need is currently being met and give consideration of other existing providers which contribute to meeting that need. The Localism Act’s provisions allow local community groups, which meet a set of criteria laid  down by government, to nominate an ‘asset’ in their local area to be placed on a Register of  Assets of Community Value. The purpose of this is to give community groups the opportunity to identify land or property that they believe furthers the social wellbeing or social interests  of the local community, and gives them time to bid for that asset if an owner decides to sell. 
POLICY CF3 
ENHANCEMENT AND RETENTION  OF ARTS, CULTURE, ENTERTAINMENT,  LEISURE, RECREATION AND SPORT USES 
The council will support the enhancement of arts, culture, entertainment, leisure,  
recreation and sport uses by: 
a. supporting the continued presence of the borough’s arts, culture, entertainment, leisure,  
recr
eation and sports venues subject to the local impact of venues being managed without 
added detriment to local residents; 
b. requiring proposals for new and expanded venues to be accessible and inclusive and to be 
supp
orted by evidence of how impacts such as noise, traffic, parking and opening hours have 
been assessed, minimised and mitigated;  
c.  seeking retention, replacement or enhancement of existing arts, culture, entertainment,  
leis
ure, recreation and sport uses, unless there is clear evidence that there is no longer an  
identified need for a particular facility or alternative community arts, culture, entertainment,  
leisure, recreation and sport uses. In these circumstances, a viability report will be required  
that demonstrates to the Council’s satisfaction that the facility or alternative arts, culture,  
entertainment, leisure, recreation and sport use is not economically viable, including evidence of active and appropriate marketing for a continuous period of at least 12 months; and  
d.  
Supporting the temporary use of vacant buildings for community uses, including for 
performance and creative work. 
Justification 
9.25 Accessible arts, cultural, entertainment, leisure, recreation and sports facilities are important elements o
f social infrastructure and contribute greatly to the quality of life of all members 
of the community as well as visitors to the borough by enhancing social inclusion and community cohesion. Such facilities are particularly important elements of town centres and will be essential in supporting the borough’s growth which is particularly directed to the four  
regeneration areas (see also policies for these areas). 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 COMMUNITY FACILITIES, LEISURE AND RECREATION 
148 
9.26  The venues occupied by these uses vary greatly from purpose built premises to conversions 
from o
ther uses. They are often open during the evening and at night-time, for example music 
venues, and along with uses such as restaurants and pubs and bars, help sustain a night-time economy which is particularly vibrant in the town centres. However, because such uses can also impact on residential amenity, for example through comings and goings, it is necessary for new or expanded venues to be appropriately located and managed. 
9.27 Notwithstanding the presence within Hammersmith and Fulham of a varied range of arts, cul
tural, entertainment, leisure, recreation and sports facilities, there are some parts of the 
borough that are not well served by such uses. It is important to try reduce these deficiencies. Facilities the borough has must therefore be protected. As a consequence, the council will  
require adequate justification for any proposals for change of use or redevelopment of  
premises to other uses. The proposed loss of buildings and land that are used for arts, culture,  
entertainment, leisure, recreation and sports uses will be considered against criteria such as  
the suitability and viability of the site or premises for such uses with or without adaption, evidence of unsuccessful marketing, evidence of need and community asset value. In addition, in order to try to reduce deficiencies in provision, when regeneration schemes come forward,  
the council will seek to ensure that these are accompanied by arts, cultural, entertainment,  
leisure, recreation and sports uses that are appropriate to the scale and location of the development and are accessible and affordable and meet the needs of the community. 
9.28 Temporary use of buildings may offer the opportunity for community uses, particularly those tha
t are transient or may have a short life. They may help to enliven town centres where 
vacancy is an issue. 
POLICY CF4 
PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL GROUNDS 
In considering any redevelopment proposal fo r all or part of an existing football 
ground, the council will require the re-provision of suitable facilities to enable  
the continuation of professional football or other field-based spectator sports in   
the borough. 
9.29 The council wishes to retain professional football in the borough, because it provides a major sour
ce of entertainment and contributes to the life of the community by enhancing social  
inclusion and community cohesion. The council is only prepared to consider re-development  
proposals for professional football grounds if they make provision for continuation of  
professional football or other field-based spectator sports at that ground. If it can be demonstrated that professional football or other field-based spectator sports are no longer viable there, the redevelopment should include provision for other community service uses in  
accordance with other policies in this Chapter. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 SECTION 10 
GREEN AND PUBLIC 
OPEN SPACE  
 
 GREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE 
150 
GREEN AND  
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE 
POLICY OS1 
PARKS AND OPEN SPACES 
The council will protect, enhance and increase provision of parks, open spaces and 
biodiversity in the borough by: 
a.  designating a hierarchy of open space that includes metropolitan open land (MOL), open space 
of bor
ough wide importance and open space of local importance (see Appendix 3) as well as  
a hierarchy of nature conservation areas of metropolitan, borough and local importance, and green corridors along the borough’s railway lines (see Appendix 4); 
b. requiring a mix of new public and private open space in the White City and Earls Court and Wes
t Kensington Opportunity Areas and the South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area and 
in any new major development; and  
c. improving existing parks, open spaces and recreational facilities throughout the borough. 
Justification 
10.1 In a densely built up area like Hammersmith and Fulham, the local environment and public  
spac
es are very important. There are a variety of types and sizes of open spaces including 
parks, playing fields, sports pitches, outdoor sporting facilities, cemeteries and churchyards,  
amenity space, allotments, nature conservation areas and play areas. 
Hierarchy and status of parks and open space  
10.2  The council’s 2008 Parks Survey and other background information shows that open space is im
portant for peoples’ quality of life, clean air, reduction of urban heat and for enhancing 
biodiversity in the borough. Open spaces provide opportunities for people to exercise and to take part in outdoor sport and recreation which enhances the health of local people. It is  
therefore important to maintain open spaces for the benefit of the community and involve local communities in the use of such spaces. The council has designated an open space hierarchy that responds to the variety of parks and open spaces in the borough, including strategically important open space, namely Metropolitan Open Land (MOL), and open spaces  
of borough-wide and more local importance (see Policies Map and Appendix 3). Overlapping  
with this hierarchy are those areas which have particular nature conservation interest. These areas were originally identified by the former London Ecology Unit and are classified as of  
metropolitan, borough-wide and local importance (see Policies Map, Map 6 below and Appendix 4). On Wormwood Scrubs, now in the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation, there is also a designated local nature reserve. The NPPF allows for communities  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 151
www.lbhf.gov.ukGREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
to identify green areas of particular local significance and value for designation as Local Green 
Space. The council will support local communities seeking the designation of Local Green Space that meets the relevant criteria. 
New and improved parks and open spaces 
10.3 The Council’s 2006 Open Spaces Audit reveals that Hammersmith and Fulham has relatively lit
tle open space per person and with more people living and working in the borough, the 
improvement of existing parks and open spaces and facilities within them, and the provision of more public open space and private amenity space as part of new developments will be important, particularly in areas of deficiency (see Map 6). 
10.4 The Parks and Open Spaces Strategy 2008-2018 sets out a framework for the delivery of servi
ces and future improvement actions for the London Borough of Hammersmith and 
Fulham, community partners and stakeholders involved in providing, managing and enjoying open spaces across the borough. Due to the existing deficiency in open space, nature conservation (see Map 7) and children’s play areas throughout the borough, it is important that new developments contribute to reducing this deficiency by provision of open space and play facilities for all ages as part of regeneration schemes. Such open space should be provided overall in a combination of public and private areas. 
10.5 In the opportunity and regeneration areas there are opportunities for new open space. This may be p
rovided in a number of ways, for example, in easily accessible small private spaces 
and in larger parks. New publicly accessible open spaces, whether public or private, will allow provision of high quality and attractive, durable and adaptable places and contribute to improving the quality of life, reducing the incidence of crime and anti-social behaviour and to making places better for people. This will offer opportunities to contribute to biodiversity and flood risk management.152
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
Map 6  Open space
© Crown copyright and database rights. 
2017 Licence No. LA100019223
Metropolitan Open Land
OPDC Area
Open space of borough importance
Open space deficiency153
www.lbhf.gov.ukGREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
POLICY OS2 
ACCESS TO PARKS AND OPEN SPACES 
The council will seek to reduce open space deficiency and will protect and enhance 
the quality of, and access to, existing open space by: 
a. refusing development on public open space and other green open space of strategic and 
boro
ugh-wide importance as identified in the council’s Open Space Hierarchy (see Appendix 3 
and Policies Map) unless it can be demonstrated that such development will not harm its open character, and its function as a sport, leisure or recreational resource, and its contribution to biodiversity and visual amenity; 
b. refusing development on open space that is not identified in the Local Plan where such land eith
er on its own or cumulatively has local importance for its open character or as a sport, 
leisure or recreational facility, or for its contribution to local biodiversity or visual amenity unless: 
 •  the proposed development would release a site for built development needed to realise a qua
litative gain for the local community in pursuance of other physical, social and economic 
objectives of the Local Plan and provision is made for replacement of open space of equal or greater value elsewhere. 
c. requiring provision of accessible and inclusive new open space in major development, 
part
icularly within the council’s regeneration areas; and 
d. seeking improvements to existing open space and the facilities within them, such as Linford Chris
tie Stadium, where appropriate and when development proposals impact upon provision. 
Justification 
10.6 The type, size and quality of parks and open spaces, including allotments, play areas, school play
ing fields and private gardens in the borough varies, but they have many benefits, 
including those associated with health, sport and recreation, children’s play, culture, biodiversity and the public realm. 
10.7 The council considers that it is important to have a general presumption against development on ex
isting open space, however, notwithstanding the need to protect, improve and increase 
open space in the borough, situations may arise when the benefits of protecting existing open spaces (private and public) need to be considered against the benefits of allowing some limited development on them. The policy criteria that relate to the possible release of open spaces of borough-wide importance and local importance are considered appropriate to clarify the special circumstances where limited types of development on public and private open space may be acceptable. However, it will not be appropriate to exacerbate or create a deficiency in access to open space or undermine the overarching objective to improve access to open space.154
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
10.8 New open space is sought in regeneration areas and strategic site policies to help achieve 
the vi
sion of a borough of opportunity for all. It is also sought elsewhere as opportunities 
arise and if justified by the type and nature of the development. This approach will require new accessible and inclusive open space to meet the needs of the occupiers of the new development, including schools, and other users, to help reduce open space deficiency; to improve the public realm and to contribute to biodiversity and flood risk management. The open space requirement will be secured through on site provision or, if appropriate, elsewhere in the borough. 
10.9 In some cases, a contribution to secure improvements in existing open space, rather than pro
vision of new open space, will be appropriate. This is likely to involve improvements 
to existing public open space in proximity to developments where it is not practicable to provide adequate open space on site. The improvements could include new or upgraded play areas, refurbished pathways, better signage or additional seating, and would be provided in the context of the council’s Parks and Open Spaces Strategy. The council will support friends’ groups that are representative of the community and will work in partnership with all groups that meet these overarching criteria to improve parks and open spaces. The more detailed matters of nature conservation and greening are included in the Planning Guidance SPD. 
POLICY OS3 
PLAYSPACE FOR CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE 
Development proposals should not result in  the loss of existing children and  
young people’s playspace or result in an increased deficiency in the availability of  
such playspace. 
In new residential development that provides family accommodation; accessible and inclusive, 
saf
e and secure communal playspace will be required on site that is well designed and located 
and caters for the different needs of all children, including children in younger age groups, older children, teenagers and disabled children. The scale of provision and associated play equipment will be in proportion to the scale and nature of the proposed development. 
Justification 
10.10  High quality playspace is important for children of all age groups, including those who are dis
abled, but particularly for children who do not have access to private gardens or amenity 
space so that they may have opportunities for play, social interaction and the physical activity. As with open space in general, it is important to protect and improve existing playspace in a borough where there is an overall deficiency of such facilities and an uneven distribution. The council has a programme for refurbishment of play areas. 
10.11  New residential development, including mixed use developments with housing, in the iden
tified regeneration areas and elsewhere should make provision for new playspace. 155
www.lbhf.gov.ukGREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
 The council will take into account the Mayor of London’s SPG49. The council considers that 
playspace for young children should be located close to the home, but for older children  
and teenagers it could be located off site if this is considered appropriate. 
POLICY OS4 
NATURE CONSERVATION 
The nature conservation areas and green corridors identified on the Policies Map  
(and shown on Map 7 and listed in Appendix 4) will be protected from development likely to cause demonstrable harm to their ecological (habitats and species) value.  In these areas, development will not be permitted unless: 
a. the proposed development would release a site for built development needed to realise a 
qua
litative gain for the local community in pursuance of other physical, social and economic 
regeneration objectives of the Local Plan, and measures are included for the protection and enhancement of any substantive nature conservation interest that the site may have so that there is no net loss of native species and no net loss of habitat; or 
b. provision is made for replacement nature conservation interest of equal or greater value elsewher
e in the locality. 
Outside of the areas identified on the Policies Map, proposals should enhance the nature con
servation interest through initiatives such as new green infrastructure and habitats, tree 
planting and brown and green roofs and protect any significant interest on the site and any nearby nature conservation area, appropriate to the scale and nature of the development. 
Planning conditions will be imposed, or planning obligations sought to ensure the maintenance 
and en
hancement of nature conservation areas where these are affected by development proposals. 
Justification 
10.12  There are nature conservation areas of metropolitan importance in the borough, namely the River Tha
mes and its inlets, and the Kensal Green Cemetery. There are also a number of sites 
of borough-wide and local importance. All three types of areas provide habitats for species of flora and fauna, as well as a valuable resource for the local community for educational and recreational purposes. The council’s Parks and Open Spaces Strategy 2008-2018 and 2006 Open Spaces Audit identify that there is an overall deficiency in access to nature conservation areas in the borough, with an area of deficiency running north/south through the borough from the River Thames to Brook Green. The London Plan Implementation Report: Improving Londoners’ Access to Nature provides information on addressing these deficiencies in access to nature with a number of priority sites for improving biodiversity identified within Hammersmith and Fulham. In a borough where land is at a premium and where many locations require physical, social and economic regeneration, it is important to 
49 Shaping Neighbourhoods Play and Informal Recreation September 2012 156
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
protect these areas from demonstrable harmful impacts both from on-site development but 
also from development in the local area because of their contribution to ecosystem services. Where replacement nature conservation areas are proposed as a result of development, then permission will only be given where it has been demonstrated that there will be at least equal nature conservation value, that is no net loss of either species or habitat, provided by the new site. It is also important that these areas are managed in order to minimise the impact of invasive non-native species. 
10.13  In this borough green corridors extend along parts of the railway network and link nature cons
ervation areas. The River Thames allow some animals and plants to penetrate further 
into the built-up area than would be the case if they did not exist. They may thus enhance the major habitats that they link e.g. the railway line linking the river and the canal and the nature conservation areas in between. Such corridors are of great value in boroughs such as Hammersmith and Fulham which are not well endowed with nature conservation areas. Opportunities to further strengthen the fundings of the green corridors will be sought. These may be future development proposals within the corridors, including those arising from operational uses or specific environmental improvement schemes as a result of council or voluntary activities. Any such proposals to enhance the green corridors or waterways, including filling in gaps or extensions, should not prejudice the operational needs alongside the road or rail thoroughfares, or the safe navigation of the waterways. 
10.14  The closely built-up nature of the borough, and the overall deficiency in accessible nature cons
ervation areas, makes it important that all new development contributes to addressing 
these deficiencies by respecting and enhancing existing nature conservation interest and provide future opportunities to improve the biodiversity of the area, as well as opening up currently inaccessible sites where appropriate. The regeneration areas can play an important part in this. In respect of new development, this can readily be achieved by following a few simple guidelines which do not affect the efficient functioning of the new building, and are not likely to be a significant part of total development costs. Nature conservation measures can enhance the character of the building and the value of the site.157
www.lbhf.gov.ukGREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
Map 7  Nature Conservation Areas 
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• •
• • 
• •
• •
• •
• •
• • 
• •
• •
• •
© Crown copyright and database rights. 
2017 Licence No. LA100019223••••Green CorridorsSites of Metropolitan ImportanceSites of Borough Importance Grade I
Sites of Borough Importance Grade II
Sites of Local Importance
Nature Conservation Deficient Areas
OPDC Area158
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
POLICY OS5 
GREENING THE BOROUGH 
The council will seek to enhance biodiversity and green infrastructure in the  
borough by: 
a. maximising the provision of gardens, garden space and soft landscaping, seeking green or 
bro
wn roofs and other planting as part of new development; 
b. protecting back, front and side gardens from new development and encouraging planting  in bo
th back and front gardens; 
c. seeking to prevent removal or mutilation of protected trees; 
d. seeking retention of existing trees and provision of new trees on development sites; and 
e. adding to the greening of streets and the public realm; 
f. making Tree Preservation Orders where justified in the interests of amenity. 
Justification 
10.15  Enhancing biodiversity and increasing the amount of green areas through new development wil
l have a number of benefits to the borough. Soft landscaping and increasing the 
number of trees not only benefit biodiversity but also can help to reduce the impact of higher summer temperatures and reduce rainfall run-off rates, which will help to reduce the risk of surface water flooding, as well as improving the borough’s health, for example through improved local air quality. Walking in green areas has also been shown to improve the physical and mental health of participants. There will also be visual benefits from a greener borough. Green or brown roofs and walls are also an essential sustainable design consideration and provide many of the benefits of more conventional urban greening. Community gardens and allotments can play an important role in enabling small scale food production, community engagement as well as enhancing biodiversity. Where opportunities arise, space for local food growing should also be encouraged, for example through creative use of green roofs, walls and balconies. This could be for individual gardeners or organisations including schools who want to grow food for themselves and/or the local community. 
10.16  Back, front and side gardens can play an important part in maintaining biodiversity as well 
as co
ntributing to the townscape and quality of life. Parked cars in front gardens can add 
visual clutter and be detrimental to the appearance of the street scene, impact on permeable surfaces and reduce the potential for soft landscaping and tree planting which would add to the street scene. The council therefore wishes to protect gardens and will generally discourage the installation of paving and impervious surfaces in existing front gardens and will encourage their removal, unless the paving is original. The enhancement of front gardens will not only help improve the street environment and biodiversity, but will also reduce the rate of surface water run off and the risk of flooding. More detailed guidance for applicants seeking permission for new development is included in the council’s Planning Guidance SPD.159
www.lbhf.gov.ukGREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE
10.17  The loss of trees will nearly always result in a deterioration of the ecological value and 
enviro
nmental character of an area and will not be acceptable without good cause, 
particularly if subject to a Tree Preservation Order. Pruning or reducing, using best practice, should be investigated as an alternative to other trees works. New development schemes provide the opportunity to provide landscaping including tree planting on site. Trees indigenous to this country should be planted, as these provide habitats for indigenous wildlife. This policy needs to be read in conjunction with the Mayor of London’s SPG on Green Infrastructure & Open Environments
50. 
50  Green Infrastructure & Open Environments: Preparing borough tree and woodland strategies – February 2013160
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GREEN AND PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. . . . . . . 
' . 
1 . . · . . . • . . · . . . . • ' • 
SECTION 11 
RIVER THAMES RIVER THAMES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    162 
RIVER THAMES 
 
.POLICY RTC1 
RIVER THAMES 
The council will work with its partner organisations, including the Environment 
Agency, Port of London Authority, Thames Water and landowners to enhance and 
increase access to, as well as use of, the waterways in the borough, namely the  River Thames, and improve waterside environments by: 
a.  identifying the Thames Policy Area on the Policies Map and setting out general criteria for  
the de
sign of development in this area, in this Local Plan; 
b  encouraging the development of vacant or underused land along the waterways, namely  
the Riv
er Thames, Chelsea Creek and taking into account their local context and character; 
c. protecting existing water dependent uses and requiring new development to provide 
o
pportunities for water based activities where appropriate and enhance river and canal related 
biodiversity, safeguard and enhance where necessary flood defences, as well as encouraging 
public access especially for leisure and educational activities; 
d. ensuring the provision, or improvement and greening, of the Thames Path National Trail  (th
e riverside walk) in all riverside developments ; 
e. promoting use of the River Thames for transport uses, including passengers and freight; and 
f. seeking improvements to the tidal foreshore in line with the requirements of the Thames River Bas
in Management Plan and the Thames Estuary 2100 Plan.  
Justification 
11.1  The River Thames is of considerable benefit to Hammersmith and Fulham and is of strategic imp
ortance to London as a whole. The Thames Policy Area designation and associated policies  
aim to protect the features of the riverside and of the river, including the Chelsea Creek,  
particularly its environmental quality and importance as: 
• a major linear open space which is particularly important in an area with limited parks and open spaces; 
• a landscape feature with views and landmarks of local importance;  
• a resource for recreation and sport, tourism and leisure; 
• an ecological resource and an important refuge for plants and wildlife; 
• an area with considerable archaeological and historic interest; and 
• a transport resource. 
11.2  Further details of the qualities and character of the river and riverside are included in the Tham
es Strategy – Kew to Chelsea 2002. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018 RIVER THAMES 
163 
11.3  A balance needs to be reached between the many functions of the river. In Hammersmith 
and F
ulham there is a particular issue with vacant and under-used safeguarded wharves and 
the development of the land adjoining these sites. More detail on the wharves is provided  
in the policy for the South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area. However, in respect of the land adjoining the wharves, their sterilisation would not accord with London Plan
51 policies  
to optimise the potential of sites or to improve the environment of the River Thames. It is  
therefore the council’s intention to encourage development of these sites and to encourage suitable waterside uses as part of mixed use schemes where these would be appropriate.  
However, the development of land should take into account London Plan (2016) policy and  
the need for design to seek to minimise conflict between different uses (see also Local Plan  
policy RTC4). The River Thames has a significant potential for water based activities that can increase opportunities for participation in sport and recreation in the borough. It also provides  
a home for a number of boat dwellers. 
11.4 It is important that all waterside developments respect the flood defences and enhance these where n
ecessary. The council will work closely with the Environment Agency on these matters. 
It is also important to extend and improve the Thames Path National Trail, together with  
pedestrian and cycling routes to link it to the surrounding area, which will often depend on  
the development of the vacant and underused riverside sites. 
POLICY RTC2 
ACCESS TO THE THAMES   RIVERSIDE AND FORESHORE 
The council will seek accessible and inclusive public access to the riverside, including 
through-site links when riparian development takes place and the provision and enhancement of the Thames Path National Trail (the riverside walk). It will also seek  the retention and enhancement of access to and from the foreshore in development schemes where it is appropriate and safe to do so, and will promote enjoyment of  riverside heritage assets and open spaces. 
The riverside walk should generally be at least 6 metres wide and should be accessible to cyclists  
if th
is can be achieved without risk to the safety of pedestrians or river users. 
All proposals will need to ensure that flood defences are not adversely affected.  
Justification 
11.5  The council has for many years been seeking to open up the riverside and river for greater 
publi
c access. This includes through-site links in new riverside development, and the provision 
of an accessible and safe access way along the whole length of the riverside as part of the Thames Path National Trail (see policy RTC1 – River Thames). New sections of the river walk  
  
51 Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016 
www.l
bhf.gov.uk  RIVER THAMES 
164 
will normally be achieved when redevelopment of riverside land takes place and its provision 
is specifically set out in the policies for South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area. Elsewhere,  development will still be expected to incorporate construction of the riverside walk, and in  instances where development creates a direct need to improve or enhance an existing section of the riverside walk, planning conditions may be imposed or developer contributions sought. 
11.6 Although priority will be given to pedestrians so that they may benefit from the many  
oppor
tunities that walking can give, the council wishes to encourage cycling, and the riverside 
walk can also provide a traffic-free route for cyclists. Measures will be taken to reduce  
pedestrian/cyclist conflicts, for example by providing separate paths where appropriate, or  
measures to slow cyclists. The council also accepts that the design of the riverside walk should  
respect and enhance the natural character of the river wherever possible e.g. by use of planted embankments. However, it should also embrace the industrial heritage of the river so that  
visitors, can learn about the river’s past. The council’s Riverside Walk Enhancement Report  
2010 provides details of opportunities for improving the riverside walk. 
11.7  Access to the foreshore, which is primarily in the ownership of the Port of London Authority,  
can ha
ve a recreational and educational value. There is a right of access for fishing, navigational  
and other customary purposes, but public access must be considered in the context of  
the environmental and archaeological importance of the foreshore and particularly safety  
considerations, bearing in mind the fast tidal flows affecting this part of the River Thames. 
11.8 Development bordering the river has an important role to play in access to the foreshore.  
Some sit
es may include drawdocks, slipways, steps, stairs, hards, piers, pontoons, ladders,  
chains or other infrastructure enabling access to and from the river and its foreshore. It  
is important that these are retained, kept in good repair or added to as appropriate, and planning conditions may be used to ensure this happens. The profile of the river bank may also have a bearing on ease of access to and away from the foreshore, and on the protection of  
environmental interests, while mutual visibility between development sites and the foreshore is also an important aid to public safety. These are matters that will be taken into account when considering the design of developments bordering the river. 
11.9  Consultation with the Port of London Authority, the Environment Agency and other stak
eholders will be undertaken on all proposals concerned with or affecting access to the 
riverside and the foreshore. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
  
 RIVER THAMES 
165 
 
 POLICY RTC3 
DESIGN AND APPEARANCE OF DEVELOPMENT  WITHIN THE THAMES POLICY AREA 
Development will not be permitted within the Thames Policy Area as shown on the 
Policies Map, unless it: 
•  respects the riverside, including the foreshore, context and heritage assets; 
•  is of a high standard of accessible and inclusive design; and 
•  maintains or enhances the quality of the built, natural and historic environment. 
The council will encourage the greening and naturalising of the river bank and/or flood defences  
wit
h reference to the Thames Estuary 2100 Plan to create habitats for wildlife and improve the 
visual attractiveness of the area. Schemes that meet these requirements, and, by their design, contribute to creating an attractive, safe and interesting riparian environment will be welcomed. The council will require the submission of a design and access statement as part of a planning  
application within the Thames Policy Area. 
Justification 
11.10 In addition to the general design policies, development on the riverside needs to respect the u
nique character of the river, having particular regard to the height, massing and bulk  
of development and its relationship to the river corridor, river walk and/or river edge, its tributaries and foreshore, as well as landward development. The river and much of the riverside is subject to conservation area status, whilst the river itself is a nature conservation  
area of metropolitan importance and development must protect its ecological value. 
11.11  The aim is to secure a special quality for all new development on the river and riverside, and where a
ppropriate to enhance the vitality of the riverfront and include river-related uses that  
attract the public. The design and access statements should include: 
•  an assessment of scale, mass, height, silhouette, density, layout, materials and colour   
in relation to the local context, including river frontage; 
• impacts on local and strategic views, including views across, along and from the  river, the skyline and local landmarks and historic buildings and structures and archaeological remains; 
• impacts on navigation, hydrology and ecological interests; 
•proposals for river edge treatment, including evidence of the Environment Agency’s  
agreement if the 16 m setback for development from the river flood defences is not met and impact on the integrity of flood defences; 
• visual and physical permeability and links with the river’s hinterland; and 
•  sections on protecting and enhancing public access to and along the river, landscaping,  
open spaces and street furniture and lighting. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
S
 
 RIVER THAMES 
166 
11.12 The council will refer to conservation area character areas character profiles and to the 
‘Th
ames Strategy – Kew to Chelsea (2000)’ to assist in identifying the qualities of the Thames  
Policy Area, including: 
i.  the individual character of reaches within the borough;  
ii. 
 areas, sites, buildings, structures, landmarks, skylines, landscapes and views of particular  
sensi
tivity and importance; 
iii.  
 development sites and regeneration opportunities; 
iv.sites of ecological importance; 
v.  sites of archaeological importance; 
vi. focal points (existing and proposed) of public activity; and 
vii.    public access and recreation opportunities. 
11.13  In respect of proposals for tall buildings, further policy guidance is provided in policy DC3 
‘Ta
ll Buildings’. The South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area policy has additional guidance  
for this area. 
POLICY RTC4 
WATER-BA SED ACTIVITY ON THE THAME  
Development will not be permitted if it would re sult in the loss of existing facilities  
in the river for water-based activities and uses, unless the facilities are demonstrably 
surplus to current or anticipated requirements, or unless alternative facilities of similar or greater utility are to be provided. Specific requirements regarding development of the borough’s three safeguarded wharves are set out in the London Plan. 
Developments that include provision in the river for water-based and river-related 
acti
vities and uses, including new permanent moorings, passenger services, and for 
facilities associated therewith, particularly where these would be publicly accessible, will be welcomed, provided: 
a.   they are suitably located and compatible with the character of the river, the riverside, and the 
impo
rtance of the river as a wildlife habitat; 
 b.they do not impede or give rise to hazards to navigation, water flow, the integrity of flood defen
ces or public safety; and 
c.  they accord with other objectives and policies of the Plan. 
Justification 
11.14 The River Thames can and should be used in ways that reflect its special character, for exa
mple as a base for many water-related recreational, leisure and commercial activities,  
a transport route that can relieve congestion on road and rail, a feature of the landscape  and a habitat for many varieties of flora and fauna. The river also provides a home for a 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 RIVER THAMES 
167 
 
 
 number of boat dwellers. A range of temporary and permanently moored vessels can 
add di
versity and vibrancy to the river. However, these need to be carefully located and 
appropriate management plans secured through planning conditions or Section 106 agreements to ensure the character and amenity value of the river is protected. Where developments include provision for new moorings, the Thames Strategy Kew-Chelsea (2000) should be considered. 
11.15 It is important to retain and improve the river infrastructure such as drawdocks, slipways, steps, s
tairs, hards, piers and pontoons because these enable access to and from the river 
for water-based activities such as sailing and rowing and for improved passenger services  
on the River Thames. Although, the council wishes to see increased use of the river and will  
seek new facilities in riverside development, a balance must always be struck with regard  
to other issues such as ecological and navigational interests and the amenity of residential neighbours. In particular, improving the quality of the river for aquatic life could be adversely affected by inappropriate development extending onto the foreshore or into the river and proposals will be resisted unless these serve a water based purpose. 
11.16  In considering proposals for the use of the river, the council will consult and collaborate with a
ppropriate organisations such as the Port of London Authority and the Environment 
Agency. Proposals for development on the three safeguarded wharves are subject to referral to the Mayor of London under amended directions issued to the council in 2000. London  
Plan (2016) policy 7.26 and supporting text set out the viability tests against which the redevelopment of safeguarded wharves for other land uses should be assessed. In addition, the development of sites adjacent or opposite safeguarded wharves should be designed in  
such a way so as to minimise the potential for conflicts of use and disturbances. 
11.17 The council will work with TfL and the Port of London Authority to encourage the deve
lopment and provision of passenger riverboat services for both leisure and commuting,  
not only eastwards between Putney Bridge and Central London, but also westwards towards Hammersmith and Chiswick. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk RIVER THAMES 
168 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 SECTION 12 
DESIGN AND 
CONSERV ATION 
  
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
170 
DESIGN AND  
CONSERVATION 
POLICY DC1 
BUILT ENVIRONMENT 
All development within the borough, should create a high quality urban environment 
that respects and enhances its townscape context and heritage assets. There should 
be an approach to accessible and inclusive urban design that demonstrates how good design, quality public realm, landscaping, heritage assets and land use can be integrated to help regenerate places. 
Justification 
12.1 The council will expect applicants to consider urban design in a wide context. It is not just  
abo
ut the design and materials of individual buildings. There should be a holistic approach to  
design that considers what makes a place function and how buildings, public realm, land uses  
and movement patterns can combine to produce attractive, distinctive and safe areas that  
achieve the highest standards. The council will expect all development proposals to provide  an accessible environment that meets the needs of all users. 
12.2  The existing character of the borough is heavily influenced by a variety of historical, land
scape and architectural assets. Some of these are of national importance, such as listed  
buildings and the Fulham Palace Moated Site, whereas others are of borough importance, including archaeological priority areas (see Appendix 5) and locally listed buildings of merit.  
However, whether they are of national or local importance, they should be considered in  
all developments in accordance with the policies of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)
52 and the associated Historic England Historic Environment Planning Practice Guide. 
12.3 Many residents value the human scale of the traditional streetscape in the borough and oft
en want to see this maintained in new development. Where this is appropriate the council 
will seek this form of design in development proposals. In addition, all new development will need to be inclusive and accessible to the whole community, and designed to minimise opportunities for crime and anti-social behaviour. A large proportion of the public realm is public highway, and works should follow the best practice design principles laid out in  
“Streetsmart” which will regularly be reviewed and updated. 
52 Communities and Local Government, National Planning Policy Framework, March 2012 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
171 
POLICY DC2 
DESIGN OF NEW BUILD  
New build development will be permitted if it  is of a high standard of design and 
compatible with the scale and character of existing development and its setting. 
All proposals must be designed to respect: 
a.  the historical context and townscape setting of the site, and its sense of place; 
b.  the scale, mass, form and grain of surrounding development and connections to it; 
c.  the relationship of the proposed development to the existing townscape, including the local 
str
eet pattern, local landmarks and the skyline; 
d. the local design context, including the prevailing rhythm and articulation of frontages, local 
bui
lding materials and colour, and locally distinctive architectural detailing, and thereby 
promote and reinforce local distinctiveness; 
 e.good neighbourliness and the principles of residential amenity; 
f. the local landscape context and where appropriate should provide high quality landscaping and pu
blic realm with good permeability;  
g.  sustainability objectives; including adaptation to, and mitigation of, the effects of climate change; 
h
.  the principles of accessible and inclusive design; and  
i. principles of Secured by Design. 
Justification 
12.4 The council is committed to excellence in urban design in all new development within the boro
ugh. This includes consideration of both buildings and open spaces and the relationship  
between the two; a balance between the need for neighbourliness and the scope for design  
freedom. New development should embrace sustainable design principles and contribute  
positively to the public domain at all levels; improving legibility and permeability, respecting  
the overall height and form of neighbouring development, its massing as well as its rhythm  
and articulation of facades. 
12.5  The design of new development should be informed by, and developed from, a considered  
ana
lysis of the existing townscape, including the setting and role of the site within the local 
environment. Where appropriate, this analysis should be carefully laid-out and fully explained in the Design and Access Statement accompanying the planning application. 
12.6  Buildings should have a visual identity appropriate to their location and intended use. The aim 
is no
t to stifle innovation but to promote or reinforce local distinctiveness. All development 
should be human in scale, and be designed with details and materials that complement the local area. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
172 
12.7  The council will encourage development which visually enhances the borough, and avoids  
harm by en
suring that the bulk and massing of schemes are appropriate in relation to the 
surroundings. In the general assessment of bulk and massing, full consideration will be given 
to amenities of neighbouring properties against Planning Standards included in the Mayor of  
London’s Housing SPG53 . 
 12.8 All the above policy criteria must be considered in relation to the existing fabric of the borou
gh and in particular the context of the development site. Much of the borough is of  
a traditional character reflected in the number of conservation areas. The finer grain and traditional form of much of the borough requires a particular design approach and in many  
streets there is a strong pattern of development in existence which derives much of its character from the uniform appearance of the streetscape. 
12.9 It is recognised that new build development within areas experiencing substantial change in  
the bor
ough, such as regeneration and opportunity areas, provide the opportunity to create  
a high quality architectural character, and sense of place which would add to the boroughs  
townscape character. It will be important for the design of such sites to be informed by the character of the surrounding environment, and the role of the site within a wider context.  
Larger schemes should connect to their surroundings, allowing permeability through the site  
and providing a high quality public realm. Larger schemes should aim to meet the criteria outlined in the Building for Life Assessment. 
12.10  Where appropriate, new development should contribute to an improved and more legible public
 realm. The council promotes a high standard of design for the public realm in its design  
guidance – Streetsmart and the Riverside Walk Enhancement Report. These documents encourage reduced clutter and promote high standards of design in the public realm which  is harmonious with, and enhances, the local area thereby reinforcing local distinctiveness. 
12.11 In its consideration of proposed new development, the council will seek to ensure that  
deve
lopments are sustainable, durable and adaptable. Designs should deliver safe and 
inclusive environments. All development should be sited, designed and laid out to offer ease of entry, egress and use by disabled people, and for parents of small children and others  
with needs for an environment which is accessible and inclusive. Approval may be required  
under the Building Regulations to make sure that buildings are constructed or adapted in the right way, and with suitable materials. In particular, Fire Regulations have to be checked both  
from a structural aspect and also to ensure fast and easy escape from a building. Building  
regulations are completely separate from planning control and approval under them does  
not mean that planning permission has been given, nor does a planning permission imply approval under the Building Regulations. Applicants are advised to contact Building Control for guidance and advice early in the design stages of a scheme 
53 . 
 Mayor of London’s Housing Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) – March 2016 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
173
POLICY DC3 
TALL BUILDINGS 
Tall buildings, which are significantly higher than the general prevailing height of  
the surrounding townscape and which have a disruptive and harmful impact on the 
skyline, will be resisted by the council. However, areas where tall buildings may be appropriate are as follows: 
•  White City Regeneration Area; 
• Earls Court & West Kensington Opportunity Area; 
•  South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area; and 
• Hammersmith Town Centre. 
In these areas identified as potentially appropriate for tall buildings, any proposal will  
need
 to demonstrate that it: 
a.has a positive relationship to the surrounding townscape context in terms of scale, streetscape and built form; 
b. is of t
 he highest quality of architectural design and materials with an appropriate form and 
silhouette which contributes positively to the built heritage and image of the borough; 
c. has an ac ceptable impact on the skyline, and views from and to open spaces, the riverside and 
w
aterways and other locally important views and prospects; 
d.has had full regard to the significance of heritage assets including the setting of, and views to  
and from, such assets, has no unacceptable harmful impacts, and should comply with Historic  
England guidance on tall buildings; 
e. is supported by appropriate transport infrastructure; 
f. has an appropriate design at the base of the tall building and provides ground floor activity; 
g. interacts positively to the public realm and contributes to the permeability of the area; 
h.is of a sustainable design and construction, including minimising energy use and the risk of  
overheating through passive design measures, and the design allows for adaptation of the space; 
i.does not have a detrimental impact on the local environment in terms of microclimate, overshadowing, light spillage and vehicle movements; and 
j. respects the principles of accessible and inclusive design. 
Justification 
12.12  Due to the generally low rise character of the borough, most areas will be sensitive to  
the i
mpact of tall buildings. However, there is scope for tall buildings in the regeneration  
of the borough. The general character of any particular area will always be an important consideration in assessing the acceptability of tall buildings and a full design appraisal of the impact of a tall building will always be required. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
174
 12.13 The White City Regeneration Area includes some parts which are less constrained in terms 
of loc
al townscape context than other parts of the borough and so tall buildings may be 
appropriate, providing a distinctive recognisable landmark. 
12.14  Hammersmith Town Centre has a number of existing tall buildings and further tall buildings cou
ld be appropriate in some parts of the centre. Any proposals for tall buildings in the 
town centre will need to respect public parks and squares, historical context views from  
the river and make a positive contribution to the skyline emphasising a point of civic or  
visual significance, demonstrate tangible urban design benefits, and be consistent with the council’s wider regeneration objectives. 
12.15  In the Earls Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area there may also be some scope for tall  
bui
ldings in carefully selected locations that are less constrained by the surrounding context. 
12.16 Parts of the South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area may be appropriate for tall buildings (se
e Tall Buildings background paper). Elsewhere, there are areas in the borough, particularly 
in conservation areas and along some parts of the Thames, that are particularly sensitive to  
tall buildings and where heights of buildings should generally be restricted. 
12.17  The council recognises and values the variation in character across the borough, and is  
com
mitted to the preservation of the borough’s built heritage and overriding townscape 
character found in large swathes of the borough of tree-lined street blocks of traditional  
family housing with rear gardens. In these areas of consistent townscape character, tall  
buildings would be seriously intrusive. In addition, in other areas of the borough, some parts of which are protected by conservation area designation, higher buildings can detrimentally impact upon the character and skyline, especially where they intrude on established views and skylines from open spaces, the river, riverside or bridges. The impact of tall buildings in  
sensitive locations should be given particular consideration. 
12.18 
 The policy aims to ensure that tall buildings do not harm the built heritage and townscape cha
racter, but are properly located, contribute in a positive manner to enhance a sense of  
place and are an integral part of the long term spatial vision for the borough. The townscape character of the borough suggests that there are few opportunities for tall buildings in  
the borough. It is important therefore that within the limited areas identified, the precise locations for tall buildings meet the criteria of this policy and the Historic England/CABE Guidance on Tall Buildings. It is this delicate balance that has determined the council’s  
approach to tall buildings in the borough. 
12.19 The Strategic Linear View from King Henry’s Mound in Richmond Park to St Paul’s Cathedral  
as i
dentified in the London View Framework, crosses the borough. The view corridor is  
shown on the Policies Map and will be protected. 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
175
POLICY DC4 
ALTERATIONS AND EXTENSIONS (INCLUDING OUTBUILDINGS ) 
 The council will require a high standard of design in all alterations and extensions 
to e
xisting buildings. These should be: 
•  compatible with the scale and character of existing development, neighbouring properties and t
heir setting; 
•  successfully integrated into the architectural design of the existing building; and 
•  subservient and should never dominate the parent building in bulk, scale, materials or design. 
In considering applications for alterations and extensions the council will take into  
accou
nt the following: 
a.scale, form, height and mass; 
b.proportion; 
c. vertical and horizontal emphasis; 
d.relationship of solid to void; 
e.materials; 
f. impact on skyline silhouette (for roof top additions); 
g.relationship to existing building, spaces between buildings and gardens; 
h. good neighbourliness in particular the amenities of the neighbouring properties, and oth
er properties most directly affected by the proposal; and 
i.the principles of accessible and inclusive design .
Justification  
12.20 The design of extensions or alterations to buildings is of considerable importance, because the
y can change the character of individual buildings and that of an area as a whole. This   
is of particular concern in terraces of uniform appearance. The council recognises that   
there will be changing needs and requirements of occupiers, but seeks to ensure that  
extensions and alterations, even the most minor ones, do not affect the inherent qualities  
of existing properties. 
12.21  
www.lbhf.gov.uk To avoid an incongruous and cluttered townscape appearance, additions to buildings such as  
roof and rear extensions and outbuildings, should be designed in keeping with the character of the building or complement its architecture without being unduly dominant. Roof level alterations and extensions, including front mansards will need to integrate successfully with  
the building concerned, using matching and high quality materials and execution. Where there are existing extensions on a street these will be taken into account in determining the appropriateness of new proposals. Other proposed installations to existing buildings such   
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
176
as external lighting, CCTV cameras, antennae and solar panels should also be designed and  
positioned to minimise their impact. 
12.22 Plant and other building services should also be integrated into the design of the building. 
Wher
e additions cannot be incorporated into the volume of the building, building services  
located at roof level should be positioned and adequately screened to minimise noise and visual intrusion. 
12.23 Planted front and rear gardens form an important part of the townscape character of many  
of the
 borough’s streets. 
12.24  Article 4 Directions will continue to be made to restrict forms of development which could hav
e an unsympathetic impact on the character and appearance of individual buildings  
and terraces. 
POLICY DC5 
SHOPFRONTS 
In order to improve the appearance of the borough’s streets, the council will  
encourage high quality shopfronts that  are designed to respect the age and 
architectural style of the building concerned, achieving a satisfactory relationship  
between the ground floor and the rest of the building. The scale of the shopfront 
should be carefully considered with its proportions, detailing (inc luding vertical and 
horizontal subdivision) and materials, which have an affinity with the building. 
Where a commercial premises with an original shopfront is converted to another use or a 
tra
ditional shopfront remains, the council will expect it to be retained and restored. 
New developments which include retail areas should provide a framework into which a shopfront and s
ignage of a suitable scale can be inserted. 
Fascia signs and projecting signs should not be overly large and should be designed to be app
ropriate to the scale and design of the shopfront. 
New shopfronts should be designed to meet the principles of accessible and inclusive design. 
Justification 
12.25  Shopfronts and their associated advertisements play a vital role in determining the character of ou
r town centres and shopping streets, primarily because they are the part of the building 
which has direct interface with the public realm, and have an immediate relationship with  
the human scale. The design of new shopfronts, therefore, needs careful attention.  
12.26 Shops in Hammersmith and Fulham are primarily located in the three major town centres of Ha
mmersmith, Shepherds Bush and Fulham and within the network of designated local 
shopping centres. However, there are also a large number of smaller shopping parades  and individual units. The presence of retail use can help to ensure a lively environment in  
these areas.  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
177
12.27 The council is committed to maintaining the vitality and improving the townscape in   
these
 areas. 
12.28 The cumulative effect of better shopfront designs will be the enhancement of the visual  
appea
rance of the borough’s shopping streets, thereby improving first impression and  
quality for users, visitors and potential investors. The emphasis is on good quality design   
of shop fronts and advertisements which will enhance the character of the shopping street 
(see Planning Guidance SPD for further detail). The council will also take into account any relevant supplementary planning documents.  
12.29  The key aim is to ensure that shopfronts are not designed in isolation but are considered   
as an i
mportant part of the building in which they are housed. The design of the shopfront 
should be informed by the architectural style and character of the building and the framework provided by the building within which the shopfront can be integrated.  
12.30  In designing new shopfronts it is important to ensure that the entrance is accessible to  
whe
elchairs and pushchairs. 
12.31 Where a former retail unit is converted to another use, such as residential, the council will  
expe
ct the retention of the shopfront including original windows and glazing bars, where 
it is historically or architecturally interesting, and the shop surround of pilasters and fascia  
where they exist, so that there is no adverse impact on the character of an area.  
POLICY DC6 
REPLACEMENT WINDOWS 
Replacement windows should respect the architectural character of the building and 
its surroundings. It will be important that the design and material of replacement windows match the original windows as closely as possible in terms of type and size, method of opening, profile and section, and sub-division. 
Justification 
12.32 In most buildings, the detailed design of the windows is a fundamental component of the eleva
tion and can contribute greatly to the visual character of the building. Windows are 
particularly vulnerable elements in that they are relatively easily replaced or altered. Where this work is not carried out sensitively, it can have a profound effect on the building, diluting its character, and detrimentally impacting upon the appearance of the general street scene.  
12.33  The policy encourages the selection of a design appropriate to the architectural character and a
ge of the building and includes the design attributes that would be important to  
consider in order to achieve a successful design of replacement window. In most cases, this  
would mean a design which replicates the design and material of the windows that formed  
part of the original composition. It may be possible to base the design of the replacement windows on those that may survive elsewhere in the building or it may be necessary to look  
for examples in other buildings of the same period and style close by. The aim of the policy  
www.lbhf.gov.uk DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
178 
is to retain the uniformity and consistency of the original design of each building, block 
or terrace in the borough thereby protecting the quality and architectural integrity  of  the 
building and character of the street scene from harmful incremental alterations. 
POLICY DC7 
VIEWS AND LANDMARKS 
The council will protect the strategic view of St Paul’s Cathedral and important local 
views shown on the Policies Map. 
Local views afforded by the open nature of the borough’s riverfront are important in determining 
the c
haracter of each stretch of the riverside. Many heritage assets are located along the river,   
and it is important that their setting and relationship with the river is preserved or enhanced.  
The council will refuse permission where applications in these views would lead to harm to  
the s
ignificance of a designated heritage asset and townscape generally, unless it can be 
demonstrated that public benefits outweigh the harm caused. Opportunities for enhancement of strategic and local views will be pursued where they arise.  
1.  Applications within the Thames Policy Area will not be permitted if it would cause 
unac
ceptable harm to the view from the following points: 
 a.  from Hammersmith Bridge, the view along the river, foreshore, and riverside development 
and l
andscape between Hammersmith Terrace to the west and Fulham Football Ground  
to the south;  
 b.  from Putney Bridge, the views along the river, foreshore and riverside, extending upstream  
from A
ll Saints Church and its environs, along Bishops Park as far as Fulham Football  
Ground, and from Putney Railway Bridge the view downstream to the grounds of the 
Hurlingham Club; or  
 c.  from Wandsworth Bridge, the view up and downstream of the river, its foreshore and bank
s, and of commercial wharves and riverside buildings.  
 
 
 
 
  
2. Applications will also not be permitted if it would cause unacceptable harm to the 
view from with
in the Thames Policy Area of any of the following important local 
landmarks identified on the Policies Map, or their settings: 
 a.  Upper and Lower Mall. The richness, diversity and beauty of the historical waterfront  
whic
h includes Hammersmith Terrace, Kelmscott House and neighbouring group of  
listed buildings, and the open space of Furnivall Gardens allowing views of the skyline of  
Hammersmith and the spire of St. Paul’s Church;  
 b.  Bishops Park. The parallel avenues of mature London plane trees and dense shrubbery  whic
h define the character of this important open space and the riverfront;  
 c.  grounds of the Hurlingham Club. The landscaped edge of the grounds providing glimpsed views t
o the listed Hurlingham House;  
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
179 
d. H ammersmith Bridge. This fine example of a suspension bridge is particularly dominant, and 
is a
n important landmark along this stretch of the river; or   
e. Pu tney Bridge and the adjacent All Saints Church. 
Justification 
12.34 The London Plan (2016)  identifies a set of strategically important views of which one, the 
lin
ear view from King Henry’s Mound in Richmond Park to St Paul’s Cathedral crosses the  
borough (see Policies Map). 54
12.35  The townscape character of the borough is one of generally tight knit streets of domestic  
scal
e architecture with irregular street blocks. This urban form, together with effect of the 
borough’s topography, places limitations on the appreciation of mid and long distance views 
across the area. However, the riverside and open spaces afford some important local key views. 
12.36 The council has identified key views and landmarks on the Policies Map and in the character pro
files for the conservation areas. The views identified make a strong contribution to the 
character of the townscape in any specific location. The preservation of the essential qualities  
of any view, or indeed the enhancement of those qualities will be sought. The impact of  
any proposal on these views will therefore form the basis of any evaluation of a proposal  
affecting heritage assets and other areas of townscape sensitivity. 
12.37 Views within the borough are key elements in determining the character of the townscape and c
ontribute to the interest of areas. The council will seek to ensure that proposed  
development, due to its location, scale and massing, does not harm these views. The council will seek to ensure that significant views in and out of conservation areas are not unacceptably harmed from new development such that the conservation area is preserved or enhanced. Development when viewed from open spaces and along the riverside has great prominence due to the openness of the location and should therefore be of the highest quality. The council will ensure that development which affects the River Thames pays due regard to the riverside’s distinctive character, and is of a bulk, massing, scale and appearance  
which is appropriate to its surroundings. 
12.38  The views afforded by the open nature of the riverfront are important in determining the cha
racter of each stretch of the riverside in the conservation areas, and will therefore be 
crucial in assessing the acceptability or otherwise of development proposals along the river’s edge. In line with the London Plan (2016), the council has identified a number of  
views across and along the river which are important to the local scene and which are to be protected. The council has included in this list of important views, all river edges of  
historical significance, corridor views of particular importance and views towards important landmarks. The views towards specific landmarks can be enjoyed from various viewpoints  
along the riverside. These views will vary in nature and content, as the viewpoint changes. Locations have been marked on the Policies Map which represent the longest viewing point towards each landmark. 
54  Mayor of London, The London Plan: spatial development strategy for Greater London, GLA March 2016 
www.lbhf.gov.uk  
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
180 
12.39  The landmarks identified include: bridges, areas of open space, and groups of buildings 
alo
ng a historic riverfront. All have strong links with the river and it is important that their 
setting and relationship with the river is preserved. Bridges are particularly important landmarks. They subdivide the river, and help to define the character of each stretch.  
Furthermore, bridges are important vantage points and command extensive views along  the riverside. 
12.40 The council is aware that the landmarks identified are also enjoyed in important views from o
utside the borough boundary, and will ensure that these are fully considered when 
assessing the impact of any development which may impact on these views.  
POLICY DC8 
HERITAGE AND CONSERVATION 
The council will conserve the significance of the borough’s historic environment by  
protecting, restoring and enhancing its heritage assets. These assets include: listed  
buildings, conservation areas historic parks and gardens, the scheduled monument  
of Fulham Palace Moated site, unscheduled archaeological remains and buildings and 
features of local interest. When determining applications affecting heritage assets, the council will apply the following principles : 
a.
  the presumption will be in favour of the conservation, restoration and enhancement of  
heritage assets, and proposals should secure the long term future of heritage assets. The more  
significant the designated heritage asset, the greater the presumption should be in favour of   
its conservation; 
b.  applications affecting designated heritage assets, including alterations and extensions to  
bui
ldings will only be permitted if the significance of the heritage asset is conserved or  
enhanced; 
c.  applications should conserve the setting of, make a positive contribution to, or reveal the 
sig
nificance of the heritage asset. The presence of heritage assets should inform high quality 
design within their setting; 
d. applications affecting non-designated heritage assets (buildings and artefacts of local impo
rtance and interest) will be determined having regard to the scale and impact of any  
harm or loss and the significance of the heritage asset in accordance with paragraph 135 of   
the National planning Policy Framework; 
e.  particular regard will be given to matters of scale, height, massing, alignment, materials and use; 
f.  where changes of use are proposed for heritage assets, the proposed use, and any alterations 
tha
t are required resulting from the proposed use should be consistent with the aims of  
conservation of the asset’s significance, including securing its optimum viable use; 
g. applications should include a description of the significance of the asset concerned and an  
asse
ssment of the impact of the proposal upon it or its setting which should be carried out 
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 DESIGN AND CONSERVATION 
181 
with the assistance of a suitably qualified person. The extent of the requirement should  
be proportionate to the nature and level of the asset’s significance. Where archaeological  
remains of national significance may be affected applications should also be supported by an  
archaeological field evaluation; 
h. proposals which involve substantial harm, or less than substantial harm to the significance  
of a heri
tage asset will be refused unless it can be demonstrated that they meet the criteria 
specified in paragraph 133 and 134 of the National Planning Policy Framework;  
i. where a heritage asset cannot be retained in its entirety or when a change of use is proposed 
the d
eveloper should ensure that a suitably qualified person carries out an analysis (including  
photographic surveys) of its design and significance, in order to record and advance the 
understanding of heritage in the borough. The extent of the requirement should be proportionate to the nature and level of the asset’s significance; , 
j. the proposal respects the principles of accessible and inclusive design;  
k. where measures to mitigate the effects of climate change are proposed, the applicants will be 
req
uired to demonstrate how they have considered the significance of the heritage asset and 
tailored their proposals accordingly; 
l.  expert advice will be required to address the need to evaluate and conserve archaeological  
rem
ains, and to advise on the appropriate mitigation measures in cases where excavation is 
justified; and  
m. securing the future of heritage assets at risk identified on Historic England’s national register, as pa
rt of a positive strategy for the historic environment.   
Justification  
12.41  Planning [listed buildings and conservation areas] act 1990 sets out the principal statutory  
dut
ies which must be considered in the determination of any application affecting listed  
buildings or conservation areas. The Act requires local planning authorities to: 
•  Have special regard to the desirability of preserving the [listed] building or its setting or   
any
 features of special, architectural, or historic interest which it possesses 
•  Pay special attention to the desirability of preserving or enhancing the character or  
appe
arance of the conservation area. 
12.42 Hammersmith and Fulham has maintained a much-valued built heritage, much of which falls  
wit
hin the borough’s 44 designated conservation areas (see Policies Map and Table 5 below). 
In many of these areas, the street provides a sense of scale and the setting for the consistent  
terraces of uniform architectural design. Within the borough, there are over 500 statutory Listed Buildings and approximately 2,150 locally designated Buildings of Merit, as well as a number of archaeological priority areas and the ancient monument of the Fulham Palace  
moated site (see Policies Map and Appendix 5). The heritage assets make an important contribution to the townscape character of the borough. 
www.lbhf.gov.uk 182
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DESIGN AND CONSERVATION
Table 5  Conservation Areas 
Conservation areas in Hammersmith and Fulham 
1St. Peter’s Square 23Avonmore & Olympia 
2The Mall 24St. Mary’s 
3Brook Green 25Bradmore 
4Hurlingham 26Melrose 
5Bishops Park 27Baron’s Court 
6Imperial Square 28Crabtree 
7Studdridge Street 29Central Fulham 
8Ravenscourt Park & Starch Green 30Moore Park 
9Walham Green 31The Billings and Brompton Cutting 
10Parson’s Green 32Ingersoll/Arminger 
11Queen’s Club Gardens 33Coningham Road/Lime Grove 
12Wormholt & Old Oak 34Gunter Estate 
13Westcroft Square 35Turneville/Chesson 
14Walham Grove 36Lakeside/Sinclair/Blythe Road 
15Barclay Road 37King Street (East) 
16Fulham Park Gardens 38Colehill Gardens 
17Sedlescombe Road 39Fulham Reach 
18Dorcas Estate 40Putney Bridge 
19Fitz George & Fitz James 41Sands End 
20Hammersmith Grove 42Wood Lane 
21Shepherds Bush 43Cleverly Estate 
22Hammersmith Broadway 44Hammersmith Odeon183
www.lbhf.gov.ukDESIGN AND CONSERVATION
12.43  Heritage assets are a non-renewable resource. Proposals should therefore actively avoid harm 
and p
romote developments that reconcile heritage significance with economic and social 
aspirations to achieve sustainable development. 
12.44  New development should have a good relationship with the character of the surrounding his
toric context. The character of a conservation area will be derived from the individual 
buildings within it, their relationship to each other, and the spaces between them; from the townscape in its broadest sense, and from the interrelationship between the public realm, open spaces and the built form. The character of the conservation area may be uniform, or, in larger conservation areas, may vary within its boundaries. The character may also be defined by its land uses and by its archaeological potential. 
12.45  The special character of the conservation areas makes it essential that new development acc
ords with their special architectural and visual qualities. The character profiles produced 
for the borough’s conservation areas will assist in interpreting the scale, massing, height and alignment of development and also the finer grain elements such as vertical and horizontal rhythms, materials and decorative or architecturally important features. Reference will also be made to street building lines and local building traditions where appropriate. New buildings will not necessarily be required to copy their older neighbours, although there will be places where a facsimile development will be appropriate. The aim should be to promote high quality design which contributes positively to the area, harmonising the new development with its neighbours in the conservation area. Valued historic assets can inform contemporary high quality design. 
12.46  The council will protect its listed buildings from demolition or harmful alteration and from dev
elopment which has a harmful impact on their setting. 
12.47  No specific powers other than normal planning controls are available to regulate the use to whi
ch listed buildings are put, but the council considers that it is important that these 
buildings should not be used in a manner which is harmful to their character. Changes of use of listed buildings often require internal and external alterations that may affect the significance of the heritage asset. It will therefore take every opportunity to persuade those involved to co-operate in finding appropriate uses and may in certain circumstances be prepared to allow a use that would not normally be approved on other policy grounds, provided this will protect the character of the building. The council expects the owners  and/or users of listed buildings to play their part in their upkeep, and will use its legal powers to ensure proper maintenance of buildings and their settings. 
12.48  The council will work with Historic England to maintain the Heritage at Risk Register and red
uce the number of heritage assets at risk in the borough. 
12.49  The council wishes to promote simple and uncomplicated access, into and around listed bui
ldings. The goal is for disabled people or people with mobility problems to use the 
property in the same way as everyone else. This will call for creative and sensitive solutions. There may be cases where a compromise solution is necessary (see Easy Access to Historic Buildings – Historic England, 2015). 184
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DESIGN AND CONSERVATION
12.50  There are many buildings in the borough, in addition to the listed buildings, which are of 
merit and which contribute to the character of the locality because of their townscape value, architectural quality or historic associations. Many of these buildings and artefacts are included in a Local Register. Most buildings on the register have been selected through external inspection on the basis of their architectural character and/or their contribution to the visual quality of the street scene. However, there may be instances where the interior of the buildings is valuable. Proposals to add to, or in exceptional cases remove, buildings from the Local Register will be considered as and when appropriate and in consultation with the relevant amenity societies. Furthermore, the council may recommend that particular buildings on the Local Register should be added to the Statutory National List of Buildings  of Special Architectural or Historic Interest (see Planning Guidance SPD for further detail). 
12.51  Locally important buildings are of value in terms of townscape, architectural or historic int
erest. The council will seek to preserve in a manner appropriate to their significance. 
Any alterations should only be carried out in a way that respects the scale, character and materials of the building (see Planning Guidance Supplementary Planning Document). 
12.52  There will be a presumption against proposals which would involve significant alteration  of, o
r cause damage to, or have a harmful impact on the setting of Archaeological Remains 
of National or Local Importance, whether scheduled or not. 
12.53  Applicants will be required to arrange for archaeological field evaluation of any such remains 
wit
hin the archaeological priority areas defined on the Policies Map before applications 
are determined or if found during development works in such areas or elsewhere. Proposals should include provision for the remains and their settings to be protected, enhanced or preserved. Where it is accepted that physical preservation in situ is not possible or not merited, planning permission may be subject to conditions and/or formal agreement requiring the developer to secure investigation and recording of the remains and publication of the results. It is therefore important for developers to consult Greater London Archaeological Advisory Service (GLAAS) at an early stage. Further guidance on archaeological priority areas can be found on the Historic England website. New buildings will normally destroy any archaeological remains and therefore these should be excavated by a qualified archaeological unit before work commences. This is because the context of any archaeological find is an essential part of the historical value of any remains. The council considers it is reasonable for a person threatening part of the community’s heritage to fund adequate excavation, the subsequent academic and popular reports, as well as publicity both for the excavation and the reports. The council will encourage developers to inform local archaeological societies of the start of any archaeological excavation and to make arrangements for public viewing of excavations in progress, wherever possible, and for subsequent analysis, interpretation and presentation to the archaeological and amenity societies and the public of any archaeological results and finds.185
www.lbhf.gov.ukDESIGN AND CONSERVATION
POLICY DC9 
ADVERTISEMENTS 
The council will require a high standard of design of advertisements, which should 
be in scale and in keeping with the character of their location and should not have an unacceptable impact on road safety. 
The council will resist excessive or obtrusive advertising and illuminated signs which adversely 
aff
ect the character and appearances of the neighbourhood or the site/building, residential 
amenity or public safety. The design of advertisements should be appropriate to their context  and should generally be restrained in quantity and form. 
Advertisements should normally be located at ground floor level and in the case of shopfronts and 
com
mercial buildings, relate to the commercial zone of the street frontage and the architectural 
design of the facade.  
Hoardings 
Hoardings and other large advertisements, such as digital screens, will be acceptable where they 
are o
f an appropriate scale with their surroundings and where they do not have a detrimental 
impact on areas sensitive to the visual impact of hoardings such as conservation areas, listed buildings and other heritage assets, residential areas, open spaces or waterside land.
Advertisement Shrouds 
Advertisement shrouds will be permitted where the advertisement would not impose a 
det
rimental impact on the building or street scene in terms of the size, illumination and/or 
content; or where the advertisement would not be harmful to residential amenity or public safety Where advertisement shrouds are considered to be acceptable, they should be accompanied by a 1:1 depiction of the building and only be displayed for a limited period related to the reasonable duration of the building works. . 
 
Justification 
12.54  The display of an advertisement can have a considerable impact on the visual amenity of the str
eet scene if its size, design and siting are handled insensitively. The council takes the view 
that any advertisements requiring consent should not adversely affect the character and visual amenity of individual buildings and streets. This will be particularly important where advertisements affect the borough’s heritage assets or their setting. There is one area of special advertisement control in the borough, namely the Mall Conservation Area. 
12.55  All forms of advertisements displayed above ground floor level would in many circumstances 
res
ult in visual clutter in the street scene and detract from the architectural composition and 
scale of the buildings to which they relate. Further detailed guidance for shopfronts and advertisements in conservation areas is included in the Planning Guidance Supplementary Planning Document.186
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DESIGN AND CONSERVATION
12.56  Advertisement shrouds are when commercial advertising forms part of a protective screen 
secu
red on scaffolding to screen buildings works being carried out. Buildings that are being 
renovated or undergoing major structural work and require scaffolding or netting around them, may be considered suitable for temporary advertisement shrouds. 
12.57  Advertisement shrouds on heritage assets will only be acceptable where the revenue gener
ated directly contributes to the restoration of the heritage asset. In order to avoid 
premature or prolonged periods of display, which could be harmful to amenity, the council will require evidence of a signed building contract where the display of an advertisement shroud is linked to building works. Where planning permission for building works is required, consent for an advertisement shroud will only be granted once planning permissions has been granted and all pre-commencement conditions have been discharged.  
12.58  The display of estate agents boards within Regulation 7 areas will not be permitted. The cou
ncil will continue to seek the removal of inappropriate advertisements. Regulation 7 areas 
have been designated where the council has received the Secretary of States approval to restrict the display of estate agents boards and these will be kept under review. 
POLICY DC10 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
The council support the expansion of Telecommunications networks, but are 
keen to avoid any detrimental impact on the local townscape. Proposals for telecommunications development should meet the following criteria where applicable: 
a. the proposed apparatus and associated structures should be sited and designed in order to 
int
egrate successfully with the design of the existing building, and thereby minimise its impact 
on the external appearance of the building; 
b. the siting and appearance of the proposed apparatus and associated structures should be com
patible with the scale and character of existing development, their neighbours and their 
setting, and should minimise impact on the visual amenity, character or appearance of the surrounding area; 
c. the siting and appearance of the apparatus and associated structures should not have an 
una
cceptable impact on conservation areas, listed buildings, buildings of merit or areas of  
open space; and 
d. where appropriate, proposed apparatus and associated structures should share locations  
where t
here is an existing facility. 
Justification 
12.59  Mobile communications are now considered an integral part of the success of most bus
iness operations and individual lifestyles. The council will support the expansion of 
telecommunications networks whilst at the same time minimising any detrimental impacts on the visual amenity of the boroughs townscape.187
www.lbhf.gov.ukDESIGN AND CONSERVATION
POLICY DC11 
BASEMENTS AND LIGHTWELLS 
New basements and extensions to existing basements will only be permitted  
where they: 
a. do not extend into or underneath the garden further than 50% of the depth of the host 
bui
lding measured from the principal rear elevation; 
b. do not extend into or underneath the garden further than 50% of the depth of the garden; 
c. are set back from neighbouring property boundaries where it extends beyond the footprint  
of th
e host building; 
d. do not comprise more than one storey. Exceptions may be made on large sites; 
e. do not result in an unacceptable impact on the amenity of adjoining properties or on the  loc
al, natural and historic environment during and post construction; 
f. are designed to minimise the risk of flooding to the property and nearby properties from all sour
ces of flooding; 
g. include a minimum of one metre of soil above any part of the basement beneath a garden; 
h. ensure that the basement helps reduce the volume and flow of surface water run-off through app
ropriate use of SuDS and will provide active drainage devices to minimise the risk of sewer 
flooding; 
i. ensure that lightwells at the front or side of the property are as discreet as possible and allow the scal
e, character and appearance of the property, street or terrace to remain largely unchanged; 
j. are designed to safeguard the structural stability of the existing building, nearby buildings  and o
ther infrastructure; 
k. provide a Construction Method Statement (CMS) (carried out by a qualified structural or civil engi
neer) to be submitted with planning applications for all basement projects; and 
l. provide a construction traffic management plan as part of the CMS to ensure that traffic  and c
onstruction activity does not cause unacceptable harm to pedestrian, cycle, vehicular  
and road safety. 
New self contained basement flats will not be permitted in the Environment Agency’s Flood  Zon
e 3 areas where there is a risk of rapid inundation by flood waters in the event of a breach of 
the river’s flood defences, unless a satisfactory means of escape can be provided. 
Justification 
12.60  For the purposes of this policy, a basement is considered to be a floor of a building which is part
ly or entirely below ground level. A ground or lower ground floor with a floor level partly 
below the ground level (for example on a steeply sloping site) will therefore generally be considered basement development.188
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DESIGN AND CONSERVATION
Size of Basements 
12.61  The council recognises the benefits of new residential basement and lightwells in meeting 
hou
sing needs and residents aspirations. It will permit basements but subject to a number of 
criteria being met, that will safeguard the quality of life. The council will allow extensions of houses and flats into the basement below the building, providing there is no adverse impact on the amenity of neighbouring properties (such as flooding) or negative impact on the street scene due to the need for the provision or alteration of lightwells. 
12.62  The policy criteria states that basements should not exceed 50% of the garden area and not exc
eed 50% of the depth of the host building. Restricting the extent of basement excavations 
to any approved extension and limiting the depth of excavation to a single storey will help to limit the extent and duration of construction. This will help to reduce the impact of basement construction on local residents. This criterion applies to the front garden, the rear garden and gardens to the side of the property individually, rather than calculated as an aggregated garden area for the whole property. The unaffected garden must be in a single area and where relevant should form a continuous area with other neighbouring gardens. Sufficient margins should be left between the site boundaries and any basement construction to sustain growth of vegetation and trees. 
12.63  On large sites, basements of more than one storey may be permitted in certain cir
cumstances. These will generally be new developments located in a commercial setting or 
of the size of an entire or substantial part of an urban block. They should be large enough to accommodate all the plant, equipment and vehicles associated with the development within the site and offer more opportunity to mitigate construction impacts and carbon emissions on site. These schemes will be expected to provide appropriate evidence to demonstrate to the Council’s satisfaction that the development does not harm the built and natural environment or local amenity or increase flood risk. For the purposes of this policy, large sites are considered to be: 
• new major developments, for example schemes which comprise 1000m2 additional 
non-residential floorspace or 10 or more additional dwellings;   
• large schemes located in a commercial setting; or 
• developments the size of an entire or substantial part of an urban block. 
12.64  A ‘single storey’ is considered to be one that cannot be subdivided in the future to create add
itional floors. It is generally about 3 to 4 metres floor to ceiling height but a small extra 
allowance for proposals with a swimming pool may be permitted.189
www.lbhf.gov.ukDESIGN AND CONSERVATION
Flood Risk 
12.65  It is important that proposals for new or extended basements provide clear evidence that 
demon
strates that there is no adverse effect on surface water drainage, the sewers and/or on 
groundwater flows. Opportunities should be taken to integrate sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) such as vegetation and permeable surfaces to help to control surface water runoff. Water butts can also be used to collect rainwater for later re-use. Where proposals cause the loss of vegetation, this can also affect the character of conservation areas and planted rear gardens, thereby impacting on privacy, shade and biodiversity. Therefore, where any part of a basement is constructed below a garden, a minimum of one metre of topsoil should be provided above it to promote infiltration and allow for planting. In areas at risk from flooding, new self contained basement dwellings will not be permitted where they are at risk of rapid inundation by flood waters in the event of failure or breach of flood defences and where no adequate means of escape can be provided because of the risk to life in the event of a flood. Any new basement that is below street level should be designed to reduce flood risk and to minimise any impact from flooding from any source. To protect against sewer flooding, developments must include the provision of a pumped solution or ‘active drainage devices’ incorporating non-return valves to prevent water entering a property from drains and sewers. 
Demolition and Construction 
12.66  Basement excavation often raises concerns about the structural stability of adjacent 
pro
perties because of works to party walls and foundations, in particular. These issues 
may be properly dealt with by means of a party wall agreement under the Party Wall Act 1996. However, the council wishes to encourage good neighbourliness and avoid planning applications which cannot be implemented due to the lack of agreement between the applicant and the owners of neighbouring properties or land instability. The NPPF places significant weight on ground conditions, land stability and local environmental issues (eg. Paragraphs 109, 120 and 121) as material considerations in determining planning applications. Therefore, the council requires applicants to submit a Construction Method Statement (CMS) (carried out by a qualified structural or civil engineer) with the planning application and to make the statement available at the same time to neighbouring owners  to demonstrate that the development accords with the policy. 
12.67  The level of information required will be appropriate with the scale, nature and location of the sc
heme. Basement construction can cause nuisance and disturbance for neighbours 
and others in the vicinity, through construction traffic, parking suspensions and the noise, dust and vibration of construction itself. The applicant must demonstrate that these impacts are kept to acceptable levels under the relevant acts and guidance, taking the cumulative impacts of other development proposals into account. Every effort must be made to locate the building compound and the skip on site or in exceptional circumstances in the highway immediately outside the application site.190
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018DESIGN AND CONSERVATION
12.68  A construction management statement will be required to be submitted with the application 
for basement projects and would be expected to cover: 
• appointment of appropriately qualified civil or structural engineer; 
• a report outlining the ground and hydrological conditions of the site and dealing with gro
undwater flow ensuring structural stability during excavation and demolition; 
• temporary propping/temporary works and construction work, minimising disturbance 
• drilling of boreholes; 
• impact on trees; 
• sequence of temporary works to minimise the effect on neighbours and management  of w
ater flow; 
• consideration of related cumulative impacts; 
• professional verification of works safeguarding amenity: noise vibration and dust from construc
tion work; and 
• construction traffic management plan. 
Lightwells 
12.69  It is very important to minimise the visual impact of light wells, roof lights, railings, steps, 
emergen
cy accesses, plant and other externally visible elements. Care should be taken to 
avoid disturbance to neighbours from light pollution through roof lights and other forms of lighting. Introducing lightwells where they are not an established and positive feature of the streetscape can harm the character or appearance of an area. Where external visible elements are allowed they need to be sensitively designed and sited, respecting the existing character and appearance of the building, streetscape and gardens in the vicinity. Excessively large lightwells will not be permitted in any garden space. Further detail on lightwells is included in the Planning Guidance SPD.SECTION 13 
ENVIRONMENTAL 
SUSTAINABILITY192
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
ENVIRONMENTAL  
SUSTAINABILITY
2035 VISION 
DELIVERING AN ENVIRONMENTALLY  SUSTAINABLE BOROUGH 
Hammersmith and Fulham’s vision is to be the greenest borough by 2035,  
with new buildings being designed to be energy and resource efficient and much more of the borough’s waste to be sustainably managed with an increase in recycling. In particular, new development will be required to minimise energy use and the use of other non renewable resources, as well as facilitating an increase in the use of low and zero carbon technologies to help minimise carbon dioxide (CO
2) 
emissions and air pollutants harmful to health. This will particularly be required  of major developments. 
All development in the borough, both bu ildings and infrastructure will be 
enc
ouraged to be intelligently designed for durable and resilient futures, 
supporting the move to a low-carbon economy and taking account of climate 
change impacts, particularly the risk of flooding. New developments will also be 
expected to contribute towards improving local air quality, particularly where they include potentially major new sources of em issions or could significantly increase 
traffic-generated emissions. 
Developments will be encouraged to contribute to the concept of a “smart city”, 
where mu
ltiple information and communication technology (ICT) solutions are 
integrated in a secure fashion to enable effective performance in terms of energy, water, waste and reducing CO
2 emissions and to improve quality of life. Sustainable 
Drainage Systems (SuDS) will be sought in new developments, and major developments in the regeneration areas will be promoted as zero carbon exemplars.193
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Ravenscourt Park 
Energy efficient boilers
 Recycling bins 
The Talgarth Road Green Corridor194
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
POLICY CC1 
REDUCING CARBON DIOXIDE EMISSIONS 
The council will require all major developments to implement energy conservation 
measures by: 
a. implementing the London Plan (2016) sustainable energy policies and meeting the associated 
carbo
n dioxide (CO2) reduction targets; 
b. ensuring developments are designed to make the most effective use of passive design measu
res, and where an assessment such as BREEAM (or equivalent) is used to determine a 
development’s environmental performance, this must be supplemented with a more detailed Energy Assessment in order to show compliance with the London Plan’s CO
2 reduction targets; 
c. requiring energy assessments for all major developments to demonstrate and quantify how the p
roposed energy efficiency measures and low/zero carbon technologies will reduce the 
expected energy demand and CO2 emissions; 
d. requiring major developments to demonstrate that their heating and/or cooling systems have 
bee
n selected to minimise CO2 emissions. This includes the need to assess the feasibility of 
connecting to any existing decentralised energy systems or integrating new systems such as Combined (Cooling) Heat and Power units or communal heating systems, including heat networks if this can be done without having an unacceptable impact on air quality; and 
e. using on-site renewable energy generation to further reduce CO
2 emissions from major 
developments, where feasible. 
Where it is not feasible to make the required CO2 reductions by implementing these measures on-site 
or off-site as part of the development, a payment in lieu contribution should be made to the council which will be used to fund CO  reduction measures in the borough or elsewhere in London. 
2
Encouraging energy efficiency and other low carbon measures in all other (i.e. non-major) developments, where feasible. The council will also encourage developers to use energy performance standards such as Passivhaus to guide development of their Energy Strategies. 
Justification 
13.1 Local planning authorities have a statutory duty to take action on climate change and include pol
icies in local plans that will help reduce CO2 emissions. To this end, this policy supports the 
move to a low carbon future as outlined in The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)55 
and helps apply the London Plan’s established energy hierarchy. This encourages sustainable energy practices in new developments by requiring them to: 
• use less energy; 
• supply energy efficiently; and 
• use renewable energy.
55 Communities and Local Government, National Planning Policy Framework, March 2012 195
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
13.2 The policy ensures that new development will be designed to be as energy efficient as 
possi
ble, help improve the provision of energy efficient and low emission heating and cooling 
networks in the borough and also promotes the generation of on-site renewable energy, where this is feasible. 
13.3 Where a development has maximised CO
2 emissions reduction on or off site but still falls 
short of meeting the required London Plan (2016) target, a payment in lieu should be made to the council. This will be used to implement sustainable energy measures off-site in the borough or elsewhere in London. The payment should be based on the council’s accepted price of offsetting carbon emissions and be calculated for a 30 year period, in line with national guidance. Further details on the council’s approach to calculating payment in lieu requirements is provided in the council’s Planning Guidance SPD. 
13.4 Energy Assessments will be required to be submitted as part of the supporting information acc
ompanying every application for a major development. Further details on the requirements 
for Energy Assessments are provided in the council’s Planning Guidance SPD.  
13.5 Developers are encouraged to use energy performance standards such as PassivHaus to gui
de development of their Energy Strategies, particularly in relation to reducing demand for 
heating. The Passivhaus standard can be applied not only to new residential dwellings but also to new commercial, industrial and public buildings and may also be suitable for refurbishment projects where the external appearance of a building would not be harmed  as a result of the alterations required.
POLICY CC2 
ENSURING SUSTAINABLE DESIGN  AND CONSTRUCTION 
The council will require the implementation of sustainable design and construction 
measures in all major developments by: 
a. implementing the London Plan sustainable design and construction policies to ensure 
dev
elopments incorporate sustainability measures, including: 
 • minimising energy use; 
 •  making the most effective use of resources such as water and aggregates; 
 •  sourcing building materials sustainably; 
 •  using prefabrication construction methods where appropriate; 
 • reducing pollution and waste; 
 •  promoting recycling and conserving and promoting biodiversity and the natural envir
onment; 
 •  ensuring developments are comfortable and secure for users and avoiding impacts  from
 natural hazards (including flooding); and
Continued over196
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
b. Requiring Sustainability Statements (or equivalent assessments such as BREEAM) for all major 
dev
elopments to ensure the full range of sustainability issues has been taken into account 
during the design stage. 
The integration of sustainable design and construction measures will be encouraged in all other (i.
e. non-major) developments, where feasible. 
Justification 
13.6 Sustainable design and construction principles are supported by a number of policies in the Lo
ndon Plan (2016). New buildings need to be constructed to meet a high level of 
environmental performance. In particular, major developments need to ensure that as well as reducing CO
2 emissions, they also consider climate change adaptation issues in their design 
and construction. 
13.7 Developments can have a wide range of impacts on the environment, health and well being of r
esidents that need to be properly managed and minimised. This policy ensures that new 
major developments are designed and constructed to take account of these impacts whilst also helping to reduce the consumption of scarce resources, reduce pollution, enhance open spaces and contribute to the health and wellbeing of residents. 
13.8 A sustainably designed and constructed development is also one that incorporates measures tha
t allow adaptation to the potential impacts of climate change during its lifetime such as 
heatwaves and droughts in summer months and potentially wetter winters. 
13.9 Smaller developments are also encouraged to consider sustainable design and construction prin
ciples, where this is feasible. 
13.10  Any assessments carried out to determine a major development’s environmental 
perfo
rmance using BREEAM (or similar) must be supplemented with an Energy Assessment 
which shows compliance with the requirements of Policy CC1 on reducing CO2 emissions. 
13.11  Further details on the requirements for the Sustainability Assessment are provided in the cou
ncil’s Planning Guidance SPD. This policy also needs to be read in conjunction with the 
Mayor of London’s SPGs on Sustainable Design and Construction and control of dust and emissions during construction and demolition
56 .
56 Sustainable Design and Construction – April 2014 and th e control of dust and emissions during construction 
and demolition – July 2014 197
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
POLICY CC3 
MINIMISING FLOOD RISK  AND REDUCING WATER USE 
The council will require developments to reduce the use of water and minimise 
current and future flood risk by implementing the following measures: 
• a site specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) will be required for the following development 
proposals
:  
 –  a ll proposals for developments in the Environment Agency’s Flood Zones 2 and 3; 
 –  a ll proposals for new developments over 1 hectare in size in Flood Zone 1; 
 –  a ll proposals for new development in areas identified in the council’s Surface Water 
Man
agement Plan (SWMP) as being susceptible to surface water flooding – i.e. those located 
in a flooding hotspot; and  
 –  a ll proposals for new development which includes a subterranean element in areas identified 
in th
e council’s SWMP as being at risk from elevated groundwater levels 
• as part of the FRA, the requirements of the National Planning Policy Framework must be 
add
ressed and, where applicable, an Exception Test must also be carried out and included in 
the FRA; 
• the FRA must assess the risk of flooding from all relevant sources, in particular tidal, surface  and g
roundwater, as well as sewer flooding and where there is a risk of flooding, appropriate 
flood proofing measures must be integrated, in accordance with the guidance in the Hammersmith and Fulham SFRA; 
• new self-contained basement flats will not be permitted in the Environment Agency’s Flood Zon
e 3 areas where there is a risk of rapid inundation by floodwaters in the event of a breach  
of the river’s flood defences or in surface water flooding hotspots where the flood hazard rating is defined as significant or higher in the SWMP, unless a satisfactory means of escape  can be provided; 
• where development is proposed in the Environment Agency’s Groundwater Source Protection Zon
es 1 or 2, measures must be taken to ensure the protection of groundwater supplies; 
• all developments that include a subterranean element must provide details of the structural wat
erproofing measures to be integrated to prevent any increase in on or off-site groundwater 
flood risk;  
• all developments that are classified as ‘more’ or ‘highly’ vulnerable to flooding that include pro
posals at basement or lower ground floor level must install a non-return valve or equivalent 
to protect against sewer flooding; 
• development proposals will be required to demonstrate that there is sufficient water and was
te water infrastructure capacity both on and off site to serve the development or that any 
necessary upgrades will be delivered ahead of the occupation of development; 
Continued over198
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
• in line with the requirements of the Thames Estuary 2100 Plan, developments adjoining the 
River Tha
mes must maintain and where necessary enhance or raise flood defences (or show 
how they could be raised in the future), demonstrating that they will continue to provide adequate flood protection for the lifetime of the development; and 
• all developments must include water efficient fittings and appliances, where provided,  in li
ne with London Plan water consumption targets. In addition, major developments and 
high water use developments must include other measures such as rainwater harvesting and greywater re-use. 
Justification 
13.12  As shown in Map 8, over 60% of the borough and about 75% of the population are in the E
nvironment Agency’s Flood Zones 2 and 3 (medium-high risk of flooding from the 
River Thames), although the actual extent of tidal flooding from the river is mitigated by existing flood defences. Although these provide a high level of flood protection, Flood Risk Assessments are required for all developments in Flood Zones 2 and 3 to assess the risk of flooding to the site e.g. in the event of a failure or breach of the defences and to identify appropriate mitigation measures to be integrated to minimise this risk. 
13.13  FRAs for proposals in Flood Zones 2 and 3 should consider flood risk from all sources, not 
jus
t the River Thames. It should also be noted that developments located in Flood Zone 1 are 
not exempt from the need to consider flood risk, as there could be risks from surface, sewer and groundwater sources that need to be assessed and mitigated. 
13.14  As most of the borough is at risk from some form of fluvial/tidal flooding from the River Tham
es, it would be unreasonable to restrict development only to Flood Zone 1 in the 
north of the borough, particularly as much of this area is also at risk from sewer and surface water flooding (covered by Policy CC4). Given the large range and extent of flood risks in the borough, the council has applied the Sequential Test and concluded that, subject to proposals satisfying the requirements of the Exception Test and the provision of an adequate Flood Risk Assessment, all parts of the borough are considered as potentially suitable for development. 
13.15  Some parts of the borough could be impacted very quickly by fast flowing flood waters if the d
efences failed or were overtopped. The council’s SFRA includes detailed maps showing 
which parts of the borough are inside this Rapid Inundation Zone which could be impacted within 30 minutes of a breach or failure of defences. As a result, there is a restriction on self-contained basements being constructed in this zone as such developments are highly vulnerable to flood impacts and there is a potential risk to life. A satisfactory means of escape must therefore be provided for any basement proposal in a rapid inundation area. This restriction also applies in those parts of the borough identified in the SWMP as a flooding hotspot where the flood hazard rating from surface water flooding is defined as significant or higher.199
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Map 8  Environment Agency’s Flood Zones
200
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
13.16  There is an increased potential for elevated groundwater in some parts of the borough, 
mai
nly to the south of Goldhawk Road although there are currently no Groundwater Source 
Protection Zones in the borough that require specific protection. 
13.17  Groundwater needs to be taken into account where new basement construction or extensions are pl
anned to ensure that any new development does not increase flood risk either on-site or 
by impacting on groundwater flows to the detriment of neighbouring properties. Policy DC11 on basements and lightwells sets out further requirements in this respect. 
13.18  Sewer flooding is also a potential problem for the borough, with Thames Water identifying over 2
,000 locations in the borough affected by sewer flooding in the past 10 years. This 
distribution across the borough is shown by postcode area in the council’s SWMP. The sewer network in the borough is a combined system which drains both foul water flows as well as surface water. Sewer flood risk is therefore intrinsically linked to the surface water flood risk, dealt with by Policy CC4. Sewer flooding occurs when high volumes of surface water are directed into the sewer during heavy rainfall events and the system surcharges due to lack  of capacity. Flood risk from sewers is a particular problem for basement and lower ground floor properties but it can be mitigated by fitting devices such as non-return valves. 
13.19  Thames Water has modelled the impact of London’s projected population growth and cli
mate change on its drains and sewers to understand their ability to cope with these  
future challenges. The modelling shows that for a relatively common rainfall event in 2020 (one that would be expected on average once every other year), some areas of London, including Hammersmith and Fulham, would not have sufficient drainage or sewerage capacity to manage the expected flows, leading to an increasing risk of surface water and sewer flooding. Map 9 provided by Thames Water shows the mapped output of this modelling for the 2020s. 
13.20  Water is an increasingly scarce resource, and with an increasing population in Hammersmith and F
ulham there is rising demand. The borough is in an area of Serious Water Stress which 
is defined by the Environment Agency as a region where the current or future demand for household water is or is likely to be, a high proportion of the effective rainfall which is available to meet that demand. Therefore, there is a need to ensure that new and refurbished buildings are designed to minimise the use of water by installing water efficient fittings and appliances where these are provided as part of the development. Required water efficient fittings include water efficient shower heads, tap fittings and toilets. Water efficient appliances include removable fixtures such as dishwashers and washing machines. As well as reducing water demand, integrating water efficiency measures can help reduce foul water flows from developments. This is particularly important in the borough as the sewer system is a combined system that takes all wastewater, including foul and surface water run-off. 
13.21  Major new developments and those that use high volumes of water such as hotels, offices, schoo
ls, commercial and leisure uses will be expected to implement water efficiency 
measures such as those outlined above, including the collection and re-use of water  (grey water recycling) and rainwater harvesting.www.lbhf.gov.uk201ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Map 9  Thames Water Sewer Capacity 2020 
13.22  Further guidance on FRA requirements is included in the Hammersmith and Fulham Strategic 
Flood Ri
sk Assessment (2015), and the council’s Planning Guidance SPD. The SPD also 
provides additional details on water efficiency measures to be installed in new developments. 
Managing Surface Water 
13.23  The council’s Surface Water Management Plan 2015 (SWMP) identifies that the risk of 
exc
eedance of the drainage system and surface water flooding in the borough is likely to 
increase in the future unless steps are taken to manage and mitigate this form of flooding. In line with the council’s duties as a Lead Local Flood Authority, surface water therefore needs to be properly managed in new developments, particularly major developments.   
13.24  Landscaping schemes associated with major and minor schemes will be expected to minimise the u
se of impermeable surfaces and maximising use of permeable materials. Where feasible, 
the inclusion of rainwater harvesting systems should also be considered as a way of helping to reduce run-off while also reducing potable water usage within developments.London Model . Storage Utilisation (Ds_Flow 2020) 
N 
·'lit Legend 
GLA_Borougtls 
London Model 
0.21 -0.30 
031·0 .40 
-0..50 ,.. 
__\ 
□ 
..,.. t. DaFlow _2020 ,,t - 016-0 .20 
I 
" " \ / ·., 
·-~ 041 .,. 
0.61 ., 
, -080 
• 
,Ill. - 1-01 - U S 051 -0,60 . - 0.70 - . 071 
081-0 ,90 
091 1,00 202
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
POLICY CC4 
MINIMISING SURFACE WATER RUN-OFF  WITH SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
All proposals for new development must ma nage surface water run-off as close to  
its source as possible and on the surface where practicable, in line with the London 
Plan drainage hierarchy. Other requirements include: 
• all major developments must implement Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) to enable a red
uction in peak run-off to greenfield run off rates for storms up to the 1 in 100 year event 
(plus climate change allowance); 
• all major developments will be required to provide a sustainable drainage strategy that demon
strates how SuDS will be integrated to reduce peak flow volumes and rates in line with 
the requirements of this policy; 
• all other developments must maximise attenuation levels, achieving greenfield run off rates where po
ssible, particularly where they are located in surface water flooding hotspots, or 
increase a site’s impermeable area; 
• as well as being designed to minimise flood risk, surface water drainage measures must be des
igned and implemented where possible to help deliver other Local Plan policies such 
as those on biodiversity, amenity and recreation, water efficiency and quality and safe environments for pedestrians and cyclists; 
• all new outdoor car parking areas and other hard standing surfaces shall be designed to be rai
nwater permeable with no run-off being directed into the sewer system, unless there are 
practical reasons for not doing so; 
• all flat roofs in new developments should be living roofs to help contribute to reducing  sur
face water run-off; and 
• where installed, SuDS measures must be retained and maintained for the lifetime of the dev
elopment and details of their planned maintenance must be provided to the council. 
Justification 
13.25  As shown in the council’s Surface Water Management Plan (2015) (SWMP), surface water flood ris
k is spread across much of the borough, as is the risk from sewer flooding.  
13.26  The SWMP identifies that over 7,000 residential properties and almost 900 non-residential pro
perties could be at risk of surface water flooding of greater than 0.1m depth during a  
1 in 100 year rainfall event.  
13.27  As discussed earlier, most of the sewer infrastructure in the borough is combined rather 
tha
n separate which means that sewers not only convey foul water to the sewage treatment 
plants further downstream, but also all surface water that enters the system – i.e. water that drains from paved areas, roads, roofs etc when it rains. Under normal circumstances, there is capacity in the sewers for all foul and surface water to be accommodated without significant 203
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
flood risk, however, during storm conditions when there can be high levels of rainfall in a 
short period of time, the volume of surface water and the rate at which it is entering the sewers can overwhelm the system and cause sewers to surcharge. This includes causing flood water to flow back into properties through drains, toilets, sinks etc. In some locations, particularly the central and southern parts of the borough, surface water flooding tends to be a result of localised ponding of surface water.  
13.28  Thames Water plan to upgrade the existing sewer system in the borough through their Count
ers Creek Flood Alleviation Scheme which will help to reduce sewer and surface water 
flooding. However, in consultation with Thames Water, developers will still be required to demonstrate that there is adequate capacity in the sewer system both on and off site to serve their development and that it would not lead to problems for existing users. In some circumstances, including all major developments impacting on surface or foul water drainage within the catchment of the Counters Creek sewer, this may make it necessary for developers to carry out appropriate studies to ascertain whether the proposed development would lead to overloading of existing infrastructure. For smaller developments, Thames Water (Developer Services) should be contacted to ensure that any potable water supply and waste water connection requirements are adequate to meet the needs of the proposal. 
13.29  All development schemes, including minor proposals will be expected to show that they have mana
ged surface water by utilising all available techniques to avoid increasing runoff and to 
reduce it as far as possible. This could include a combination of options including, but not limited to, the provision of water butts and rainwater harvesting systems, maximising the area of permeable surfaces and using green walls, green, blue or brown roofs, or integrating water features. Direct discharge into watercourses such as the Thames, may also be feasible for some developments, where this can be implemented without causing adverse impacts on the river, including its habitat and associated biodiversity. Where above ground SuDS measures are not feasible it may be necessary to use underground attenuation tanks and flow control mechanisms to manage run-off. 
13.30  SuDS measures detailed in FRAs or separate Sustainable Drainage Strategies must clearly demon
strate how they will achieve the required attenuation of peak surface water run-off, 
in line with the drainage hierarchy outlined in London Plan (2016) in order to minimise run-off, achieving greenfield run off rates where necessary. An on-going maintenance programme must also be included for implementation to ensure the effectiveness of the system for the lifetime of the development.  
13.31  The inclusion of rainwater harvesting systems must be considered as a way of helping to red
uce runoff while also reducing potable water usage within developments. To help 
minimise run-off from new areas of hard standing, including car parks, these must be designed to be permeable and allow infiltration of surface water with no run-off being directed to the sewer system (unless there are practical reasons for this not being possible – i.e. unsuitable underlying soils). Landscaping schemes associated with major and minor schemes will be expected to minimise the use of impermeable surfaces, maximising use of permeable materials. 204
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
POLICY CC5 
WATER QUALITY 
The council will require that where a private supply or distribution system is  
proposed as part of a development, the quality of water is assessed so that any required treatment is identified and an on-going monitoring and maintenance plan  is established. 
Justification 
13.32  The availability and supply of water must be assessed in the development of land and the poten
tial for sourcing a supply from water run-off harvesting or utilising groundwater 
sources may be considered. In order to comply with the Drinking Water Directive and the Water Framework Directive potable and non-potable water must meet minimal levels of quality to ensure they do not adversely effect human and animal health, vegetation or other sensitive receptors. It is therefore necessary that when a private supply is to be included in a development that they are appropriately tested, monitored, protected and treated as required. 
13.33  In conjunction with a private water supply or complementary to a water supply from the sta
tutory provider, a private distribution system may be installed as part of a development. 
Standards for the materials used in these distribution systems as well as their layout and flow must be met. Regular inspections and maintenance plans shall be required to ensure distribution system safety.  
POLICY CC6 
STRATEGIC WASTE MANAGEMENT 
The council will pursue sustainable waste management, including: 
a. planning to manage 247,000 tonnes per annum of waste in LBHF by 2036; 
b. promoting sustainable waste behaviour and continued use of the WRWA Smuggler’s Way 
facili
ty; and 
c. seeking, where possible, the movement of waste and recyclable materials by sustainable 
means o
f transport, maximising the use of the River Thames where possible.   
Justification 
13.34  London Plan (2016) policies are seeking to manage as much of London’s waste within Londo
n as practicable, and are working towards managing the equivalent of 100% of 
London’s waste (municipal and commercial and industrial waste) arising in London by 2026. The London Plan sets out the waste apportionment to be managed by London boroughs for household and commercial and industrial waste. Hammersmith and Fulham’s apportioned 205
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
waste total for 2036, as specified in the London Plan (2016), comprises 106,000 tonnes 
household waste and 141,000 tonnes commercial and industrial waste (247,000 tonnes in total by 2036). 
Table 6  London Plan Waste Apportionment for LBHF and Waste Planning Authorities (WPAs) in the Western Riverside Waste Authority (WRWA) 
London Plan Apportionment (tonnes per annum) 
2016 2021 2026 2031 2036 
LBHF 172,000 199,000 238,000 242,000 247,000 
WPAs within the WRWA Area 683,000 790,000 944,000 961,000 981,000 
13.35  The Western Riverside Waste Authority (WRWA) is the statutory Waste Disposal Authority for LB
HF, as well as the London Boroughs of Kensington and Chelsea, Lambeth and 
Wandsworth. The council is therefore statutorily required to deliver its Local Authority Collected Waste (LACW) to places as directed by the WRWA. Currently all of the LACW goes to the WRWA facilities in the London Borough of Wandsworth for transfer and treatment (Western Riverside Transfer Station near Wandsworth Bridge and Cringle Dock Transfer Station next to Battersea Power Station). Since 2011, recyclables go to the Material Recycling Facility at Smuggler’s Way, close to Wandsworth Bridge in the London Borough of Wandsworth. Currently most of the non-recyclable municipal waste is transported by river to an Energy from Waste facility at Belvedere in the London Borough of Bexley. The contract which does not expire until 2032 does not commit the Waste Authority to a specified amount of waste for incineration and therefore recycling rates can continue to rise without any penalty.  
 
13.36  In order to manage increasing tonnages of recyclables and compostable waste, there is a need to ensu
re that major new developments, such as those within the White City Opportunity 
Area, Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area and Fulham Regeneration Area and the development at Imperial Road, make provision for managing their waste on site. 
13.37  Two large waste sites (Powerday at Old Oak Sidings and EMR), and some other smaller sites 
exis
t within the Old Oak Common Opportunity Area. Since April 2015 this Opportunity 
Area and the waste sites have fallen within the boundary of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation (OPDC). OPDC became the local planning authority for part of the Hammersmith and Fulham area, which means that the existing waste sites now fall within OPDC’s boundary. Some of these waste sites are being considered for redevelopment as part of plans to develop new homes and jobs in the OPDC area, but OPDC is working with Hammersmith & Fulham Council to help meet the apportionment targets for household and commercial and industrial wastes set out in the London Plan.206
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
13.38  The Powerday (Old Oak Sidings) site is approximately 3.9ha and is licenced to manage up 
to 1.
6 million tonnes of waste per annum. The site is capable of managing both household/ 
commercial/industrial waste and construction and demolition waste. The EMR site is approximately 4.4 ha and has a licenced capacity of 419,000 tonnes per annum. The site specialises in metal recycling and materials recovery (particularly end of life vehicles and white-goods). 
13.39  LBHF have jointly prepared a Waste Technical Paper with the Western Riverside Waste Plan
ning Authorities, including OPDC. The study provides up to date waste capacity evidence 
for the WPAs within the WRWA area to support meting their waste apportionments as required by the London Plan (2016). The Waste Technical Paper takes into account site closures and also includes details on the management of other waste streams not apportioned in the London Plan (construction, demolition and excavation, low-level radioactive, agricultural, hazardous and waste water). 
13.40  The joint Waste Technical Paper concludes that LBHF, including OPDC have surplus capacity aga
inst LBHF’s London Plan apportionment, due to extensive recyclate and residual (RDF) 
capacity of 537ktpa (2016) reducing to 426ktpa by 2036. As a whole, the WRWA WPAs have surplus capacity of 346ktpa in 2016, reducing to 48ktpa by 2036 against the London Plan apportionments. This demonstrates that individually LBHF and the WRWA WPAs as a whole have sufficient waste management capacity to meet the London Plan apportionments. 
13.41  For the other waste streams not apportioned in the London Plan, the Waste Technical Paper con
cludes that there is little or no waste arising from low level radioactive and agricultural 
waste, therefore there is no need for additional management capacity for these waste streams. 
13.42  Construction, demolition and excavation waste (CD&E) comprises of waste arising from the 
con
struction and demolition industries, including excavation material. The London Plan has 
a target for London to recycle and re-use 95% of its CD&E waste by 2020. The joint Waste Technical Paper forecasts arisings of 158,921tpa of CD&E waste in LBHF by 2036, with a total of 507,626tpa forecast for the WRWA area up to 2036. The study demonstrates that there is surplus capacity for the sorting, transfer and treatment of CD&E waste within the WRWA area, with a surplus of 317,000 tonnes in 2016 increasing to approximately 627,000 tonnes in 2036. LBHF will encourage the re-use and recycling of CD&E waste where possible, Local Plan Policy CC7: on site waste management provides further guidance on this.  
13.43  For hazardous waste, the EA Sites Activity Listing for 2015 identifies around 90ktpa of permit
ted hazardous waste capacity within the WRWA area, consisting of clinical waste 
transfer, vehicle de-pollution sites and car breakers. This total capacity is considered to be in considerable access of the waste arisings forecast and therefore it is considered that no provision needs to be made for additional capacity.  
 
13.44  Part of LBHF falls within the boundary of OPDC and therefore a certain proportion of  LBHF
’s waste arisings and capacity will be derived from the OPDC area. As OPDC does not 
have a waste apportionment target in the current London Plan (2016) OPDC is required to co-operate with LBHF to ensure its apportionment requirements are met.207
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
13.45  OPDC is currently preparing its Local Plan. The revised draft Local Plan was published for 
con
sultation in June 2017 and was accompanied by a Waste Apportionment Study. The 
Waste Apportionment Study demonstrates how OPDC can help constituent boroughs, 
including LBHF meet the apportionment targets in the London Plan. For LBHF, the strategy shows that there would be sufficient capacity at the Old Oak Sidings (Powerday) site to meet LBHF’s London Plan apportionment targets. On this basis, OPDC’s Local Plan identifies and is seeking to safeguard the Powerday site. OPDC is not proposing to safeguard the remaining waste sites (including EMR) which will be redeveloped to facilitate regeneration of the Old Oak area. For LBHF, the strategy shows that there would be sufficient capacity at the Powerday site to meet LBHF’s London Plan apportionment targets up to 2036. 
13.46  The council therefore considers that the Old Oak Sidings (Powerday) site can meet LBHF’s was
te apportionment target set out in the London Plan (2016). The council will continue to 
work with the OPDC to ensure LBHF’s apportionments are met and encourage the OPDC to safeguard the Old Oak Sidings (Powerday) site for waste management activities, whilst acknowledging that its long term future is subject to the OPDC’s regeneration proposals for the Old Oak Common Opportunity Area. The council is committed to working with the WPAs within the WRWA area, including the OPDC and will work with them to help ensure that where appropriate, as much apportioned waste as possible is managed within the WRWA area. The council is also investigating the potential for pooling apportionment requirements with the other waste planning authorities within the WRWA area. Any potential surplus capacity identified at Powerday (Old Oak Sidings) beyond that required to meet LBHF’s apportionment target, will be the joint responsibility of the OPDC and LBHF. LBHF will work with the WPAs within the WRWA area and the GLA to consider relevant waste matters, including apportionments. In addition, major development sites will be expected to sort, process and recover materials on site thereby further increasing LBHF’s capacity to locally manage waste.208
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
POLICY CC7 
ON-SITE WASTE MANAGEMENT 
All new developments must include suitable facilities for the management of waste 
generated by the development, including the collection and storage of separated 
waste and where feasible on-site energy recovery. 
a. all developments, including where practicable, conversions and change of use, should aim to 
min
imise waste and should provide convenient facilities with adequate capacity to enable the 
occupiers to separate, store and recycle their waste both within their own residence and via accessible and inclusive communal storage facilities, and where possible compost green waste on site;  
b. in major development proposals, on-site waste management should be provided, particularly for c
ommercial and industrial waste streams; and 
c. sustainable waste behaviour, including the re-use and recycling of construction, demolition and e
xcavation waste will be encouraged and recyclable materials should, wherever feasible, be 
segregated on site, providing there is no significant adverse impact on either site occupants or neighbours. On larger demolition sites, the council will expect details of the type and quantity of waste arising and details of proposed methods of disposal, including means of transport. 
Justification 
13.47  As a Waste Collection Authority (WCA), Hammersmith and Fulham Council collects mun
icipal waste which includes household refuse and recyclables, street sweepings, 
litter, flytipped materials and commercial/industrial waste. Waste collected by the council is delivered to the Western Riverside Waste Authority (WRWA) for disposal or recycling. Mixed recycling comprising glass, metal, paper, cardboard, plastic and cartons is sorted at a Materials Recycling Facility in Wandsworth. Refuse not separated for recycling is disposed of at an Energy from Waste facility in Bexley. 
13.48  In 2015/16, 22% of household waste collected by the council was recycled. In recent years, the amo
unt of overall waste produced per household has reduced, but is expected to rise again in 
the future. The council has targets for increasing the amount of waste diverted from disposal, as this delivers an environmental, social and economic benefit to the borough and its residents. 
13.49  In order to facilitate the sustainable management of waste in the future it is essential that all dev
elopments provide adequate facilities for the separation of waste and recyclables in the 
home and for its satisfactory storage prior to collection. Where feasible space or facilities for the composting of green waste should also be provided. 
13.50  In the regeneration areas and other major redevelopment schemes, consideration should be giv
en to the provision of on-site waste management in order to facilitate the re-use 
and recycling of waste generated by the development, particularly for the industrial and commercial waste streams. On-site waste management could have the added benefit of reducing transport trips.209
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
13.51  Construction, excavation and demolition waste should, wherever feasible, be segregated  
on si
te in order to maximise reuse and recycling of the waste. On some smaller construction 
sites in close proximity to residential or noise dust sensitive uses this may not be possible.  On larger sites the council will expect developers to produce a Site Waste Management Plan to ensure the efficient handling of waste and materials. Further details on the requirements for on-site waste management is provided within the council’s Planning Guidance SPD. 
POLICY CC8 
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES 
The council will ensure the protection of new and existing residents, by rejecting 
proposals involving provision for hazardous substances that would pose an unacceptable risk to the health and safety of occupants of neighbouring land, and rejecting development proposals in the vicinity of existing establishments if there would be an unacceptable risk to future occupants. 
The council will ensure that development ta kes account of major hazards identified  
by the He
alth and Safety Executive, namely: 
• Swedish Wharf, Townmead Road. 
Justification 
13.52  Within the borough there is one facility (fuel holder and pipelines) which handles and 
tra
nsports hazardous substances. Although the facility is strictly controlled by health and 
safety regulations, it is necessary to control the type of development around this site and to resist new development which might pose a risk to people occupying sites and buildings in the vicinity.  
13.53  This policy ensures the protection of new and existing residents by resisting the expansion of, or n
ew developments which would cause an unacceptable safety risk. The council will consult 
the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) on all hazardous substances consent applications. We will also consult the HSE about certain developments (essentially those that will increase the number of people) within the consultation distances around installations, for example, so that risks presented by installations can be given due weight. 
13.54  In Fulham there is one installation handling notifiable substances, including pipelines. Whilst it is s
ubject to stringent controls under existing health and safety legislation, it is important 
to control the kinds of development permitted in the vicinity of this installation. The council will consult the Health and Safety Executive on appropriate applications prior to the granting of planning permission about the risks to the proposed development from the notifiable installation and this could lead to refusal of permission, or restrictions on the proximity of development to the notifiable installation. The notifiable site is shown on the Policies Map.210
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
POLICY CC9 
CONTAMINATED LAND 
When development is proposed on or near a site that is known to be, or there is good 
reason to believe may be, contaminated, or where a sensitive use is proposed, an applicant should carry out a site assessment and submit a report of the findings in order to establish the nature and extent of the contamination. 
Development will not be permitted unless practicable and effective measures are to 
be tak
en to treat, contain or control any contamination so as not to: 
a. expose the occupiers of the development and neighbouring land uses including, in the case  
of ho
using, the users of open spaces and gardens to unacceptable risk; 
b. threaten the structural integrity of any building built, or to be built, on or adjoining the site; 
c. lead to the contamination of any watercourse, water body or aquifer; and 
d. cause the contamination of adjoining land or allow such contamination to continue. 
Any application will be assessed in relation to the suitability of the proposed use for the conditions on th
at site. Any permission for development will require that the measures to assess and abate 
any risks to human health or the wider environment agreed with the authority must be completed as the first step in the carrying out of the development. 
Justification 
13.55  In a heavily built up borough such as Hammersmith and Fulham where there has been a his
tory of heavy industry, land contamination is known to exist. It is important therefore 
that any land that is known or suspected of being contaminated, or where a sensitive use is proposed, is dealt with before the development takes place. 
13.56  Any potential risks associated with contaminated land should be identified and assessed at 
the pl
anning pre-application stage. Some sites may be contaminated as a result of being 
in the vicinity of a contaminated site. The risk of this contamination depends on ground conditions and the type of contamination. Where necessary, developers will be required to carry out remediation works and satisfy the council that their development can be safely built and occupied without posing any unacceptable risks to human health or the environment. 
13.57  Developers must ensure that their remediation works are sustainable and result from a rob
ust site investigation and risk assessment and that remediation is conducted in-situ when 
possible to reduce the amount of waste produced which requires transport, and recycle soils and aggregates when possible to avoid the need for disposal hence minimising the pollution of the wider environment. Any investigation or treatment of the contamination must be agreed with the council before they are implemented.211
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
POLICY CC10 
AIR QUALITY 
The council will seek to reduce the potential adverse air quality impacts of new 
developments by: 
a. requiring all developments which may be impacted by local sources of poor air quality or may 
adv
ersely contribute to local air quality to provide an air quality assessment that considers the 
potential impacts of pollution from the development on the site and on neighbouring areas 
and also considers the potential for exposure to pollution levels above the Government’s air quality objective concentration targets. The assessment should include separate consideration of the impacts of (i) the construction/demolition phase of development and (ii) the operational phase of development with appropriate mitigation measures highlighted for each phase; 
b. requiring mitigation measures to be implemented to reduce emissions, particularly of nitrogen oxi
des and small particles, where assessments show that developments could cause a 
significant worsening of local air quality or contribute to the exceedances of the Government’s air quality objectives; 
c. requiring mitigation measures that reduce exposure to acceptable levels where developments are p
roposed that could result in the occupants being particularly affected by poor air quality; 
d. requiring developments to be ‘air quality neutral’ and resist development proposals which 
wou
ld materially increase exceedances of local air pollutants and have an unacceptable impact 
on amenity or health unless the development mitigates this impact through physical measures and/or financial contributions to implement proposals in the Council’s Local Air Quality Management Plan; and 
e. requiring all decentralised energy schemes to demonstrate that they can be used without 
havi
ng an unacceptable impact on air quality. Where this is not possible, CHP systems will not 
be prioritised over other air quality neutral technologies. 
Justification 
13.58  Nearly one in seven deaths (15%) in Hammersmith and Fulham are caused by Nitrogen Diox
ide via pollution – the eighth highest level in London according to Kings College London. 
The whole of Hammersmith and Fulham is an Air Quality Management Area for Nitrogen Dioxide (NO
2) and particulate matter (PM10) and the council is implementing measures to 
help meet national air quality objectives for these and other pollutants. New developments are expected to contribute towards improving local air quality, particularly where they include potentially major new sources of emissions or could significantly increase traffic-generated emissions. Some developments such as schools, nurseries, hospitals and care homes for the elderly and also housing, may be particularly affected by the potential impacts of poor air quality on the occupants of the development.212
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
13.59  Requiring air quality issues to be considered early in the planning process and to be assessed 
in d
etail if necessary (i.e. for developments that may increase local emissions significantly) 
is the best way of establishing a design led approach to mitigating those emissions and reducing exposure. Air quality assessments should include ‘air quality neutral’ assessments carried out with reference to the GLA’s emission benchmarks for buildings, transport and combustion based energy plant. Developments that do not exceed these benchmarks will be considered to be ‘air quality neutral’. 
13.60  Some carbon reduction measures for energy generation and spatial heating can adversely impa
ct local air quality if not properly mitigated. The use of individual Combined Cooling, 
Heating and Power (CCHP), Combined Heat and Power (CHP) and Biomass to produce heat and power can deliver significant reductions of CO
2. However, the use of these technologies 
could also lead to increases in NO2 and particle emissions. Therefore, their air quality impacts 
need to be assessed as part of an Air Quality Assessment. CHP or other combustion based technologies that cannot demonstrate that they will have acceptable impacts will not be accepted and instead the use of other sustainable energy generation air quality neutral technologies should be used which reduce both CO
2 and NO2 emissions. 
POLICY CC11 
NOISE 
Noise (including vibration) impacts of  development will be controlled by 
implementing the following measures: 
a. noise and vibration sensitive development should be located in the most appropriate locations 
and p
rotected against existing and proposed sources of noise and vibration through careful 
design, layout and use of materials, and by ensuring adequate insulation of the building envelope and internal walls, floors and ceilings as well as protecting external amenity areas; 
b. housing, schools, nurseries, hospitals and other noise-sensitive development will not normally 
be permit
ted where the occupants/users would be affected adversely by noise, both internally 
and externally, from existing or proposed noise generating uses. Exceptions will only be made if it can be demonstrated that adequate mitigation measures will be taken, without compromising the quality of the development; and 
c. noise generating development will not be permitted, if it would be liable to materially increase 
the n
oise experienced by the occupants/users of existing or proposed noise sensitive uses in  
the vicinity.  
Where necessary, applicants will be expected to carry out noise assessments and provide details of th
e noise levels on the site. Where noise mitigation measures will be required to enable 
development to take place, an outline application will not normally be acceptable.213
www.lbhf.gov.ukENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Justification 
13.61  The dominant sources of noise in Hammersmith and Fulham are road and rail traffic, 
con
struction (including DIY), noisy neighbours, pubs/clubs and other entertainment venues, 
pavement cafés/outdoor seating and noisy building services, plant and equipment. Aircraft and helicopter noise is also a concern in parts of the borough.  
13.62  Noise and associated vibration can affect and have a direct impact on noise sensitive uses, part
icularly housing, but also other sensitive uses such as schools and hospitals and impact 
upon people’s health and well being. Some areas of the borough are subject to significant noise disturbance. Existing and potential noise levels will be taken into account when assessing a proposal for residential development. Noise levels both inside the dwelling and in external amenity spaces will be considered. The council will therefore require a careful assessment of likely noise levels before determining planning applications. 
13.63  Any proposal (including new development, conversion, extension, change of use) for a noise 
gen
erating development close to dwellings or other noise sensitive uses will be assessed 
to determine the impact of the proposed development in relation to these existing uses. In this borough, noise generating activities that cause particular problems tend to be late-closing entertainment and food and drink establishments. Also an issue is noise disturbance in existing buildings where sound insulation is inadequate. Proposals for conversions and change of use should minimise noise disturbance from adjoining uses by improving sound insulation and the arrangement of rooms, such as stacking/locating rooms of similar uses above/adjacent to each other. 
13.64  Issues of noise and nuisance are considered on a site-by-site basis having regard to the pro
posal, site context and surrounding uses in the context of related policies and guidelines. 
POLICY CC12 
LIGHT POLLUTION 
The potential adverse impacts from lighting arrangements will be controlled by 
requiring all developments that include proposals for external lighting including illuminated signs and advertisements, security and flood lights and other illuminations to submit details showing that it: 
a. is appropriate for the intended use; 
b. provides the minimum amount of light necessary to achieve its purpose; 
c. is energy efficient; and 
d. provides adequate protection from glare and light spill, particularly to nearby sensitive  
rec
eptors such as residential properties and Nature Conservation Areas, including the  
River Thames.214
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY
Justification 
13.65  External lighting is often required in new developments to help provide a healthy and safe 
envir
onment and can also be used to enhance the appearance of some buildings and extend 
the use of other facilities, e.g. outdoor sports facilities. However, excessive lighting can have a negative impact on residents’ quality of life, adversely affect wildlife, contribute to ‘sky glow’ and waste energy. Requiring the submission of details of external lighting in line with the recommendations of the Institute of Lighting Professionals for approval will allow external lighting and its impacts to be controlled and minimised. 
POLICY CC13 
CONTROL OF POTENTIALLY POLLUTING USES 
All proposed developments (inclu ding new buildings, demoliti on of existing  buildings, 
conversions and changes of use) will be required to show that there will be no undue 
detriment to the general amenities enjoyed by existing surrounding occupiers of their properties, particularly where commercial and service activities will be close to residential properties. In the case of mixed use developmen ts, similar protection will 
also be afforded to the prospective residents and other users where there is potential for activities within the new development to impact on their immediate neighbours on the same site. 
The council will, where appropriate, require mitigation measures if a nuisance, for 
example, fr
om smoke, fumes, gases, dust, stea m, light, vibration, smell, noise, spillage 
of gravel and building aggregates or other polluting emissions, would otherwise be likely to occur, to ensure that it will not.  
Justification 
13.66  Many activities can be a source of nuisance, a hazard to health, or both. The council wishes to enc
ourage enterprise. However, the benefits of any new enterprise or commercial 
activity must always be set against any adverse effects on the amenities of local residents and existing businesses. It is also necessary to take account of potential impacts within new mixed use developments where new residents and other users could be impacted by activities on the same site or building. Developments that may give rise to environmental nuisance must therefore be designed appropriately, so as not to unduly interfere with the existing and future quality of life in the borough. SECTION 14 
TRANSPORT AND 
ACCESSIBILITY216
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
TRANSPORT AND  
ACCESSIBILITY
POLICY T1 
TRANSPORT 
To work with strategic partners to improve transportation provision, accessibility, and 
air quality in the borough, by improving and increasing the opportunities for cycling and walking, and by improving connections for bus services, underground, national and regional rail by: 
Major Scheme Targets: 
• seeking and promoting the routing of Crossrail 2 via South Fulham, with an interchange to  
the O
verground line at Imperial Wharf; 
• supporting the implementation of a HS2 Crossrail/Great Western interchange at Old Oak with int
erchanges with the West London Line and underground services, a new and enhanced 
station at Willesden Junction and connect development in the north of the borough with the stations at Old Oak;  
 
• seeking a road tunnel replacing all or parts of the A4, including the Flyover through Ham
mersmith allowing for major new housing, community facilities and office developments 
within the town centre and improved links to the Thames; 
• continuing to promote major improvements with new stations and enhanced local and  sub
-regional passenger services on the West London Line; 
• seeking the increased capacity and reliability of the Piccadilly and District Lines; 
• seeking increased use of the River Thames for passenger services and freight use where this is co
mpatible with the capacity of the connecting road network and meets environmental 
concerns; 
• increasing the opportunities for walking, for example by extending the River Thames Path Nat
ional Trail, and for cycling by supporting the Mayor’s Cycling Vision; and 
• seeking localised improvements to the highway network to reduce congestion on north-south routes
 in the borough.  
Borough wide Targets: 
• promoting and supporting the continued development of initiatives designed to encourage modal s
hift away from private vehicles, in order to improve congestion and air quality within  
the borough; 
• developing and promoting safe environments for cyclist and pedestrians to encourage  res
idents and businesses to consider these modes; 
• extending the Mayor’s Bike Hire scheme throughout the borough;217
www.lbhf.gov.ukTRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
• working with Transport for London and bus operators to develop zero exhaust emission bus 
ser
vices and routes across the borough; 
• securing access improvements for all, particularly people with disabilities, as part of planning permis
sions for new developments in the borough; 
• ensuring that there are adequate levels of provision of electric charging infrastructure to sup
port local residents and visitors;  
• working towards changing the behaviour patterns and vehicle types of private hire vehicles and t
axis;   
• ensuring that traffic generated by new development is minimised so that it does not add to parki
ng pressures on local streets or congestion, or worsen air quality; and 
• relating the intensity of development to public transport accessibility and highway capacity. 
Justification 
Public transport 
14.1 A key objective is to improve public transport and accessibility in the borough, whilst reducing 
the a
dverse impact of road traffic and traffic congestion. The level of population and 
employment growth proposed over the next 20 years will necessitate increased investment in 
public transport to improve transport accessibility for all users, and the council will work with partners, transport operators and developers to ensure that this takes place. The council will also seek to ensure that major new development is located in areas with high levels of public transport accessibility, thereby reducing the need to travel by private car, to minimise energy use and to increase opportunities for walking and cycling. If there is not adequate capacity in the transport system, the council’s strategy for growth may be constrained or delayed. 
14.2 The health and wellbeing of residents and visitors using the public highway and transport net
work is an essential consideration for the council. Growing the awareness of air quality and 
vehicle emissions is key to improving the health of the public highway for all users. The council will seek to develop initiatives that increase public awareness regarding air quality and work with stakeholders to drive modal shift towards lower emission modes of transport. 
14.3 The borough has historically had poor opportunities for north-south travel on public transport and o
n the highway network. The council has put considerable effort into promoting the 
increased use of the West London Line for passenger transport and have secured new stations at West Brompton, Shepherds Bush and Imperial Wharf. However, although services have improved, higher frequency and more action is needed by rail operators to ensure that there is sufficient capacity for the future, particularly in the four proposed regeneration areas. In particular, direct sub-regional services to Gatwick airport must be restored and maintained to provide quick links with the regeneration areas at White City, Earl’s Court and North Fulham. The possibilities for additional stations should be explored, for example at North Pole Road or adjacent to the Imperial College Campus, as advocated by RBKC.218
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
14.4 The Government’s decision to support a High Speed Rail Line (High Speed 2) from London 
to th
e West Midlands and beyond is welcomed, and this potentially gives a great boost to 
the council’s aspirations for regeneration of large tracts of railway land in the north of the borough. The council believes Old Oak Common could become one of the capital’s busiest interchanges, with train links to Heathrow and Bristol to the west, Birmingham to the north, Stratford and Canary Wharf to the east, and Richmond, Clapham Junction and Gatwick to  the south. 
14.5 In addition to improvements to the overground network, the regeneration of the borough also n
eeds to be supported by the underground and bus network. The council is promoting 
the routing of Crossrail 2 through South Fulham Riverside, rather than as currently planned,  as this would greatly assist the regeneration objectives for this area. Elsewhere improvements to increase the capacity on underground routes and the quality of the bus network will also need to accompany the growth in the borough’s population and jobs. 
14.6 The policy needs to be read in conjunction with the Mayor London’s SPG on Land Industry and T
ransport.57 
The River Thames 
14.7 The Thames is part of London’s Blue Ribbon network which the Mayor of London wishes to 
see pr
ovide increased passenger and freight transport. In respect of the Thames, there is now 
a riverboat service between Putney and Blackfriars which calls at Chelsea Harbour and the main central London piers. However, it only runs at Monday-Friday peak times. The council supports increased passenger service, including services towards Hammersmith and Chiswick, and provision of improved and new piers and other infrastructure that are appropriate and viable. 
14.8 The council also supports greater use of the River Thames for freight movement, particularly for t
he short to medium term transport of aggregates and construction waste to and from 
the large redevelopment sites adjacent to the river. However, the council recognises that the transfer of freight between barges and lorries can cause problems of congestion in the local road network and will therefore seek river freight activity on a consolidated site which has the best connections to the Strategic Road Network (i.e to the east of Wandsworth Bridge). 
Local Implementation Plan 
14.9 The council is in the process of developing proposals to improve transport in the borough 
thr
ough its third Transport Local Implementation Plan (LIP3), a statutory document in which 
councils are required to show how they will implement the Mayor of London’s Transport strategy in their area. The Draft LIP2 was drawn up in close collaboration with the LDF and was adopted in 2011 and updated in September 2013. 
57  Land Industry and Transport Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) – September 2012219
www.lbhf.gov.ukTRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
POLICY T2 
TRANSPORT ASSESSMENTS AND TRAVEL PLANS 
All development proposals will be assessed for their contribution to traffic generation 
and their impact on congestion, particularly on bus routes and on the primary route 
network. The existing and potential availability of public transport, and its capacity to meet increased demand will also be assessed for any development. 
The council will require a Transport Assessment (TA), together with a Travel Plan 
where a dev
elopment is anticipa ted to generate a level of trips that impacts on the 
local network or have an impact on any strategic routes. Delivery and Servicing Plan should be secured in line with TfL’s London Freight Plan and should be co-ordinated with Travel Plans. s 
Justification 
14.10  The council expects Transport Assessments (TA) and Travel Plans to be produced in acc
ordance with Transport for London’s “Transport Assessment Guidance”, published in 
2014. This document gives details on the production and content of Delivery and Servicing Plans. The TA will contain information on a range of transportation matters and will assist the council in determining what quantum of development is acceptable in transportation terms and how access can be achieved, as far as possible by means other than the private car. The TA should consider accessibility from the perspective of disabled people or people with mobility impairments. Further guidance on this is contained within the Mayor of London’s Accessible London SPG. 
14.11  A travel plan is a long-term management strategy for an organisation or site that seeks to del
iver sustainable transport objectives through an action plan that is regularly reviewed. 
The travel plan should set targets, objectives and monitoring requirements. The travel plan should include a series of measures, management and funding details that aim to deliver the stated objectives and targets. The travel plan should be secured by a planning obligation and have regular ongoing management. 
14.12  A TA will be required for any development where the council anticipated that the dev
elopment will generate a level of trips that impact on the existing highways arrangement. 
In line with planning practice guidance published by central government, the need for a TA will be assessed on a case-by-case basis and will be at the discretion of the council. A TA is required for all planning applications which are referred to the Mayor of London. The criteria for referral are given in the Mayor’s Transport Assessments Guidance document. Large developments will be required to produce Servicing and Delivery Plans which will encourage the use of freight consolidation centres where appropriate. Westtrans, the west London transport partnership, are pursuing the establishment of a freight consolidation centre and the council supports this.220
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
14.13  The council will require developer support for upgrades and improvements to capacity on 
publi
c transport services and the associated infrastructure and facilities, through financial 
contributions, where these improvements are necessary to enable the development to take place. The council will also expect that appropriate mitigation is provided by the developer for any impacts expected on the public highway or local network. 
POLICY T3 
INCREASING AND PROMOTING  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CYCLING AND WALKING 
The council will encourage and support the increasing use of bicycles by requiring: 
• new developments to include the provision of convenient accessible and safe secure cycle 
parki
ng within the boundary of the site (see appendix 8); 
• the provision of suitable changing and showering facilities, following the guidance outlined  in th
e Hammersmith and Fulham Cycling Strategy 2015; and 
• developer contributions for improvements to cycling infrastructure, including contributions to th
e extension of TfL or other Cycle Hire schemes to mitigate their impact on the  
existing network.  
The council will facilitate walking by requiring larger developments to provide: 
• accessible, inclusive and safe pedestrian routes within and through the larger developments; 
• accessible and inclusive pedestrian access to the river and canal, where appropriate; and 
• contributing to improvements in the local highway infrastructure and walking environment. 
Justification 
14.14  Increasing the opportunities for accessible and safe walking and cycling in the borough will hav
e a number of benefits, ranging from improving people’s health, improving air quality 
and reducing traffic congestion. As well as strategic walking and cycling routes, the council will seek local improvements, including convenient and safe walking routes, cycling changing and parking facilities and signage. 
14.15  The Mayor of London has a target of quadrupling cycling in London by 2031 (Mayor’s Tra
nsport Strategy May 2010) and the Mayor of London’s Cycling Vision intends to double 
cycling over the next 10 years (March 2013). The council supports the Mayor’s Cycle Super Highway through the borough and around Hammersmith Broadway. Hammersmith and Fulham’s Cycling Strategy 2015 also identifies a desire to have one of the highest levels of cycling of any London borough, whilst ensuring a safe and easy to use cycle environment. 
14.16  The increases in infrastructure provision for both cycling and walking should be designed to tar
get all residents and businesses. Developers will be encouraged to engage with future site 
users to promote the use of alternative modes of travel. It will be required that both physical 221
www.lbhf.gov.ukTRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
interventions and educational material is designed to target both those who use the modes 
at present and new users. 
14.17  The cycle parking standards of the London Plan (2016) are considered to represent a min
imum standard for any development within the borough, further guidance on parking 
standards can be found in appendix 8, the West Trans Cycle Parking Guidance and the Hammersmith and Fulham Cycling strategy. The council will work with developers to ensure not only on site standards are met, but that where feasible infrastructure to support cycling  is also provided on the public highway through contribution from developers. 
POLICY T4 
VEHICLE PARKING STANDARDS 
The council will require any proposed deve lopment (new build, conversion or change 
of use) to conform to its car parking standards (appendix 7). The council will also 
require car parking permit free measures on all new development unless evidence is provided to show that there is a significant lack of public transport available. 
Justification 
14.18  Sufficient car parking will need to be provided to meet the essential needs of developments in a
ccordance with London Plan (2016) parking standards set out at appendix 7, particularly 
ensuring that there are suitable places for disabled people, car clubs and electric cars. Parking space is often an inefficient and unattractive use of land and its impact on local environmental quality should be minimised where car parking is provided in new developments. Additional commuting by car must not be encouraged as it would add to the existing congestion. 
14.19  Residential design guidance will promote housing designs that reduce the impact of 
parki
ng on local environmental quality, including where appropriate restricting properties 
to be car permit free. The council will only consider the issuing of permits for on street parking in locations where the PTAL level is considered 2 or lower (TfL’s public transport accessibility level). The PTAL calculator represents the best available tool for calculating public transport accessibility, as such this is the primary method for determining car permit free developments. However, the PTAL level calculations change over time as road networks/ provision and other factors change. The levels of local parking stress must also be considered when assessing the impact of additional on street parking. 
14.20
 Where appropriate, and in accordance with the London Plan (2016), the council will encourage car club bays in new developments, especially those with restricted parking.  The council will also require all development to provide a minimum of 25% of parking  spaces in new developments to be equipped with electric car charging points, and a further 25% passive provision. All electric car and car club spaces should be of an accessible width and length. 222
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
POLICY T5 
PARKING FOR BLUE BADGE HOLDERS 
New developments that include vehicular access must prov ide accessible, off street 
car parking bay for Blue Badge holders even if no other general parking is provided  
as part of the development. 
Justification 
14.21  The minimum standards for blue badge parking provision are set out in the Mayor of 
Londo
n’s blue badge parking standards for off-street car parking (2006). When considering 
the provision and location of blue badge parking bays, consideration should be given to the uses of the development and the desire lines/access points for users. 
14.22  The provision of bays should be regularly monitored and reviewed to ensure the level is ade
quate and that enforcement is effective. Spaces designated for blue badge holders  
should be located on firm level ground and as close as feasible to the accessible entrance  to the building. 
POLICY T6 
BOROUGH ROAD NETWORK -  HIERARCHY OF ROADS 
Developments, construction and other operations that affect the borough’s road 
network will be regulated according to the council’s hierarchy of roads, shown on  the Policies Map, as follows: 
Tier 1: Strategic routes (Transport for London Road Network) 
Development will not be permitted if it would prejudice the effectiveness of the strategic route 
net
work to provide safe and unobstructed road connections to national and international 
transport networks, to provide for long distance and commercial traffic to traverse the region,  or to reduce traffic demand on lower tier roads. Direct frontage access from development sites  to such routes will be resisted unless there is no prospect of alternative access to a lower tier road, and the particular section of frontage concerned already performs lower tier functions, and the safe flow of traffic will be maintained. Proposals likely to increase car commuting into central London along such routes will be resisted. 
Tier 2: London distributor roads 
Development will not be permitted if it would prejudice the effectiveness of these roads to 
pro
vide links to the strategic route network, provide access to and between town centres, and 
distribute traffic to and around, but not within, local areas. 223
www.lbhf.gov.ukTRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
Tier 3: Borough distributor roads 
Development will not be permitted if it would prejudice the effectiveness of these roads to 
distribute traffic to land and property within any local area bounded by the strategic route network and London distributor roads, or introduce additional through-traffic on them. 
Tier 4: Local access roads 
Development will not be permitted if it would prejudice the effectiveness of these roads to provide 
saf
e and convenient access to individual properties, or result in their use by through-traffic. 
Justification 
14.23  There are limited opportunities for tackling urban congestion and increasing road capacity in th
e borough. North-south movements can be particularly difficult, and development 
schemes, particularly in the regeneration areas, will need to consider how they contribute to improvements to the highways network. 
14.24  To achieve the objectives of this policy, the borough’s roads are grouped into a hierarchical net
work – with different roads fulfilling different functions, as follows: 
i. Strategic Routes (TLRN: Transport for London Road Network): 
•  to provide for the longer journeys and, in particular, for those by buses and goods vehicles; 
•  to link London effectively to the national road system; and 
•  to reduce traffic demand on secondary roads so that, in association with traffic restraint poli
cies, they can provide an adequate level of service and, in turn, relieve local roads of 
through traffic. 
 These roads form the Transport for London Road Network (TLRN) – Priority Red Routes – in th
e borough and are controlled by Transport for London (TLRN).   
ii.  London distributor roads, whose function is: 
•  to provide links to the strategic route network; 
•  to give access to strategic centres for short and medium distance traffic;  
•  to provide the main bus routes with the provision of bus priority measures where appropri
ate; and 
•  to distribute traffic to and around, but not within, local areas. 
 Most of the London distributor roads in the borough form part of TfL’s “Strategic Road Netwo
rk” but should not be confused with the TLRN. 
iii.  Local distributor roads, whose function is: 
• to distribute traffic within a local area bounded by strategic and London roads, but  not t
o carry through traffic (i.e. traffic which has neither its origin nor its destination 
within that area). 
• to cater primarily for traffic movements within the borough.224
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
 Local distributor roads may be subject to measures to restrict the speed of general traffic 
flow. Restrictions on the types of vehicle which can pass along the road may be introduced as part of an agreed traffic restraint or reduction strategy. Some categories of frontage development are not suited to this category of road, particularly at critical junctions. 
iv.  Local access roads, whose function is: 
• to provide final access to destination only; primarily for use by residents and pedestrians. 
 Local roads will frequently provide opportunities to provide safer routes for cyclists and 
pedes
trians. 
14.25  The strategic, London distributor, borough distributor and certain local access roads are show
n on the Policies Map. A schedule of individual roads is included in the table below. 
Table 7  Hierarchy of Borough Roads 
Hierarchy Roads 
A. Strategic Routes 
(Tran
sport for 
London Road Network) A4: Great West Road (including the slip roads to Hammersmith 
Bridge Road)/
Hammersmith Flyover/Talgarth Road (east of 
Butterwick)/West Cromwell Road 
A40/A40(M):  Westway, including slip roads to Wood Lane and 
A3320
 Roundabout 
A3320:  West Cross Route/Holland Park Roundabout 
B. London 
Distribut
or Roads A217:  Wandsworth Bridge Road/Wandsworth Bridge 
A219:  Scrubs Lane/Wood Lane (north of Westway) 
A219:  Shepherds Bush Road 
A219:  Butterwick/Queen Caroline Street (north of Talgarth Road)/ 
Talg
arth Road (west of Butterwick)/Fulham Palace Road/ 
Fulham High Street/Putney Bridge Approach/Putney Bridge 
A304:  Fulham Road/Fulham Broadway/Fulham Road 
A306:  Hammersmith Bridge/Ham mersmith Bridge Road  
A308:  New King’s Road/King’s Road 
A315:  Hammersmith Broadway/Hammersmith Road 
(wes
t of Butterwick)  
A40:  Wood Lane (south of Westway)/Uxbridge Road 
(eas
t of Wood Lane)/Shepherd’s Bush Green  
A402:  Goldhawk Road 
A4020:  Uxbridge Road/Shepherds Bush Green225
www.lbhf.gov.ukTRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
Hierarchy Roads
C. Local  
Distributor Roads A315:  King Street/Studland Street (south of Glenthorne Road)/ 
Gle
nthorne Road (east of Studland Street and west of Beadon Road)/ 
Beadon Road 
A315:  Hammersmith Road (east of Butterwick) 
A3218:  Lillie Road 
A3219:  Munster Road (north of Dawes Road)/Dawes Road  
(west o
f North End Road) 
B317:  North End Road (south of Dawes Road) 
B408:  Askew Road: Old Oak Common Lane/Old Oak Road:  
Hopgood S
treet/Macfarlane Road (east of Hopgood Street). 
B317:  North End Road (north of Dawes Road) 
B318:  Harwood Road 
B408:  Paddenswick Road/Dalling Road (south of Paddenswick  
Road
 and north of Glenthorne Road)/Glenthorne Road (west of 
Studland Street) B409:  Stamford Brook Road 
B412:  North Pole Road: Bloemfontein Road: Du Cane Road: 
Glent
horne Road (east of Beadon Road): Hammersmith Grove  
(south of Glenthorne Road) 
D. Local  
Access
 Roads i. Retaining an essential through traffic function in the short to medi
um term: 
 B408:  Dalling Road (south of Glenthorne Road): Coningham 
Roa
d: Emlyn Road/Larden Road: Hammersmith Grove (north 
of Glenthorne Road): Munster Road (south of Dawes Road): Parson’s Green Lane/Parson’s Green (west side): Townmead Road (south of Imperial Road)/Imperial Road/Harwood Terrace/Bagleys Lane (north of Harwood Terrace) and Waterford Road (north of Harwood Terrace and south of King’s Road). Brook Green  
 
ii. Other: All roads not included in classifications above 
14.26  The classification of roads to fulfil different functions has implications for areas adjacent to 
them
, and for their uses. It also allows proper account to be taken of the functions intended 
for different roads when development proposals are under consideration. In the short term, 
local access roads and, to a lesser extent, borough distributor roads, and development related to them, will benefit from measures which will improve environmental conditions for essential traffic and allow them to fulfil better their local access function. It is the council’s intention that proposed developments fronting onto the strategic and London distributor road network should have regard to environmental conditions in terms of land-use, internal room arrangements and sound insulation measures.226
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018TRANSPORT AND ACCESSIBILITY
POLICY T7 
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION LOGISTICS 
All construction, demolition, utilities and major logistic activities within the borough 
will be required to work with the council in developing the scope and impact of their operations. In order to mitigate the impact of any additional traffic or potential disruption to the network, careful planning and co-ordination with the council is required to ensure the smooth operation of the highway network. 
Justification 
14.27  Any development that requires significant numbers of deliveries or that is going to add to the tra
ffic on the local highway network over an extended period of time, will need to work with 
the council to establish how this capacity will be accommodated. This is usually done with the conditioning of a Construction Management Plan at the planning stage, however any works that are anticipated to impact significantly on the highway network will be expected to co-ordinate these actions with the council. The council will encourage, operators of construction and logistics vehicles to become FORS (Freight Operator Recognition System) recognised and members of CLOCS (Construction Logistics and Community Safety), in order to minimise road danger emanating from these vehicles. 
14.28  The use of alternative modes of delivery such as rail and river transport are considerations in Tf
L’s Transport Assessment guidance document and the council will encourage the use 
of these modes of transport by new developments wherever possible, subject to any local environmental concerns. 
14.29  The council has a duty to ensure that the local highway network is not adversely impacted by de
velopment. The council will look to ensure that works and developments are not 
adversely impacting users and local neighbours, for example: where a development includes any excavation works a construction logistics plan will be required, this will help mitigate the impact on local parking and footways. 
14.30  The council, as the local highway authority, has a duty to maintain the public highway under sect
ion 41 of the Highway Act 1980. Included within this is the responsibility to mitigate the 
impact of utilities and associated works on the highway. The council will seek to work with utilities and statutory undertakers to minimise the impact that their users have on the public highway. This will include works both on the highway and at new development sites where additional service requirements may impact on public managed lands.SECTION 15 
PLANNING 
CONTRIBUTIONS AND 
INFRASTRUCTURE228
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018PLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
PLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS
AND INFRASTRUCTURE  
POLICY INFRA1 
PLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE PLANNING 
The council will seek planning contributions to ensure the necessary infrastructure 
to support the Local Plan is delivered using two main mechanisms:  
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) 
The council will charge CIL on developments in accordance with the CIL Regulations (as amended) 
and t
he LBHF CIL Charging Schedule. 
The council will spend CIL on: 
• infrastructure in accordance with the H&F Regulation 123 (R123) List; 
• projects identified for ‘Neighbourhood CIL’; and 
• CIL administration expenses (no more than the statutory cap). 
Section 106 Agreements (‘S106s’) 
The council will seek to negotiate S106s, where the S106 ‘tests’ are met, for: 
• the provision of infrastructure projects or types not specified on the R123 List (through either 
fin
ancial contributions or ‘in kind’ delivery); and 
• non-’infrastructure’ provisions, such as for affordable housing (see policy HO3) and S106 
monitoring expenses. 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) 
15.1 The CIL is a charge levied on the net increase in floorspace arising from development in order to fund i
nfrastructure that is needed to support development in the area. 
15.2 The council’s CIL came into effect on 1 September 2015. The council will spend CIL on: 
• Infrastructure in accordance with the H&F Regulation 123 (R123) List; 
• Projects identified for ‘Neighbourhood’ CIL’ (up to 15-25%) following appropriate con
sultation; and 
• CIL administration costs (no more than the statutory cap, which is currently set at 5%). 
15.3 Further details of the council’s CIL can be found at www.lbhf.gov.uk/cil229
www.lbhf.gov.ukPLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
Mayoral CIL 
15.4 The Mayor of London’s CIL Charging Schedule has been in effect since April 2012 and the 
cou
ncil collects this CIL on behalf of the Mayor as part of the funding package for Crossrail. 
The Mayor of London’s Use of Planning Obligations in the Funding of Crossrail, and the Mayoral CIL SPG (April 2013) provides further guidance on the operation of the Mayoral CIL. London Plan (2016) Policy 8.3 Community Infrastructure Levy provides strategic planning policy on CIL and states that the “Mayor will work with Government and other stakeholders to ensure the effective development and implementation of the CIL”. 
Neighbourhood CIL 
15.5 The council has produced the R123 list which identifies the borough’s strategic priorities in 
terms o
f infrastructure spending. The CIL Regulations 2010 also identify that where there 
is a neighbourhood development order in place (i.e, passed Referendum and adopted), the local charging authority may choose to pass on 25% of the levy in accordance with the neighbourhood plan’s infrastructure priorities.  
15.6 Where there is no neighbourhood plan or neighbourhood development order in place, a 15% po
rtion can still benefit the community. The council/charging authority will retain the 
levy receipts but where appropriate, the council will consult with the local community.  
Section 106 Agreements (S106s) 
15.7 S106s are planning obligations or undertakings which can be agreed between a landowner and l
ocal planning authority relating to a planning permission and are normally used where 
planning conditions cannot adequately control the development and/or to secure the provision of necessary infrastructure. 
15.8 S106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (inserted by S12 of the Planning and 
Comp
ensation Act 1991) states that any person interested in land in the area of a local 
planning authority may, by agreement or otherwise, enter into an obligation: 
a. restricting the development or use of the land in any specified way; 
b. requiring specified operations or activities to be carried out in, on, under or over the land; 
c. requiring the land to be used in any specified way; or 
d. requiring a sum or sums to be paid to the authority on a specified date or dates 
or period
ically.  
15.9 Alongside CIL, the council will negotiate for planning obligations that are considered to meet 
the ne
cessary tests: 
• necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
• directly related to the development; and 
• fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development. 
15.10  Planning obligations provide the opportunity to mitigate against local and site specific impa
cts of a development proposal. The measures sought via a planning obligation will be 
based on the nature, scale, the location and impact of a development proposal.230
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018PLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
15.11  To ensure there is no overlap between the contributions sought through the CIL and 
planning obligations, the council has produced ‘The relationship between CIL and section 106 and section 278 planning contributions’. This note outlines the infrastructure items on the Regulation 123 list and the nature of additional planning obligations. In limited circumstances, such as in the case of particularly large developments, where the Council concludes that the costs of administering and monitoring the development would satisfy the relevant tests in regulation 122 CIL Regulations (as amended), it will secure the payment of those costs by the developer via the Section 106 agreement. 
15.12  London Plan (2016) Policy 8.2 Planning Obligations provides strategic planning policy on S106
s and states that “Boroughs should set out a clear framework for negotiations on 
planning obligations in DPDs having regard to relevant legislation, central Government policy and guidance and local and strategic considerations”. 
Pooling contributions 
15.13  The CIL Regulations 2010 as amended restrict the number of planning obligations that can 
be funde
d through a s106 agreement. No more than five obligations may be sought for a 
specific infrastructure item that is not contained on the Regulation 123 list. 
Infrastructure Planning 
15.14  The NPPF sets out a core planning principle that planning should “take account of and 
sup
port local strategies to improve health, social and cultural wellbeing for all, and deliver 
sufficient community and cultural facilities and services to meet local needs” (paragraph 17). It also states that “Planning policies should recognise and seek to address potential barriers to investment, including a poor environment or any lack of infrastructure” (paragraph 21) and goes on to state that LPAs should “work closely with the business community to understand their changing needs and identify and address barriers to investment, including a lack of housing, infrastructure or viability” (paragraph 160). 
15.15  The Local Plan sets out the council’s approach to regeneration and development in the boro
ugh over the next 20 years. It will be essential that a range of social infrastructure, 
such as health and recreational facilities, as well as physical infrastructure, such as transport facilities and green infrastructure is provided to ensure successful development and to support the local communities, particularly in those areas experiencing the most growth.  The council will work with social and physical infrastructure providers, to ensure that adequate facilities are provided to support new development. 
15.16  An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) has been prepared alongside the Local Plan that 
inc
ludes the schedule listing the likely requirements of social and physical infrastructure in 
the borough, where these are known. It draws upon detailed area-based planning guidance provided for the White City, Earls Court and West Kensington and South Fulham Riverside areas, as well as ‘Development Infrastructure Funding Studies’ (DIFS) for both White City and South Fulham Riverside. The IDP lists any other likely additional requirements in the borough, the mechanisms for funding, the costs of provision and indicative timescales for delivery. 
15.17  The council will work with its partners and stakeholders on strategic sites and detailed del
ivery programmes. It is envisaged that the Local Plan and IDP Schedule will be used in 231
www.lbhf.gov.ukPLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
conjunction with the Hammersmith & Fulham CIL. The council will seek to support the 
provision of infrastructure from CIL and s106 contributions, and applying for funding streams where possible. 
15.18  It should be noted that the council works on a ‘Bi-Borough’ basis with the neighbouring Roya
l Borough of Kensington and Chelsea and on a ‘Tri-Borough’ basis with the City of 
Westminster Council for a number of services within these infrastructure categories. 
15.19  The following sections set out the overarching strategy for delivering infrastructure required as par
t of the Local Plan. 
Housing 
15.20  The council’s Housing Strategy sets out an innovative and creative approach to delivery of aff
ordable housing. The council will work with the public and private sector to seek the best 
solution to the housing challenges facing the borough and will be as flexible as possible in its housing and planning policies to deliver the outcomes it wants to achieve. The council will work with the Government, Greater London Authority (GLA), Homes and Communities Agency (HCA), Registered Providers and private house builders to tackle affordability issues with low cost home ownership housing and rented accommodation. 
Regeneration 
15.21  The four regeneration areas – White City, Hammersmith, Fulham and South Fulham Riverside –  set ou
t an ambitious strategy for the borough. In each of the regeneration areas there are a 
range of physical and social infrastructure requirements specific to the location and needs of the site. 
15.22  The following policies in the Local Plan identify the key requirements in each of the reg
eneration areas: WCRA, WCRA1, WCRA2, WCRA3, HRA, HRA1, HRA3, FRA, FRA1, SFRRA, 
SFRRA1. The schedule contained in the IDP outlines in more detail the associated works and infrastructure requirements for each of the regeneration areas. 
15.23  Across the regeneration areas, the council seeks to add to the existing offer to existing and 
futu
re communities by: 
• supporting strategic public transport provision through road, rail and cycleway improvements; 
• adding to and enhancing the retail offer in suitable locations; 
• supporting education needs for all members of the community; 
• encouraging job creation and investment in opportunity areas without detriment to exi
sting employment opportunities; 
• expecting high quality, well integrated Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems; 
• improving the public realm, protecting and identifying further open spaces, and access  to th
e riverfront; and 
• supporting the health and community infrastructure requirements, including leisure and rec
reation, of partner health and community organisations.232
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018PLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
15.24  To support the delivery of the anticipated associated infrastructure, the council will continue 
to w
ork with the Government, the GLA, neighbouring local authorities, private house 
builders, Transport for London (TfL) and other relevant stakeholders to ensure the council’s infrastructure priorities are met. The council will also work with the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation (OPDC) to ensure that physical and social infrastructure is sufficient to support development of this northern part of the borough, and ensure its long term success. 
Education 
15.25  Meeting the needs of education provision is an essential part of delivering sustainable dev
elopment. The Local Plan seeks to support the educational priorities outlined at 
paragraph 5.127. A list of expansion and development proposals have been identified to support the need for school places in the borough in the short term. These have been identified in partnership with the Children’s Services Capital Programme. To support the delivery of future education proposals, policy CF1 supports expansion and enhancement proposals for school provision in the borough. Throughout the duration of the plan period, the council will continue to monitor school need and requirements. This will involve working closely with the relevant partners such as Children’s Services, school providers, and neighbouring local authorities to support the council’s education priorities. 
15.26  As well as meeting the primary and secondary school provision, the council has identified dev
elopment for Imperial College London in the White City East regeneration area student 
accommodation and related higher education facilities. The council will continue to work with the relevant organisations. 
Health 
15.27  The council is seeking to respond to the changing and evolving health care provision by sup
porting and enhancing the provision of existing secondary and primary health services 
in the borough. The increase in population as a result of the Local Plan proposals will have an impact upon the existing health provision and the council will work with its partners to develop integrated health and social care and to improve access to community healthcare and out-of-hospital services for existing and new residents. 
15.28  The council will support: 
• the existing secondary health care services in the borough (Hammersmith/Queen Char
lotte’s Hospital and Charing Cross Hospital) by working in partnership with the 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust; 
• the rise in demand of secondary healthcare provision by identifying provision in the reg
eneration areas; and, 
• continued partnership working with Hammersmith & Fulham Clinical Commissioning Grou
p (CCG), the NHS Property Services and other successor groups to respond to future 
health and social care requirements.233
www.lbhf.gov.ukPLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
15.29  The council will work with the relevant health providers and any successor groups, monitor 
pop
ulation growth and promote innovative ways of providing health services in the 
community. The Local Plan proposals have been developed with the health providers and therefore relevant health facilities have been identified in the regeneration area proposals. Further details of the specific requirements and anticipated phasing are included in the schedule of the IDP. 
15.30  The council also recognises the impact of the health and wellbeing of its communities with the p
hysical environment. Improving air quality, increasing the provision of and access to 
open spaces, ‘greening’ of the borough, promoting accessible and inclusive facilities are examples of how the Local Plan takes a holistic approach to tackling these issues. The Local Plan policies have been developed to ensure these principles are implemented into the development process. 
Economic development 
15.31  Alongside residential development, the council is promoting an ambitious economic gro
wth agenda to tackle social deprivation and social exclusion. The council has identified 
an indicative figure of 29,500 jobs to be produced over the plan period as a result of the regeneration areas. In each of the regeneration areas, the council is promoting sustainable economic growth that seeks to enhance the employment, business, retail and higher education offer in the borough, relative to the scale of each regeneration area proposal. The Hammersmith and Fulham Economic Growth Strategy has been produced to inform the needs of the strategic regeneration areas and to identify a strategy to secure skills, qualifications and job creation across the borough. 
15.32  As well as identifying the key growth areas across the borough, the council seeks to support and p
rotect existing employment areas. The council also seeks to protect and enhance local 
retail and town centres by the policies contained in the Local Plan by identifying local centres and neighbourhood parades. 
Open space and green infrastructure 
15.33  The Parks and Open Spaces Strategy 2008-2018 seeks clean, green and award winning parks wh
ere residents and visitors can relax and enjoy themselves. The Strategy sets out the 
framework for the delivery of services and future improvement actions in the borough. Any successor strategy will be used to inform the Local Plan policies. 
15.34  There are still areas of the borough that are deficient in open space, play spaces and nature con
servation. A number of these areas overlap with the council’s regeneration areas. 
The council will secure through planning obligations high quality open spaces in all the regeneration areas, particularly Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area and the White City Opportunity Area which are particularly deficient in access to open space.234
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018PLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
15.35  The borough recognises the risk of fluvial flooding from the Thames River and surface water 
flooding. There are varying degrees of vulnerability across the borough. The council has therefore set out the expectations of any development proposals to minimise flood risk and reducing water usage. The council will continue to work with relevant stakeholders to maintain up-to-date information to help inform the development management process. The council has produced the Surface Water Management Plan which identifies the present and anticipated future risks of surface water and sewer flooding in the borough and ways of mitigating these. To ensure future development does not exercabate any existing issues, the Local Plan policies CC3 and CC4 set out the requirements for Flood Risk Assessments and Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) of any development proposals across the borough. Further to this, the council is seeking to produce further guidance for development proposals. 
15.36  In addition to this, the council will look towards greening the borough’s streets and ensuring tha
t regeneration proposals contribute to the protection, promotion and management of 
biodiversity in the borough. 
Transport 
15.37  Much of Hammersmith and Fulham has a high level of transport accessibility and the mai
n regeneration areas all have very good access by public transport. Nevertheless, all 
development will need to be considered carefully in terms of the capacity of the public transport and highway network and the need for further improvements. 
15.38  The four regeneration areas contained in the plan identify a number of major transport scheme
s as part of the proposals. The council will continue to work with TfL to support the 
frequency and reliability of the tube network across the borough. 
15.39  In addition the council will: 
• work with TfL and other stakeholders to bring forward a new Crossrail 2 station at  Imper
ial Wharf; 
• support the regeneration proposals of the OPDC and the provision of HS2, Crossrail and  a Great W
estern Main Line station at Old Oak Common; 
• explore options of developing the Hammersmith Flyunder; 
• identify, promote and complete cycle networks as part of the Hammersmith and Fulham Cyc
ling strategy; and 
• seek highway, pedestrian and bus service improvements where these are required as a result
 of regeneration initiatives. 
Utilities 
15.40  Regeneration will lead to demands on the services of companies that deliver energy, water, sewera
ge and other utility infrastructure. The council will work with the relevant partners 
to ensure that utilities upgrades and relevant infrastructure are delivered as part of any development proposal.235
www.lbhf.gov.ukPLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE
15.41  A particular issue in this borough is the provision of drainage infrastructure. The council will 
work w
ith Thames Water to support the planning and development of a solution to reduce 
the risk of sewer flooding in the Counters Creek catchment and other stakeholders to ensure that there is adequate water supply, surface water, foul drainage and sewerage treatment capacity to serve all new developments.  
15.42  Thames Water is also going to provide a Thames Tunnel which will reduce foul water from flow
ing into the river. The council will work with Thames Water and other stakeholders to 
ensure that the pollution of the Thames from sewage is reduced in accordance with the EU Urban Waste Water Directive. 
15.43  The council seeks to keep up-to-date with current technology and finding sustainable solu
tions to managing the borough’s resources and assets. The council is therefore seeking to 
contribute to the development of the ‘smart city’ approach. This is recognised as a vision of integrating information communication technology with a cities physical assets. The council will therefore promote integrated systems through the re-development of the regeneration areas as well as upgrading, where possible, council owned assets to improve the quality of life for its residents. The council will develop this by working with relevant development partners and stakeholders as well as working cross-departmentally across the council.236
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018PLANNING CONTRIBUTIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURESECTION 16 
GLOSSARY 238
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
GLOSSARY 
ACE is an abbreviation for Arts, Culture and Entertainment activities. 
Accessible and Inclusive Design  is the design of development that is accessible to, and usable by, 
as m
any people as reasonably possible without the need for special adaptation or specialised design. 
Accident and Emergency (A&E) Services 
• Type 1 A&E department – Major A&E, providing a consultant-led 24 hour service with full 
resuscitation facilities (applies to Charing Cross Hospital). 
• Type 2 A&E department – Single Specialty A&E service (e.g. ophthalmology, dentistry) 
• Type 3 A&E department – Other A&E/Minor Injury Unit/Walk In Centre, treating minor injuries and illnesses  
Active frontage refers to the interaction between buildings and the public domain should be posi
tive. Frontages should be ‘active’, adding interest, life and vitality to the public realm, as well as 
the sense of informal security. Dependent upon use and intensity, active frontages mean frequent doors and windows and few blank walls; main building entrances and foyers; ground floor shop fronts and transparent frontages that allow activities within the buildings to be visible from the street; and occasionally the opportunity for activities to spill out onto pavements through street cafés and shop displays. 
Advertisement shrouds when commercial advertising forms part of a protective screen secured 
on sca
ffolding to screen buildings works being carried out. 
Affordable Housing  Includes social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing  
(se
e definitions below), provided to specific eligible households whose needs are not met by the 
market. Affordable housing should: 
• meet the needs of eligible households including availability at a cost low enough for them to 
afford, determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices; and 
• include provision for the home to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households  or, if these restrictions are lifted, for the subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable  housing provision. 
The affordable housing definitions are from the NPPF Annex 2: Glossary. Households eligible for int
ermediate housing can earn up to £90,000 per annum (as at 1st April 2016). The definitions do 
not exclude homes provided by private sector bodies or provided without grant funding. 
Where such homes meet the definition above, they may be considered, for planning purposes, as 
aff
ordable housing. Whereas, those homes that do not meet the definition, for example ‘low cost 
market’ housing, may not be considered, for planning purposes, as affordable housing.239
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Affordable Rented housing  is rented housing provided by registered providers of social housing, 
that has the same characteristics as social rented housing except that it is outside the National rent 
regime, but is subject to other rent controls that require it to be offered to eligible households at a rent of up to 80 per cent of local market rents. 
Air Quality Management Area (AQMA)  An area which a Local Authority had designated for 
act
ion, based upon a prediction that Air Quality Objectives will be exceeded. 
Amenity Space (Private and Communal) 
• Private amenity space  – Private amenity space is land within the curtilage of a dwelling that is 
used exclusively for the day-to-day activities of a household, such as clothes drying, relaxation and 
gardening. Examples of private amenity space include private gardens and courtyards, terraces and balconies. 
• Communal amenity space  – Communal amenity space is land that is shared among a number 
of households of a development for recreational purposes. This space should be well-designed in terms of its location, safety and functionality. Children’s play space does not constitute communal amenity space and should be provided separately. 
Archaeological Priority Areas are areas of particular archaeological importance or vulnerability in 
the Bo
rough which have been identified by the council with the advice of English Heritage. In these 
areas the council’s policies and proposals for archaeological sites will particularly apply. Planning applications affecting such areas will generate appropriate consultation, which could in turn lead to further processes of site assessment. 
Back addition  generally means that part of a Victorian or Edwardian dwelling (which predominate 
in t
his Borough) that projects beyond the rear wall of the main part of the building and is usually 
of a lesser height and width. This part of the building was designed to be subordinate to the main 
building and normally contained subsidiary accommodation i.e. kitchens, sanitary facilities and secondary bedrooms. It enabled the developer to achieve a greater density with a narrower frontage whilst still providing some light and air to rooms at the rear. 
Biodiversity refers to the variety of plants and animals and other living things in a particular area 
or re
gion. It encompasses habitat diversity, species diversity and genetic diversity. Biodiversity has a 
value in its own right and has social and economic value for human society. Blue Badge  Blue parking badges allow cars carrying disabled people to be parked near shops, 
sta
tions and other facilities, and in LBHF Controlled Parking Zones and meter parking bays. Blue 
Badges can only be issued to people who meet the eligibility criteria. They can be used in any car  
the badge holder is driving or is a passenger in.240
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Brownfield land  Both land and premises are included in this term. This refers to a site that has 
previously been used or developed and is not currently fully in use, although it may be partially 
occupied or utilised. It may also be vacant, derelict or contaminated. This excludes open spaces and land where the remains of previous use have blended into the landscape, or have been overtaken  by nature conservation value or amenity use and cannot be regarded as requiring development. 
Brown Roofs are roofs which have a layer of soil or other material which provides a habitat or 
gro
wing medium for plants or wildlife. 
Build to rent 
Build to rent involves the construction of dwellings specifically for the rental market, rather than 
the mo
re traditional route in which developers build dwellings which they then sell, either to 
householders or to landlords. Build to rent schemes require long-term professional management to deal with the maintenance of the building and day-to-day issues. 
Building Research Establishment’s Environmental Assessment Methodology (BREEAM)   
is the methodology for measuring the environmental performance of nearly every land use, 
includ
ing schools, health care or bespoke uses. 
Combined Heat and Power (CHP)  is the combined production of electricity and usable heat is 
kno
wn as Combined Heat and Power (CHP). Steam or hot water, which would otherwise be rejected 
when electricity alone is produced, is used for space or process heating. The provision of cooling  can be added to create Combined Cooling, Heat and Power (CCHP). 
Car Clubs, also known as Community Car Pooling  schemes, are aimed at sharing the 
own
ership and use of cars. The principle is different from conventional car hire in that the cars are 
kept locally and can be used at short notice and for short periods of time. Community Car Pooling 
Schemes ensure that cars are available when people really need them, but reduce unnecessary use and pressure for parking spaces.241
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Community facilities/uses: 
• Education  
 –  Schools, Colleges, Universities, Adult Learning, Training, Children’s Centres, Nurseries, Crèches. 
• Healthcare  
 – Hospitals, Community Health Services, General Practitioners. 
•  Emergency Services  
 –  Police, Fire, Ambulance, Criminal Justice. 
• Community Services and Third Sector  
 –  Community Halls/Meeting Rooms/Public Houses/Hubs, Religious Meeting Places, Libraries, 
Young
 People’s Facilities. 
• Arts, Cultural and Entertainment Uses  
 –  Tourism, Cinemas, Theatres, Museums, Galleries, Concert Halls, Music Venues, Public Houses. 
• Leisure, Recreation and Sports Uses  
 –  Sports Halls, Pitches, Courts, Professional Sports Clubs, Gymnasiums, Swimming Pools,  
Ath
letics Facilities, Bowling Greens, Dance Halls, Ice Rinks. 
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) refers to the discretionary charge on development  
whic
h Local Planning Authorities will be empowered to make in order to fund local  
infrastructure requirements. 
Conservation Area  is a geographical area designated by the Council under the Planning (Listed 
Buil
dings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 as having special architectural or historic interest the 
character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance. Contaminated land defined in section 78A(2) as any land which appears to the Local Authority  
in w
hose area it is situated to be in such a condition, by reason of substances in, on or under the 
land, that: 
a) significant harm is being caused or there is a significant possibility of such harm being caused; or, 
b) pollution of controlled waters is being, or is likely to be, caused. 
Decentralised Energy  is generating power on a smaller scale and closer to the end user  
(i.
e. decentralised), is much more energy efficient and can generate potential cost savings for users. 
Decentralised energy generation using CHP or renewable energy technologies can help significantly 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions. 
Density relates to the amount of residential accommodation in any given area. It is measured by 
cal
culating the number of habitable rooms and dwellings per hectare or acre. For individual sites  
the gross site area is the appropriate unit of measurement.242
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Design and access statement  a statement that accompanies a planning application to explain 
the design principles and concepts that have informed the development and how access issues have 
been dealt with. 
Dormer window or extension  means a projecting vertical window in the sloping roof of a house 
(OE
D definition). The council considers that any roof extension which takes less than 50% of each 
roof slope to the original dwelling house can be classed as a dormer window or dormer window 
extension provided that such an extension does not involve raising either party wall. 
Employment uses are defined as all Class B Uses and similar uses that are classified as sui generis 
(To
wn and Country (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended). 
Energy Assessment  A report evaluating the energy use of a proposed development which shows 
how i
t has been designed to reduce carbon emissions in line with the council’s Development Plan 
policies on tackling climate change. The assessment should show how energy efficiency measures, including passive design and low and zero carbon technologies such as decentralised communal energy systems and renewable energy generation will be implemented to reduce energy use and minimise CO
2 emissions. 
Energy Efficiency  measures are taken to ensure that the best or most efficient use of energy  
is us
ed in order to achieve a given output of goods or services, and of comfort and convenience.  
This does not necessitate the use of less energy, in which respect it differs from the concept of energy conservation. 
Environmental Impact Assessments provide, information about the environmental effects of a 
pro
ject is collected, assessed and taken into account in reaching a decision on whether the project 
should go ahead or not (DETR Nov 2000). Estate Renewal – area-based programmes that physically renew housing stock through, 
refu
rbishment or other change to enable improved housing opportunities for local residents and to 
support economic regeneration in this area. 
Family dwelling  generally means a dwelling containing three or more bedrooms. 
Flood Risk Assessments (FRA)  are required when a planning application is submitted in a 
loca
tion where there is a risk of flooding from any source. This requirement is set out in the 
Government’s policy on development and flood risk as stated in the NPPF.243
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Green corridors  can be defined as extensive contiguous areas of trees and open space which 
straddle or run along the major road, rail and river/canal routes into London. They may be narrow, 
often only the “unused” margins of development, but are of value as habitats for wildlife and plants and local landscape features and because they may link nature conservation areas. Certain transport routes, such as the Thames and the Canal, also act as corridors for animals and plants in the same way as green corridors. However these have been designated as nature conservation areas because of their greater nature conservation importance, and are not shown as open space. 
Green roof  refers to the roof of a building that is partially or completely covered with vegetation 
and a g
rowing medium, planted over a waterproofing membrane. It may also include additional 
layers such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems. Green infrastructure  The multifunctional, interdependent network of open and green spaces  
and g
reen features (e.g. green roofs). It includes the Blue Ribbon Network but excludes the  
hard-surfaced public realm. This network lies within the urban environment and the urban fringe, 
connecting to the surrounding countryside. It provides multiple benefits for people and wildlife including: flood management; urban cooling; improving physical and mental health; green transport links (walking and cycling routes); ecological connectivity; and food growing. Green and open spaces of all sizes can be part of green infrastructure provided they contribute to the functioning  of the network as a whole. 
Gross floor area means the overall area of the building on each floor below or above ground. 
It includes at each floor level: i) the thickness of internal and external walls; 
ii) stairs, service ducts, lift shafts, corridors and halls; 
iii) any covered passage (other than a public right of way); 
iv) cloakrooms, lavatories, kitchens and restaurants; and 
v) basement areas (other than those used for car parking or for bank vault, strong room, safe 
depo
sit or plant room purposes). 
Any space allocated for car parking, for loading and unloading commercial vehicles and for public tra
nsport operational purposes shall be excluded from gross floor area, as shall any roof-top plant. 
Rooms and other spaces which continue through two or more normal floors of the building (e.g. thea
tres, lecture halls, and atria) will be assessed as occupying that number of floors, except where 
it is assured (preferably by legal agreement) that those spaces shall not be used for the subsequent provision of additional floorspace by the insertion of extra floors. 
Ground water Water within soils and rock layers.244
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Gypsy and travellers’ sites These are sites either for settled occupation, temporary stopping 
places, or transit sites for people of nomadic habit of life, such as travellers and gypsies. 
A habitable room  is any room used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes above 6.5 sq.m. 
(70 sq
.ft.) in floor area except for kitchens of less than 13 sq.m. (140 sq.ft.), bathrooms and WCs. 
Utility rooms will not be included as habitable rooms if they have direct access to kitchens and 
provided they do not exceed 6.5 sq.m. (70 sq.ft.) or the kitchen and inter-connecting utility room together do not exceed 13 sq.m. (140 sq.ft.). If a habitable room has a net floor area exceeding  20.5 sq.m. (220 sq.ft.), that area shall be assessed at the rate of one habitable room per 20.5 sq.m. (220 sq.ft.) or part thereof, but an exception may be made in the case of accommodation designed to be used exclusively as one-room sheltered and other special-needs housing units. 
Gross site area  applies to density calculations for residential purposes and means the area of the 
sit
e plus an area calculated by multiplying the length of the site’s frontage onto adjoining street(s) by 
half the width of the street(s) (up to a maximum of 6m (20ft.) subject to the area thus added being 
no more than 10% of the net site area. No part of any river or canal or railway (or its embankments) or of any public open space shall be used in density calculations. Private open space to be used exclusively in association with a proposed development (including that provided for communal use) shall be included with the gross site area. 
Hazardous substances  are substances which are dangerous because they are very toxic, toxic, 
harm
ful, corrosive or irritant. Major hazards comprise a wide range of chemical process sites, fuel 
and chemical storage sites, pipelines, explosive sites and nuclear sites. Heat Network A heat network distributes heat to several users, just as an electricity grid distributes 
power
. The heat energy produced and recycled by CHP Plants during electricity generation can be 
distributed to local homes and businesses via a heat network. Recycling heat in this way has an 
important role to play in the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions. 
Heritage Asset is a building, monument, site, place, area or landscape positively identified as 
havi
ng a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions. Heritage assets are the 
valued components of the historic environment. They include assets identified by the local planning authority during the process of decision-making or through the plan-making process (including Local Listing).245
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Highly Vulnerable Uses  in relation to flood risk are considered to be as follows: 
• police stations, ambulance stations and fire stations and command centres and 
telecommunications installations required to be operational during flooding; 
• emergency dispersal points; 
• basement dwellings; 
• caravans, mobile homes and park homes intended for permanent residential use; and 
• installations requiring hazardous substances consent. 
Hostel There are many kinds of hostel uses. The policies of the Plan distinguish between two  
main t
ypes: 
1. Residential  – accommodation usually occupied by people of a specific group with a common 
int
erest. There will usually be an element of management supervision or support and some 
communal facilities. It will normally be occupied on a medium to long-term basis by people who  do not have permanent accommodation elsewhere. It may cater for a wide range of socio-economic groups, including homeless families. It excludes residential institutions in the C2 Use Class which provide a significant element of care.  
2. Tourist – normally short-stay accommodation for those whose normal residence is elsewhere. 
They a
re for holidays or short stays and are sometimes open to the general public. They resemble 
hotels except that the accommodation is usually of a lower standard. 
House in Multiple Occupation (HMO)  Under the changes in the Housing Act 2004, if a landlord 
let
s a property which is one of the following types, it is a House in Multiple Occupation: 
• an entire house or flat which is let to three or more tenants who form two or more households 
and who share a kitchen, bathroom or toilet; 
• a house which has been converted entirely into bedsits or other non-self contained accommodation and which is let to three or more tenants who form two or more households  and who share kitchen, bathroom or toilet facilities; 
• a converted house which contains one or more flats which are not wholly self contained (ie the flat does not contain within it a kitchen, bathroom and toilet) and which is occupied by three  or more tenants who form two or more households; 
• a building which is converted entirely into self contained flats if the conversion did not meet the standards of the 1991 Building Regulations and more than one-third of the flats are on short-term tenancies; or 
• in order to be an HMO the property must be used as the tenants’ only or main residence and it should be used solely or mainly to house tenants. Properties let to students and migrants will be treated as their only or main residence and the same will apply to properties which are used as domestic refuges.246
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Intermediate Housing  is housing at prices and rents above those of social rent, but below market 
price or rents, and which meet the criteria set out above (see the definition of affordable housing). 
These can include shared equity products (e.g. HomeBuy), other low cost homes for sale and intermediate rent. 
Inclusive design  creates an environment where everyone can access and benefit from the full 
ran
ge of opportunities available to members of society. It aims to remove barriers that create undue 
effort, separation or special treatments, and enables everyone to participate equally in mainstream 
activities independently, with choice and dignity. 
Key Local Centre  are those diversified larger centres with a range of local shops and services which 
sit bel
ow the three town centres of Hammersmith, Shepherds Bush and Fulham. They often include 
a choice of small supermarkets and food/drink units, possibly with an ethnic goods and evening 
economy element.  
Key criteria are: 
• location: outside of the town centre catchment (400 metres); 
• uses: predominantly retail use (A1) providing local shopping, but presence of other non A1 uses including food and drink establishments and service uses; and 
• size: greater than 200 metres frontage. 
Legibility  the degree to which a place can be easily understood and traversed. 
Less Vulnerable Uses  in relation to flood risk are considered to be as follows: 
• police, ambulance and fire stations which are not required to be operational during flooding; 
• buildings used for: shops; financial, professional and other services; restaurants and cafes; hot food takeaways; offices; general industry; storage and distribution; non-residential institutions not included in ‘more vulnerable’; and assembly and leisure; 
• land and buildings used for agriculture and forestry; 
• waste treatment (except landfill and hazardous waste facilities); 
• minerals working and processing (except for sand and gravel working); 
• water treatment works which do not need to remain operational during times of flood; and 
• sewage treatment works (if adequate measures to control pollution and manage sewage during flooding events are in place).247
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Lifetime Homes Ordinary homes designed to provide accessible and convenient homes for a large 
segment of the population from young children to frail elderly people and those with physical or sensory impairments. Lifetime Homes have 16 design features that ensure the home will be flexible enough to meet the existing and changing needs of most households, as set out in the 1999 Joseph Rowntree Foundation report ‘Meeting Part M and Designing Lifetime Homes’. Government legislation in 2015 has produced Building Regulations in approved document known as M4 (2), and is broadly equivalent to satisfying Lifetime Homes criteria. Approved document part M4 also includes category 3 for “wheelchair user dwellings” known as M4 (3). 
Listed Building is a building or structure which is considered to be of ‘special architectural or 
his
toric interest’. The definition of ‘Listed Building’ is fairly wide and the term ‘building’ may include 
a wide range of structures including bridges, milestones and follies. 
Local Buildings of Merit  means buildings which are of local interest because of their townscape, 
arc
hitectural or historic interest but not meriting Listed Building status. 
London Housing Design Guide The London Housing Design Guide sets out the Mayor of 
Londo
n’s aspirations for the design of new housing in the capital. 
Major Development  has the same definition as contained in the London Plan. 
Major developments (applications decided by the London Boroughs) Major Developments are defi
ned as these: 
• for dwellings: where 10 or more are to be constructed (or if number not given, area is more than 0.5 hectares); and 
• for all other uses: where the floor area will be 1000 sq metres or more (or the site area is 1 hectare or more). The site area is that directly involved in some aspect of the development. Floor space is defined as the sum of floor area within the building measured externally to the external wall faces at each level. Basement car parks, rooftop plant rooms, caretakers’ flats etc should be included in the floor space figure. 
A mansard roof  is traditionally a double-pitched roof slope having the lower part steeper than the 
upper
. It has recently come to include a steep single-pitched roof slope used to retain the appearance 
of a roof while allowing the introduction, within the roof space, of extra accommodation. 
Market Housing  refers to private housing for rent or for sale, where the price is set in the  
open m
arket.248
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Metropolitan Open Land (MOL)  is strategic open land within the urban area that contributes 
to the structure of London. Land designated MOL is afforded the same level of protection as 
the Metropolitan Green Belt Designation is intended to protect areas of landscape, recreation, nature conservation and scientific interest which are strategically important. Any alterations to the boundary of MOL should be undertaken by boroughs through the Local Plan process, in consultation with the Mayor and adjoining authorities. 
More Vulnerable Uses in relation to flood risk are considered to be as follows: 
• hospitals; 
• residential institutions such as residential care homes, children’s homes, social services homes, 
prisons and hostels; 
• buildings used for: dwelling houses; student halls of residence; drinking establishments; nightclubs; and hotels; 
• non-residential uses for health services, nurseries and educational establishments; 
• landfill and sites used for waste management facilities for hazardous waste; and 
• sites used for holiday or short-let caravans and camping. 
Municipal solid waste (MSW) This includes all waste under the control of Local Authorities or 
agen
ts acting on their behalf. It includes all household waste, street litter, waste delivered to council 
recycling points, municipal parks and garden wastes, council office waste, Civic Amenity waste, and some commercial waste from shops and smaller trading estates where Local Authorities have waste collection agreements in place. It can also include industrial waste collected by a Waste Collection Authority (WCA) with authorisation of the Waste Disposal Authority (WDA). 
National Planning Po licy Framework (NPPF) sets out the Government’s planning policies for 
Eng
land and how these are expected to be applied. It sets out the Government’s requirements for 
the planning system only to the extent that it is relevant, proportionate and necessary to do so.249
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Neighbourhood Parade – are those clusters of frontages serving the immediate vicinity with 
day-to-day essentials. Generally, but not in all cases, they are smaller than Key Local Centres, and include a greater representation of small shops. Some neighbourhood centres also include a range of specialist shops serving a much wider area, such as the furniture shops in Wandsworth Bridge (North). On average they contain a greater proportion of convenience goods frontage than key local centres, but a narrower range of services. This categorisation covers a range of types of centre and includes successful parades of high environmental quality, as well as less prosperous parades and housing estate facilities. 
Key criteria are: 
• location: outside of the town centre catchment (400 metres); 
• uses: predominantly Retail use (A1); and 
• size: between 100 and 300 metres frontage. 
Neighbourhood Planning  was introduced as part of the Localism Act 2011. Neighbourhood 
plan
ning enables communities to develop spatial plans at a neighbourhood level. Neighbourhood 
plans must be developed in conformity with the relevant regulations, which includes a referendum to 
determine whether the plan will be adopted and become part of the Local Development Framework. 
Net floor area  (of a dwelling) means the aggregate internal area of each floor as enclosed by the 
ext
ernal walls of a dwelling. It includes the area occupied by internal partitions or walls, the area 
taken up on each floor by any staircase, the area of any chimney breast or fireplace. It excludes 
the floor area of any addition to the dwelling as originally built, dustbin store, fuel store, garage or balcony, any area in rooms with sloping ceilings to the extent that the height of the ceiling does not exceed 1.5m (5ft.) and any porch. 
Net floor area  (of a room) means the area of floor enclosed by the walls of the room measured to 
the o
pposing faces. It includes the area taken up by any bay window. It does not include the area 
taken up by any chimney breasts or flues, the circulation space required for access through the room 
to another room measured as 675mm (2.25ft.) wide and any area in rooms with sloping ceilings to the extent that the height of the ceiling does not exceed 1.5m (5ft). 
Net site area  means the area of the site as measured to its boundaries and does not include parts 
of t
he adjoining public highway. 
Non-family dwelling  means a dwelling containing two bedrooms or less. 
Open Space  refers to all land that is predominantly undeveloped other than by buildings or structures 
tha
t are ancillary to open space. The definition covers a broad range of types of open spaces whether 
in public or private ownership and whether public access is unrestricted, limited or restricted.250
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Opportunity Areas identifying London’s principal opportunities for accommodating large scale 
development to provide substantial numbers of new employment and housing, each typically more than 5,000 jobs and/or 2,500 homes, with a mixed and intensive use of land and assisted by good public transport accessibility. 
Permeability  is the degree to which an area has a variety of pleasant, convenient and safe routes 
thr
ough it. 
Permission in principle  has been introduced as part of the Housing and Planning Act 2016. 
It i
s aimed to introduce a new consent route for obtaining planning permission. Permission in 
principle is the first stage where issues such as land use, location, and amount of development 
are agreed ‘in principle’. If this is agreed, applicants may progress their application to the next technical details stage, which requires further detailed technical work to take place and be discussed between the applicant and the Local Planning Authority. Planning permission is only granted where technical matters consent has been granted. Any proposed sites must be developed in accordance with National, Regional and Local planning policies. Sites may be identified in Local and/or Neighbourhood Plans or they can be identified on brownfield registers. 
Planning Obligations Section 12(1) of the Planning and Compensation Act 1991 substitutes new 
sect
ions 106, 106A and 106B for section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. The 
new section 106 introduces the concept of planning obligations, which comprises both planning 
agreements and unilateral undertakings. It enables a planning obligation to be entered into by means of a unilateral undertaking by a developer as well as by agreement between a developer and a Local Planning Authority. Such obligations may restrict development or use of the land; require operations or activities to be carried out in, under or over the land; require the land to be used in any specified way; or require payments to be made to the Authority either in a single sum or periodically (see Circular 1/97 Planning Obligations for further details). 
Prime retail frontages are where retail development is concentrated and generally comprise the 
mai
n component of Primary Shopping Areas in Town Centres. 
Public realm  is the space between and within buildings that are publicly accessible, including 
str
eets, squares, forecourts, parks and open spaces. 
Public Transport Access Level (PTAL)  provides a methodology for assessing the relative ease of 
acc
ess to a location to the public transport network. PTAL 1 is ‘very poor’ with PTAL 6 is ‘excellent’. 
Register of Assets of Community Value The purpose of this is to give community groups the 
oppo
rtunity to identify land or property that they believe furthers the social wellbeing or social 
interests of the local community, and gives them time to bid for that asset if an owner decides to sell.251
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
A Registered Housing Association  is a Housing Association registered with the  
Housing Corporation. 
Registered Provider  replaces the previous definition of Registered Social Landlord (“RSL”). All 
pro
viders of social housing will now be listed on a register and will become a “Registered Provider”. 
Renewable energy  is energy derived from a source that is continually replenished, such as wind, 
wav
e, solar, plant materials (bio fuels), but not fossil fuels or nuclear energy. 
A roof extension means any extension to the original roof and can apply to a dormer window 
or ful
l-width extension to the roof of a pitched roofed property. The context in which the term is 
used should in most cases describe the exact form of the roof extension. A full-width roof extension means any extension to a pitched roof property which extends the existing roof from party wall to party wall, associated with the raising of those party walls irrespective of whether it is over the whole of the roof area or only a part of it. 
Satellite Parade  are those parades and centres with a range of shops and services which adjoin or 
are w
ithin walking distance of one of the borough’s three Town Centres. They often include small 
supermarkets and food/drink units and services which support and complement the Town Centre as 
well as supporting local residents. Similar to Key Local Centres, they offer frontages which contain ethnic goods and an evening economy element. The Satellite Parades provide an opportunity for uses and services which support the retail function of the town centre and also allow an element of flexibility in the types of uses permitted. 
Key criteria are: 
• location: within the town centre catchment (400 metres) but not included within the town  
centre designation; 
• uses: mix of uses, including presence of non A1 uses including food and drink establishments  and service uses. There may also be some B1 uses; and 
• size: between 100 and 400 metre frontage. 
Section 106 Agreements (also often denoted as s106) – these agreements confer planning 
obl
igations on persons with an interest in land in order to achieve the implementation of 
relevant planning policies as authorised by Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990. These may be used to help mitigate the specific impact of a development where it would generate additional needs e.g. on community infrastructure. Standard charges are calculations and measurements of the level of contribution likely to be sought by a local planning authority towards infrastructure necessitated by new development. The Government has encouraged the use of formulae and standard charges, and pooling of contributions, where appropriate.252
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Self-build and custom housebuild  is a building or completion by individuals, associations of 
individuals, or persons working with or for individuals or associations of individuals of houses to be 
occupied as homes by those individuals. But it does not include the building of a house on a plot acquired from a person who builds the house wholly or mainly to plans or specifications decided or offered by that person. 
Self-contained dwelling  is a residential unit of one or more habitable rooms, whose occupier has 
exc
lusive use of all his/her amenities, including kitchen, shower/bath and W.C., and which is a single 
and discrete unit. Sensitive use  in relation to flood risk is regarded as residential land with gardens or soft landscaping. 
Sequential approach  applies to all town centre-related activities and states that, if possible, 
fac
ilities should be accommodated in the centre, failing that on the edge of the centre. 
Sequential Test  in relation to flooding, is a test to provide a decision-making tool designed to 
ensu
re that sites at little or no risk of flooding are developed in preference to areas at higher risk. 
Within each Flood Zone, new development should be directed first to sites at the lowest probability 
of flooding. 
Social infrastructure  Covers facilities such as health provision, early years provision, schools, 
col
leges and universities, community, cultural, recreation and sports facilities, places of worship, 
policing and other criminal justice or community safety facilities, children and young people’s play 
and informal recreation facilities. This list is not intended to be exhaustive and other facilities can be included as social infrastructure. 
Social rented housing  is rented housing owned and managed by Local Authorities and registered 
socia
l landlords, for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent regime. 
The proposals set out in the Three Year Review of Rent Restructuring (July 2004) were implemented 
as policy in April 2006. It may also include rented housing owned or managed by other persons and provided under equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local authority or with the Homes and Communities Agency as a condition of grant. 
Starter Homes defined in the Housing and Planning Bill as new dwellings for first time buyers 
und
er 40, sold at a discount of at least 20% of market value and at less than the price cap of 
£250,000 or £450,000 in London.253
www.lbhf.gov.ukGLOSSARY
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment is a study to assess the risk to an area or site from flooding, 
now and in the future, and to assess the impact that any changes or developments on the site or area will have on flood risk to the site and elsewhere. It may also identify, particularly at more local levels, how to manage those changes to ensure that flood risk is not increased. 
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) is an assessment of land availability 
for h
ousing which informs the London Plan and borough’s local development document. 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA)  Established by Government guidance: Planning 
Pol
icy Statement 3: Housing (2006), and detailed Strategic Housing Market Assessment Practice 
Guidance (2007). The aims of a Strategic Housing Market Assessment are to provide  
clear evidence as to what is going on in the housing market and what future prospects for the market may be. 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)  is an SPD which can take the form of design guides 
or ar
ea development briefs, or supplement other specific policies in the plan. Such documents do 
not form a part of the Statutory Plan, however it is a material planning consideration. It must be 
consistent with national and regional planning guidance, as well as policies set out in the adopted plan. It should be clearly cross-referenced to the relevant plan policy or proposal that it supplements. Public consultation should be undertaken and SPDs should be regularly reviewed. 
Supported Housing Homes in which vulnerable residents are offered a range of housing related 
sup
port services to enable them to live independently. 
Sustainability Statement  is a document outlining the elements of a development scheme that 
add
ress sustainable development issues. 
Sustainable development  is that which meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the a
bility of future generations to meet their own needs. 
Sustainable Drainage System (SUDS) An alternative approach to the traditional ways of 
man
aging rainwater runoff from buildings and other surfaces. SUDS can reduce the total amount, 
flow and rate at which surface water runs directly to stormwater systems or to rivers and other 
water courses. 
Tall Buildings  are those that are substantially taller than their surroundings, cause a significant 
cha
nge to the skyline or are larger than the threshold sizes set for the referral of planning applications 
to the Mayor.254
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018GLOSSARY
Thames Policy Area A special policy area to be defined by boroughs in which detailed appraisals 
of the riverside will be required. 
3rd Sector  is a term which describes community and voluntary groups, registered charities both 
lar
ge and small, foundations, trusts, social enterprises and co-operatives. 
Transport Assessment are prepared and submitted alongside planning applications for 
dev
elopments likely to have significant transport implications. 
Travel Plans  are aimed at helping employees to use alternatives to driving to work – for example 
publi
c transport, walking and cycling. Green Travel Plans also address business’ transport use 
and cover travel in the course of business. Travel plans can make a major contribution to easing 
congestion, especially during the peak periods. 
Vulnerable use is referenced within the document in relation to the vulnerability to flooding. Wheelchair accessible housing  refers to homes built to meet the standards set out in the  
seco
nd edition of the Wheelchair Housing Design Guide by Stephen Thorpe, Habinteg Housing 
Association 2006. Wheelchair adaptable housing  is where the initial occupants are not known and the intention 
is t
hat where layouts and components are easy to change at a future date, it is not necessary to 
comply with all of the features needed for wheelchair access at the outset. Windfall sites  are those sites which come forward for development that could not be identified 
previ
ously as they were previously in active use.SECTION 17 
APPENDICES256
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX 1 
SUMMARY OF THE LOCAL PLAN  SUSTAINABILITY APPRAISAL 
Set out below is a summary of the Local Plan Sustainability Appraisal. 
Summary of the Sustainability Appraisal of the Local Plan 
Strategic Objectives 
The strategic objectives of the Local Plan set out the many and varied aims of the council in relation 
to la
nd use and future development. Overall, the Sustainability Appraisal (SA) revealed that they 
exhibit a broad commitment to the principles of sustainable development and are largely compatible with the assessment objectives of the SA process. 
It is the Local Plan objectives to regenerate the most deprived parts of the borough and increase 
hou
sing where there is most tension with the SA objectives. Nonetheless, the SA considered that 
through appropriate mitigation measures any incompatibilities can be reduced, and in some cases eliminated, provided that the plan policies are implemented in a sustainable fashion, for example by incorporating energy and resource efficiency measures, making space for biodiversity, ensuring public transport accessibility and avoiding inappropriate development in areas of flood risk. 
Regeneration Area Policies and Strategic Sites 
The Local Plan includes policies for the broad spatial approach to planning and regeneration across 
the bo
rough over the next 20 years. 
The Local Plan’s approach is to focus major growth in four key regeneration areas; to promote new hou
sing and employment activities throughout these areas; and to deliver supporting infrastructure. 
In addition, the Local Plan sets out a designated town and local centre hierarchy which overlaps with the regeneration areas. 
The SA found that the council’s approach to regeneration and strategic sites was sustainable. For each of the four regeneration areas identified, the Local Plan sets out policies for the overall 
str
ategy and vision for the area and the proposals for sites of strategic importance. 
In relation to the policies for the key regeneration areas and strategic sites, the SA found that no who
lly unsustainable policies have been put forward. In general, the policies meet social 
and economic sustainability criteria, but there is less certainty as to whether they will meet the environmental objectives as this will depend on implementation through development management. Throughout the SA process, recommendations were made in order to ensure a high level of sustainability in those development management policies concerned with environmental criteria. 257
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
The SA also recommended that more in-depth sustainability appraisals are carried out for the key 
regeneration areas, for example as individual area planning frameworks are prepared or updated, and that appropriate appraisals accompany major planning applications. 
Boroughwide development management policies 
In addition to the overarching spatial strategy and regeneration area policies, the Local Plan 
inc
ludes a number of boroughwide development management policies to help deliver the spatial 
strategy and to ensure that development both inside and outside the proposed regeneration areas contributes to meeting the council’s objectives. 
The proposed boroughwide development management policies are generally sustainable and in 
add
ition are accompanied by viability assessment criteria where appropriate. 
Conclusions and Recommendations 
Overall, therefore the strategic objectives, spatial policies, and boroughwide development 
man
agement policies are generally sustainable. This is only to be expected given the iterative 
nature of the Local Plan process and the fact that sustainability appraisal has run side by side with the development of policy options. In addition, this document is the latest of a series of SAs to be published on council planning documents, with previous reports being made available for planning documents in June 2007 (Core Strategy Preferred Options), June 2009 (Core Strategy Options), October 2011 (Core Strategy) July 2013 (Development Management Local Plan) and January 2015 (draft Local Plan). 
It should also be borne in mind that, in general, growth in London is supported by national and 
Londo
n wide policy and can be more sustainable in highly accessible areas like Hammersmith 
and Fulham than in many other areas of the country. Achieving the council’s vision, including regenerating deprived areas of the borough and delivering affordable homes for local people and improving local health and social care provision will, however, have an impact on the environment and will need to be managed carefully (for example, to minimise carbon emissions and resource use) through development management and environmental standards. 
The sustainability effects of the Local Plan will largely depend upon the implementation of its 
poli
cies through the development management process and so it will be important to ensure that 
the policies in the Local Plan are monitored closely and at an early stage in order to identify any unforeseen negative effects, which may occur. 
Some policies may require further SA assessment as part of the preparation of more detailed 
reg
eneration area SPDs for the borough or when planning applications are submitted. Therefore, 
despite this SA appraisal, the difficult target of achieving sustainable development will remain and it will be necessary for future development, particularly major schemes to be assessed on an individual basis in terms of impact on sustainability.258
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
APPENDIX 2 
TOWN AND LOCAL CENTRE HIERARCHY 
Town Centres Designation 
Hammersmith Major Centre 
Fulham Major Centre 
Shepherds Bush Metropolitan Centre 
Key Local Centres Address 
East Acton Old Oak Common Lane, 74 to 100,  
Erc
onwald Street, 1 to 5, 2 to 4 Westway 1-11, 13 
Askew Road East side, 105 to 119, 63-105, 121-155 
West side, 66 to 118, 124 to 128, 157 to 165 
North End Road 
(We
st Kensington) East side, 137 to 153, 155-169, 175 to 203c,  plus
 4-12 North End Crescent 
West side, 62-70, 78 to 84, 86 to 114 North End Road,  plus 1 Ba
ron’s Court Road, 2 Castletown Road, 2-6 Charleville Road, 
1 Charleville Road, the three Kings Pub 
Fulham Road North side, 656 to 702c, South side, 799 to 859,  604-
620 Fulham Road, 753-763 Fulham Road,  
765-781 Fulham Road, 783-797 Fulham Road 
Wandsworth  Bridge R
oad East side, 99 to 133, 269-283, West side 112 to 132,  and 1
34 to 198, 1 Hazlebury Road and 308-314 including  
Post Office fronting Hugon Road259
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
Neighbourhood 
Parades Address 
Bloemfontein Road Shop units in Charnock House, Sainsbury’s on site of former  Jane
t Adegoke Centre 
Uxbridge Road West South side, 171 to 197a, North side, 412 to 420, 424 to 448 
Edward Woods Estate 2
 -18 Swanscombe Road, Shop Units in Swanscombe House,  
Shop
 Units in Mortimer House 
Brackenbury Village 127a-139 Brackenbury Road, 22, 53-55 Aldensley Road 
Blythe Road North side, 108-118, and Coleridge Court shop units,  Sout
h side, 59 to 73 
Baron’s Court Palliser Road, West side, 45-55, Margravine Gardens,  Sout
h side, 1, 3, 3a Shops in Baron’s Court station 
Fulham Palace  Road Nor
th 
(previously known as Greyhound Road) Fulham Palace Road, West side, 168 to 190, 192 to 206, 208 to 220; East s
ide 169 to 177, 179-191, 193 to 207 and 209-211 
Lillie Road, North side, 392 to 402 
Fulham Cross 287-297 Munster Road, 299-305 Munster Road, 325 Lillie Road,  302
-320 Munster Road 
Munster Road East side, 236 to 244, West side, 199 to 259 
Fulham Palace  Road South East side, 323- 327, 329 to 367 
King’s Road 559-575 Kings Road, 577-581 Kings Road, 587-599 Kings Road,  554
-562 Kings Road, 564-598 Kings Road, 600-612 Kings Road 
Fulham High Street 6-66 Fulham High Street, 963-969 Fulham Road, 1-9a, 15-35, 41-47 and 4
9-67a Fulham High Street, 947-961 and 764-792 Fulham Road 
Parson’s Green New Kings Road, North side, 26 to 40, South side, 173 to 207,  48-
60 New Kings Road, 62-80 New Kings Road, 82-96 New Kings 
Road, 251-269 New Kings Road, 271-285 New Kings Road,  287-305 New Kings Road 
King Street  (Ham
let Gardens) 338-340a King Street, 344-348 King Street, 352-366 King Street,  370
-372 King Street, Standish House and 345-357 King Street,  
369-399 King Street 
Parsons Green Lane West side, 50 Parsons Green Lane, Dexter Court & Brigade House 
East side, 51, 61 to 77 Parsons Green Lane; 1-3 Parsons Green260
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Satellite Parades Address 
Uxbridge Road East North side, 216 to 250, and 262 to 294, South side, 15 to 41,  
and 5
7 to 95 
Goldhawk Road South side, 57 to 75, 77 to 85; North side, 56 to 104, 106-120 
Shepherd’s Bush Road West side 48 to 104 
King Street (Ra
venscourt Park) 182-230 King Street, 232-246a King Street, 248-260 King Street 
Latymer Court 102-172 Hammersmith Road 
Fulham Palace Road 54-66, 68 to 80, 82-114, 91-99, 101-111, 113-127 Fulham Palace Road 
APPENDIX 3 
OPEN SPACE HIERARCHY 
Name of Open Space Area (hectares) 
Metropolitan Parks 
OS1  Wormwood Scrubs * (MOL)5868.36 
District Parks OS2  Bishops Park and Fulham Palace ^ (MOL) 19.58 
OS3  Ravenscourt Park 13.60 
Local Parks OS4  Eel Brook Common * 7.44 
OS5  Edward Woods Town Park 1.25 
OS6  Hammersmith Park 3.23 
OS7  Hurlingham Park (MOL) 7.90 
OS8  Lillie Road Recreation Ground 3.60 
OS9  Little Wormwood Scrubs * 8.81 
OS10  Normand Park 2.61 
OS11  Shepherds Bush Common * 3.33 
OS12  South Park 8.58 
OS13  Wormholt Park 3.66
Table continued over261
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
Name of Open Space Area (hectares)
Small Local Parks and Open Spaces 
OS14  Bayonne Park 1.11 
OS15  Brompton Park 0.84 
OS16  Brook Green * 1.80 
OS17  Cathnor Park 1.06 
OS18  Frank Banfield Park 1.44 
OS19  Furnivall Gardens 1.78 
OS20  Gwendwr Gardens 0.47 
OS21  Imperial Wharf Park 2.4 
OS22  Marcus Garvey Park 0.63 
OS23  Parsons Green * 1.37 
OS24  Queens Club Gardens 0.79 
OS25  Rowberry Mead 0.48 
OS26  St Paul’s Green 0.71 
OS27  St Paul’s Open Space, Hammersmith Road 0.77 
OS28  St Peter’s Square ^ 0.79 
OS29  Wendell Park 1.75 
OS30  White City Community Garden 0.56 
OS31  William Parnell Park 1.03 
Cemeteries and Open Spaces adjoining places of Worship OS32  Fulham Cemetery 5.20 
OS33  Margravine Cemetery (Hammersmith Cemetery) 6.2 
OS34  Kensal Green Cemetery (MOL) 9.45 
OS35  St Mary’s Cemetery (MOL) 10.07 
Allotments OS36  The Warren (MOL) 5.87
Table continued over262
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Name of Open Space Area (hectares)
School Playing Fields 
OS37  Burlington Danes School Playing Fields and Courts 4.20 
OS38  Latymer Upper School Playing Fields 3.98 
OS39  St Paul’s Girls School Playing Fields, Brook Green 0.46 
Outdoor Sporting Facilities OS40  Chelsea Football Club, Stamford Bridge 0.78 
OS41  Fulham Football Club, Stevenage Road 0.28 
OS42  Hurlingham Club Grounds (MOL) 15.88 
OS43  Parsons Green Club, Broomhouse Lane 1.16 
OS44  Queens Club 2.49 
OS45  Queens Park Rangers Football Club, Loftus Road 0.73 
Note: 
58 Now located within the boundaries of the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation 
MOL. Metropolitan Open Land 
* Common Land 
^ Historic Park or Garden263
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
APPENDIX 4 
NATURE CONSERVATION AREAS AND GREEN CORRIDORS  
Areas of Metropolitan Importance Area (hectares) 
M31  The River Thames, with its foreshore, drawdocks and inlets – 
incl
uding Chelsea Creek 70 
M125  Kensal Green Cemetery 8.2  
plu
s 18.0 in RBK&C 
Areas of Grade I Borough-wide Importance Area (hectares) 
BI.1  Scrubs Wood and Wormwood Scrubs 42 
BI.4  Fulham Palace and Bishops Park – including All Saints’ Church
yard 13.5 
BI.5  Former British Gas Pond at end of Chelsea Creek to  west
 of Railway 0.1 
BI.6  Hurlingham Club Grounds 9.2 
BI.7  Rail side habitats – various locations 20 
Areas of Grade I Borough-wide Importance Area (hectares) 
BII.1  St Mary’s Cemetery 8.0 
BII.2  Hammersmith Park 1.4 
BII.3  Ravenscourt Park 8.55 
BII.4  Margravine Cemetery (Hammersmith Cemetery) 6.2
Table continued over264
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Areas of Local Importance Area (hectares) 
L1  White City Community Gardens 0.096 
L2  Wormholt Park 2.0 
L4  Wendell Park 1.5 
L5  Cathnor Park 0.4 
L6  Shepherd’s Bush Common 2.7 
L7  Furnivall Gardens 1.5 
L8  St Paul’s Open Space 0.3 
L10  Fulham Palace Road Cemetery 5.3 
L11  Normand Park 1.26 
L12  South Park 6.0 
L13  Eel Brook Common 5.0 
L14  Little Wormwood Scrubs Park 7.2 
L15  Loris Road Community Garden 0.07 
L16  Godolphin Road Community Garden 0.08 
Green corridors 
West London Line – Fulham Road to Chelsea Creek 
West London Line – Westway to Lillie Road 
Note: 
More information about nature conservation areas is contained in the former London Ecology 
Uni
t’s Handbook 25: Nature Conservation in Hammersmith and Fulham. 
Also, note that former Area of Metropolitan Importance M6: Grand Union Canal, the area  of Gr
ade 1 borough wide importance B1.2 Old Oak Common and Green Corridor Euston to  
Watford DC Line, are now included in the Old Oak and Park Royal Development Corporation.265
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
APPENDIX 5 
ARCHAEOLOGICAL PRIORITY AREAS 
Archaeological Priority Areas 
1. Fulham Village 
2. Ravenscourt Leper Hospital 
3. Ravenscourt Manor House (Palingswick) 
4. Hammersmith Creek, Queen Caroline Street and Broadway 
5. Winslow Road area 
6. Parson’s Green 
7. Walham Green 
8. Sandford Manor House 
9. William De Morgan Pottery Works (Townmead Road Estate) 
10. Hurlingham Park 
11. Broomhouse 
12. Martin Brothers Pottery Works 
13. Lygon Almshouses and corner of Finlay Street/Fulham Palace Road 
14. Rowberry Close 
15. King Street 
Note: 
These Archaeological Priority Areas may be subject to a review by Historic England in 2020. 
More
 information about Archaeological Priority Areas will be provided in the Planning Guidance 
Supplementary Planning Document.266
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
APPENDIX 6 
LOCAL PLAN MONITORING INDICATORS 
Local Plan Policy Monitoring Indicator Target and Direction Data Source 
Meeting Housing Needs and Aspirations 
Housing policy 
HO1:
 Strategic 
housing supply – Housing trajectory. 
– Number of net additional 
dwe
llings granted 
permission and completed (total, regeneration areas and rest of borough) for current year and since the policy was first published, adopted or approved. London Plan target:  1,0
31 per annum. LBHF 
Housing policy HO2:
 Housing 
conversion  and retention – Proposed units from con
versions with 2 or  
more bedrooms. At least 50% of  the p
roposed units 
consist of two or  more bedrooms. LBHF 
Housing policy HO3:
 Affordable 
housing Net additional affordable homes permi
tted and 
completed by tenure for current year and since the policy was first published, adopted or approved. 
Total sum of commuted 
payments approved for affordable housing. At least 50% of  all additional  d
wellings built. LBHF 
Housing policy HO4: Housin
g 
quality and density Average density of resid
ential permissions. London Plan target. LBHF/London 
Devel
opment 
Database (LDD)
Table continued over267
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
Local Plan Policy Monitoring Indicator Target and Direction Data Source
Housing policy 
HO5: Housing mix Type and size of all  new dwell
ings. – For social and afford
able rented 
approximately: 1 bedroom: 10% of units; 2 bedrooms: 40%of units; 3 bedrooms: 35%of units; 4+ bedrooms 15%of units; 
– For intermediate 
hous
ing approximately: 
1 bedroom: 50%; 2 bedroom: 35%; 3 or more bedrooms: 15% of units and; 
– For market housing, 
a mix o
f unit sizes 
including larger family accommodation. LBHF 
Housing policy HO6
: Accessible 
housing – Number and % of homes gra
nted permission that 
meet Building Regulations requirement M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable dwellings’; 
– Number and % of homes 
gra
nted permission that 
meet Building Regulation Requirement M4(3) ‘wheelchair user dwellings’. 90% of new housing shou
ld meet Building 
Regulation requirement M4(2) accessible and adaptable dwellings’. 
10% of new housing 
shou
ld meet Building 
Regulation requirement M4(3) ‘wheelchair  user dwellings’ designed to be wheelchair accessible. LBHF 
Housing policy HO7: Meet
ing needs of 
people who need care and support Net change in the number of spe
cial units permitted 
and completed. No net loss where  need
 exists. LBHF 
Housing policy HO8: Ho
stels and 
houses in multiple occupation Net change in the number of HM
Os and hostels. No net loss where  need
 exist. LBHF 
Housing policy HO9:
 Student 
Accommodation Net additional student bedr
ooms granted 
permission/completions. Increase LBHF
Table continued over268
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Local Plan Policy Monitoring Indicator Target and Direction Data Source
Housing policy 
HO10: Gypsy and traveller Accommodation Net additional pitches granted p
ermission/ 
completed. LBHF 
Local Economy and Employment 
Employment 
polic
y E2: Land 
and premises for employment use Overall employment rate. Increase Office for 
National Sta
tistics 
Working age people out  of work
 benefits. Decrease Office for National Sta
tistics 
The business stock. Increase in new 
busine
sses. Office for National Sta
tistics 
Employment land supply. No target LBHF 
Amount of permitted and com
pleted employment 
floorspace (by type and regeneration areas and  rest of the borough). Increase LBHF 
Employment polic
y E3: Provision 
for visitor accommodation and facilities Number of hotel bedrooms gra
nted permission and 
completed (including wheelchair accessible bedrooms). – London Plan: 40,000 additional hot
el 
bedrooms by 2036. 
– At least 10% of hotel 
bedr
ooms designed as 
wheelchair accessible. LBHF 
Town and Local Centres 
Town and Local 
Cen
tre policy TLC2: 
Town Centres Percentage of frontage  in A1
, and other use  
classes in the non-prime frontage areas. Maximum of 40%  of no
n A1 use in  
the centre. LBHF 
Town and Local Cen
tre policy TLC3: 
Local Centres Percentage of frontages in n
on-A1 use; percentage 
in A3, A4 and A5 uses in frontages identified in policy TLC3. As set out in policy LBHF a
ccording to  
type of centre. LBHF
Table continued over269
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
Local Plan Policy Monitoring Indicator Target and Direction Data Source
Town and Local 
Centre policy 
TLC4: Small non-designated parades and clusters and corner shops Percentage of frontage in A1 u
se; percentage in A3, 
A4 and A5 uses. As set out in  polic
y TLC3. LBHF 
Community Facilities, Leisure, Recreation 
Community 
fac
ility policy 
CF1: Supporting Community Facilities and Services Net change of use of communitie
s facilities  
and services. No target. LBHF 
Number of total offences in th
e borough.  Decrease Metropolitan polic
e 
Community fac
ility policy CF3: 
Enhancement of arts, culture, entertainment, leisure, recreation and sport uses Net change in D2 use  cla
ss floorspace. No net loss unless in acc
ordance with policy. LBHF 
E: Green and Public Open Space 
Open Space  
polic
y OS1: 
Protecting parks and open spaces Net change in total  area
 of open space. N/A LBHF 
Open Space  Policy
 OS4: Nature 
conservation Net change to  area
s of nature 
conservation interest. No net loss unless in acc
ordance with policy. LBHF 
Open Space  Policy
 OS5: 
Greening the borough Number of permissions involv
ing garden land 
granted for development. No net loss of back, front and side
 gardens. LBHF 
River Thames 
River Thames policy 
RTC
1: River Thames The length of  river
side walk. Increase in  perman
ent path. LBHF
Table continued over270
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Local Plan Policy Monitoring Indicator Target and Direction Data Source
Design and Conservation 
Design and 
Conserv
ation policy 
DC2: Design of  new build Total of new build housing completions re
aching very 
good, good, average and poor rating against the Building for Life criteria.  Increase LBHF 
Design and Conserv
ation policy 
DC8: Heritage and conservation The number of listed buil
dings at risk. Reduce the number of bui
ldings at risk as a 
percentage of the total number of liste
d 
buildings in the borough. LBHF 
Environmental Sustainability 
Environmental 
Sustainabilit
y 
policy CC1: Reducing carbon dioxide emissions 
 Average % reduction in 
CO
2 emissions for major 
developments from the Building Regulations baseline requirements. Reduction in CO
2 
emissions of 40%. LBHF  (Ener
gy 
Assessment Report) 
Number of properties connec
ted to decentralised 
energy networks. No specific target. LBHF  
(Ener
gy 
Assessment Report) 
Number of developments where on-s
ite renewable 
energy generation is integrated. No specific target. LBHF  
(Ener
gy 
Assessment Report) 
Types and numbers of renew
able energy 
technologies installed. No specific target. LBHF  
(Ener
gy 
Assessment Report) 
Environmental Sustainabilit
y 
policy CC4: Minimising surface water run off with Sustainable Drainage Systems Average % reduction in sur
face water flows for 
major developments. Maximise reductions in pea
k surface water 
discharges compared to pre-development. LBHF (Fl
ood Risk 
Assessment or SuDS Strategy Report) 
Types and number of SuDS meas
ures installed. No specific target. LBHF 
(Fl
ood Risk 
Assessment Report)
Table continued over271
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
Local Plan Policy Monitoring Indicator Target and Direction Data Source
Environmental 
Sustainability policy CC6: Strategic waste management Amount of municipal waste aris
ing and managed by 
management type.  Decrease DEFRA 
% of household waste  sent
 to recycling. Increase 
Environmental Sustainabilit
y 
policy CC10:  Air Quality How many permitted developm
ents integrated 
emissions reduction measures. No target LBHF 
How many permitted developm
ents integrated 
exposure reduction measures. 
Transport and Accessibility 
Transport and 
Access
ibility policy 
T1: Transport Methods of children tra
velling to school  
(5-16 year olds). London Plan targets. LBHF 
Private car usage. London Plan targets. Department 
for T
ransport 
Transport and Access
ibility policy 
T2: Transport assessments and travel plans Number of planning permis
sions involving 
a Transport Impact Assessment. No target. LBHF 
Transport and Access
ibility policy 
T3: Increasing the opportunities for cycling and walking Cycle parking provision in permit
ted development 
schemes. Increase LBHF 
Transport and Access
ibility policy 
T4: Vehicle parking standards Parking provision in permit
ted development 
schemes. London Plan targets. LBHF 
Transport and Access
ibility policy 
T5: Parking for blue badge holders Parking provision for dis
abled people in 
permitted development schemes. Increase LBHF272
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
APPENDIX 7 
CAR PARKING STANDARDS 
London Plan Car Parking Standards 
Table 8  Parking for residential development 
Maximum residential parking standards 
Number of beds 4 or more 3 1-2 
Parking spaces Up to 2 per unit Up to 1.5 per unit Less than 1 per unit 
Table 9  Parking for retail 
Maximum standards for retail uses: space per sq m of gross floorspace (GIA) Use PTAL 6 and 5 PTAL 4 to 2 PTAL 1 
Food: up to 500 m
275 50-35 30 
Food: up to 2500 m245-30 30-20 18 
Food: over 2500 m238-25 25-18 15 
Non food 60-40 50-30 30 
Garden centre 65-45 45-30 25 
Town centre/shopping mall/department store 75-50 50-35 30 
Notes: 
Unless for disabled people, no non-operational parking should be provided for locations  
in P
TAL 6 central. 
Unless for disabled people, no additional parking should be provided for use classes A2-A5  in t
own centre locations. 
10 per cent of all spaces must be for electric vehicles with an additional 10 per cent passive pro
vision for electric vehicles in the future.273
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
Table 10  Parking for employment uses 
Non-operational maximum standards for employment B1: spaces per sq m of  
gross floorspace (GIA) 
Location Central London (CAZ) 1000-1500 
Inner London 600-1000 
Outer London 100-600 
Outer London locations identifi ed through a DPD where more 
generous st
andards should apply (see Policy 6.13) 50-100 
Note: 
20 per cent of all spaces must be for electric vehicles with an additional 10 per cent passive 
pro
vision for electric vehicles in the future.274
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Table 11  Designated Blue Badge parking bays recommended in BS 8300:2009 
Building Type Provision from the outset Future provision 
Number of 
spaces for ea
ch 
emplo
yee who is a 
disabled motorist * Number of spacesfor visiting disabled moto
rists * Number of enlarged standar
d spaces ** 
Workplaces One space 5% of the total capacity A further 5% of the 
total
 capacity 
Shopping, recrea
tion and 
leisure facilities One space 6% of the total capacity A further 4% of the 
total
 capacity 
Railway buildings One space 5% of the total capacity A further 5% of the 
total
 capacity 
Religious buildings and crema
toria Two spaces or 6% whichever is the greater A further 4% of the 
total
 capacity 
Sports facilities Determined according to the usage of the sports facility *** 
Note: 
* Parking spaces designated for use by disabled people should be 2.4m wide by 4.8m long with  
a zon
e 1.2m wide provided between designated spaces and at the rear outside the traffic zone,  
to enable a disabled driver or passenger to get in or out of a vehicle and access the boot safely. ** Enlarged standard spaces 3.6m wide by 6m long that can be adapted to be parking spaces 
des
ignated for use by disabled people to reflect changes in local population needs and allow for 
flexibility of provision in the future. *** Further detailed guidance on parking provision for sports facilities can be found in the  
Spo
rt England publication Accessible Sports Facilities 2010.275
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
APPENDIX 8 
CYCLE PARKING STANDARDS 
Table 12  London Plan Cycle Parking Minimum Standards 
Land use Long-stay Short-stay 
A1 Food retail From a threshold of 100 
sqm: 1 s
pace per 175 sqm From a threshold of 
100 sq
m: first 750 sqm: 
1 space per 40 sqm thereafter: 1 space per 300 sqm 
Non-food retail From a threshold of 100 
sqm:
 first 1000 sqm: 
1 space per 250 sqm thereafter: 1 space per 1000 sqm From a threshold of 100 sqm:
 first 1000 sqm: 
1 space per 125 sqm thereafter: 1 space per 1000 sqm 
A2-A5 Financial/professional servi
ces From a threshold of 100 sqm: 1 s
pace per 175 sqm From a threshold of 100 sqm: 1 s
pace per 40 sqm 
Cafes & restaurants 
Drinking establishment Take-aways Business offices Inner/central London:  
1 spa
ce per 90 sqm outer 
London: 1 space per  
150 sqm First 5,000 sqm: 1 space per 500 sq
m thereafter:  
1 space per 5,000 sqm 
B1 Light industry and res
earch and development 1 space per 250 sqm 1 space per 1000 sqm 
B2-B8 General industrial, storage or di
stribution 1 space per 500 sqm 1 space per 1000 sqm 
C1 Hotels (bars, restaurants, gyms et
c open to 
the public should be considered individually under relevant standards) 1 space per 20 bedrooms 1 space per 50 bedrooms 
C2 Hospitals 1 space per 5 staff 1 space per 30 staff 
C2 Care homes/secure accommod
ation 1 space per 5 staff 1 space per 20 bedrooms
Table continued over276
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Land use Long-stay Short-stay
C2 Student accommodation 1 space per 2 beds 1 space per 40 beds 
C3-C4 Dwellings (all) 1 space per studio and  
1 bedr
oom unit 2 spaces 
per all other dwellings 1 space per 40 units 
D1 Nurseries/schools  
(pr
imary and secondary) 1 space per 8 staff +  1 spa
ce per 8 students 1 space per 100 students 
Universities and colleges 1 space per 4 staff +  1 spa
ce per 20 FTE 
students 1 space per 7 FTE students 
Health centre,  incl
uding dentists 1 space per 5 staff 1 space per 3 staff 
Other  (e.
g. library, church, etc.) 1 space per 8 staff 1 space per 100 sqm 
D2 Other  (e.
g. cinema, bingo, etc.) 1 space per 8 staff 1 per 30 seats 
Sports  (e.
g. sports hall, swimming, 
gymnasium, etc.) 1 space per 8 staff 1 space per 100 sqm 
Sui generis As per most relevant other standard e.g. casino  and t
heatre = D2 
Stations To be considered on a case-by-case basis through  lia
ison with TfL 
Notes: 
In outer London town centres that are designated as ‘mini-Hollands’ or which have high PTALs, 
cyc
le parking standards are expected to match those of inner/central London. 
Where the size threshold has been met, for all land uses in all locations a minimum of 2 short-stay and 2 l
ong-stay spaces must be provided. 
Cycle parking areas should allow easy access and cater for cyclists who use adapted cycles.277
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
APPENDIX 9 
VIABILITY PROTOCOL 
The council’s Delivery and Implementation policy identifies that the council will implement the 
policies and proposals of the Local Plan by, amongst other things, having regard to the financial viability of development in negotiating Section 106 Agreements, including for affordable housing. This is also reflected in Policy HO3 Affordable Housing, which references financial viability as one of the criteria to be considered. This approach is consistent with the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and the national Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). An important element of  this process must be openness and transparency to enable full public scrutiny. 
Where consideration of the financial viability of a development is relevant the council will require  
the a
pplicant to submit an ‘open book’ financial viability assessment (FVA). 
The FVA will be made publically available along with all the other planning application supporting docu
ments. In exceptional circumstances at the request of the applicant specific elements of the 
FVA may be treated as confidential and not be made public, but only where the applicant has demonstrated that disclosure would cause harm to public interest to such an extent that the harm outweighs the benefits of disclosure. The Council’s finalised independent report on the FVA will  also be made public subject to the same exceptional circumstances. 
The FVA should : 
59
1. Be submitted at the time the planning application is made and will therefore form part of the 
appl
icant’s supporting documents to enable validation of the application and commencement 
of the consultation process. (The council is currently updating its Local Validation Checklist to include this requirement). 
2. Include a signed declaration from the applicant that confirms: 
i. A ll viability information submitted in support of the application has been submitted in good 
fai
th and accurately represents a true and fair reflection on the scheme’s viability and that the 
applicant has not (and will not) submit any viability information which it knows or considers  
to represent an inaccurate position on viability. 
ii.  Whether any of the viability information has been prepared on the basis of performance rel
ated or contingent fees or similar arrangements. 
3. Contain only information which is robustly justified and appraisal assumptions which are bench
marked against publically accessible data sources. For example, development values should 
be justified with reference to up to date transactions and market evidence relating to comparable new properties within a reasonable distance from the site. Build costs should be based on a realistic specification of the development proposed and accompanied by evidence of associated professional costs. 
4. Include a Developer’s Profit proportional to the risk associated with the proposed development and n
ot only represent the return desired by the developer. The council will require supporting 
59 The council may build upon and develop the Viability Protocol policy principles and requirements in subsequent  
policy guidance278
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
evidence to justify the proposed rates of profit, which should typically be expressed as a 
percentage of gross development costs or gross development value. Supporting evidence of target profit should take account of the individual characteristics of the scheme, the risks related to the scheme and comparable schemes and be appropriate to current market conditions. 
5. Use the residual land value (RLV) methodology which the council considers is the most app
ropriate methodology to use when undertaking a FVA for a planning application. The 
benchmark land value (against which the RLV will be compared) should be calculated with the existing use value plus a premium. This approach is supported by PPG; the Mayor of London’s Housing SPG; and the GLA Affordable Housing Toolkit Guidance Note. The existing use value should exclude any hope value associated with the development on site or alternative uses and instead be established through evidence including reasonable comparative uses in similar condition and circumstances. Once the existing use value is established the reasonable premium above this value can then be considered. 
An alternative use value approach to the benchmark value will only be accepted where there is a va
lid consent for the alternative use or if the alternative use would clearly fully comply with 
the development plan. In such cases a full viability appraisal must be submitted together with a provisional design indicating how the alternative use could be accommodated on the site. 
PPG requires that in all cases land value should first and foremost reflect policy requirements, 
plan
ning obligations and CIL charges. It is vital that land value is not overstated based on purchase 
price, land transactions or land owner aspirations which do not sufficiently reflect the role and requirements of the council’s development plan. The application of a ‘market value’ approach has raised concerns of inadequate reflection of policy requirements and inflated land values which inappropriately reduce planning obligations. 
The Council will assess the viability of a scheme as follows: 
a. In line with PPG, the council will normally consider development viability based on costs and 
val
ues at the time the application is being determined. The PPG also advises where a scheme 
requires phased delivery over the medium and longer term, it may be appropriate to consider projected changes in values and costs at the application stage. This approach is sometimes referred to as a ‘growth model’ approach and the council will seek to apply the ‘growth model’ approach on phased delivery or schemes to be built out over two or more years. 
b. To protect against growth model assumptions that do not adequately capture future growth and t
o ensure the maximum reasonable level of affordable housing is provided in line with 
Policy HO3, and that other plan requirements are met, the council will require viability review mechanisms through Section 106 agreements. This will apply to all major residential applications, phased and non-phased, which do not meet the borough-wide affordable housing target and for all major applications, phased and non-phased, where policy requirements are not met in full at the time permission is granted. 
c. The frequency, trigger point and nature of the viability review mechanisms to be agreed will be con
sidered on the individual circumstances of each major application and may include prior to 
substantial implementation review; mid-point stage in development review(s); and advanced stage of development review.279
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
APPENDIX 10 
STRATEGIC POLICY LIST 
Neighbourhood planning forms part of the planning system and provides a role in supporting 
strategic development set out in the Local Plan and contributing to sustainable development. 
Neighbourhood plans must be developed in general conformity with the strategic policies contained 
in na
tional, regional and local policy. The definition of ‘strategic’ is set out in paragraph 156 of the 
NPPF, with further detail set out in the PPG. 
This table sets out which policies in the Local Plan are considered strategic and non-strategic based 
on n
ational guidance, and should guide groups in the development of their neighbourhood plans. 
Table 13  Strategic Policy List 
Policy Reference Status 
Delivery and Implementation 
DEL1  – Delivery and Implementation Strategic 
Regeneration Area Strategies Strategic Policy  – Regeneration Areas Strategic 
WCRA  – White City Regeneration Area Strategic 
WCRA1  – White City East Strategic 
WCRA2  – White City West Strategic 
WCRA3  – Shepherd’s Bush Market and adjacent land Strategic 
HRA – Hammersmith Regeneration Area Strategic 
HRA1  – Town Hall Extension and adjacent land, Nigel Playfair Avenue Strategic 
HRA2  – A4, Hammersmith Flyover, Hammersmith Gyratory and  
adjoin
ing land Strategic 
FRA – Fulham Regeneration Area Strategic 
FRA1  – Earl’s Court and West Kensington Opportunity Area Strategic 
SFRRA  – South Fulham Riverside Regeneration Area Strategic 
SFRRA1  – Imperial Gasworks National Grid Strategic
Table continued over280
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Policy Reference Status
Housing 
HO1 – Housing Supply Strategic 
HO2 – Housing Conversion and Retention Strategic 
HO3 – Affordable Housing Strategic 
HO4 – Housing Quality and Density Strategic 
HO5 – Housing Mix Strategic 
HO6 – Accessible Housing Strategic 
HO7 – Meeting Needs of People who Need Care and Support Strategic 
HO8 – Hostels and Houses in Multiple Occupation Strategic 
HO9 – Student Accommodation Strategic 
HO10 – Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Strategic 
HO11 – Detailed Residential Standards Non-strategic 
Local Economy and Employment 
E1 – Providing for a Range of Employment Uses Strategic 
E2 – Land and Premises for Employment Uses Strategic 
E3 – Provision for Visitor Accommodation and Facilities Strategic 
E4 – Local Employment, Training and Skills Development Initiatives Strategic 
Town and Local Centres 
TLC1  – Hierarchy of Town and Local Centres Strategic 
TLC2  – Town Centres Strategic 
TLC3  – Local Centres Non-strategic 
TLC4  – Small Non Designated Parades, Clusters and Corner Shops Strategic 
TLC5  – Managing the Impact of Food, Drink and Entertainment uses Strategic 
TLC6  – Betting Shops, Pawnbrokers and Payday Loan Shops and  
Hot Food Ta
keaways Strategic 
TLC7  – Public Houses Strategic
Table continued over281
www.lbhf.gov.ukAPPENDICES
Policy Reference Status
Community Facilities, Leisure and Recreation 
CF1 – Supporting Community Facilities and Services Strategic 
CF2 – Enhancement and Retention of Community Uses Non-strategic 
CF3 – Enhancement and Retention of Arts, Culture, Entertainment,  
Leisu
re, Recreation and Sport Uses Non-strategic 
CF4 – Professional Football Grounds Strategic 
Green and Public Open Space OS1 – Parks and Open Spaces Strategic 
OS2 – Access to Parks and Open Spaces Strategic 
OS3 – Playspace for Children and Young People Strategic 
OS4 – Nature Conservation Strategic 
OS5 – Greening the Borough Non-strategic 
River Thames RTC1  – River Thames Strategic 
RTC2  – Access to the Thames Riverside and Foreshore Non-strategic 
RTC3  – Area and Appearance of Development within the Thames Policy Area Strategic 
RTC4  – Water-based Activity on the Thames Non-strategic 
Design and Conservation DC1 – Built Environment Strategic 
DC2 – Design of New Build Strategic 
DC3 – Tall Buildings Strategic 
DC4 – Alterations and Extensions (including Outbuildings) Non-strategic 
DC5 – Shopfronts Strategic 
DC6 – Replacement Windows Non-strategic 
DC7 – Views and Landmarks Strategic 
DC8 – Heritage and Conservation Strategic 
DC9 – Advertisements Strategic 
DC10  – Telecommunications Non-strategic 
DC11  – Basements and Lightwells Non-strategic
Table continued over282
Hammersmith & Fulham Local Plan 2018APPENDICES
Policy Reference Status
Environmental Sustainability 
CC1 – Reducing Carbon Dioxide Emissions Strategic 
CC2 – Ensuring Sustainable Design and Construction Strategic 
CC3 – Minimising Flood Risk and Reducing Water Use Strategic 
CC4 – Minimising Surface Water Run-Off with Sustainable Drainage Systems Strategic 
CC5 – Water Quality Strategic 
CC6 – Strategic Waste Management Strategic 
CC7 – On-site Waste Management Strategic 
CC8 – Hazardous Substances Strategic 
CC9 – Contaminated Land Strategic 
CC10  – Air Quality Strategic 
CC11  – Noise Non-strategic 
CC12  – Light Pollution Strategic 
CC13  – Control of Potentially Polluting Uses Strategic 
Transport T1 – Transport Strategic 
T2 – Transport Assessments and Travel Plans Non-strategic 
T3 – Increasing and promoting Opportunities for Cycling and Walking Non-strategic 
T4 – Vehicle Parking Standards Strategic 
T5 – Parking for Blue Badge Holders Strategic 
T6 – Borough Road Networks – Hierarchy of Road Strategic 
T7 – Construction and Demolition Logistics Non-strategic 
Planning Contributions and Infrastructure INFRA1  – Planning Contributions and Infrastructure Planning Strategic© Designed and published by Hammersmith & Fulham Council – February 2018   
020 8753 1764  Ref: 257_137at 
Produced by Hammerprint 020 8753 2235 
Printed on paper from sustainable sources