www.luton.gov.ukLuton Local Plan 2011–2031  
November 2017
Planning and Economic Growth
Place and InfrastructureForeword
iii Foreword
Introduction and Background
1 Introduction and Background1
8 Setting the Scene2
13 Vision and Objectives3
Core Document
16 Spatial Strategy4
49 Growing Luton's Economy5
54 Housing6
64 Luton Town Centre & District & Neighbourhood Centres7
70 Education and Other Community Facilities8
75 High Quality Design9
79 Natural & Historic Environment10
91 Transport, Communications & Climate Change11
109 Infrastructure Delivery, Monitoring and Review of the Local Plan12
Appendices
114 Appendix 1 Glossary
122 Appendix 2 Parking and Cycling Standards
126 Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
135 Appendix 4 Housing Allocations
137 Appendix 5 Housing Trajectory
139 Appendix 6 External Amenity Space Standards
140 Appendix 7 Transport Assessments, Transport Statements and Travel Plans
142 Appendix 8 Monitoring Framework
147 Appendix 9 Replaced Minerals and Waste Policies
149 Appendix 10 Technical Evidence Studies
152 Appendix 11 Greenspace Standards
154 Appendix 12 Luton Green Infrastructure Network
156 Appendix 13 Map Showing Luton Enterprise Zone
Contents
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
List of Local Plan Policies
17 Policy LLP1 - Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development
21 Policy LLP2 - Spatial Development Strategy
25 Policy LLP3 - Luton Town Centre Strategy
28 Policy LLP4 - Green Belt
29 Policy LLP5 - Land South of Stockwood Park Strategic Allocation
31 Policy LLP6 - London Luton Airport Strategic Allocation
35 Policy LLP7 - Butterfield Green Technology Park
37 Policy LLP8 - Napier Park
39 Policy LLP9 - Power Court
42 Policy LLP10 - High Town
45 Policy LLP11 - Creative Quarter
47 Policy LLP12 - Marsh Farm
52 Policy LLP13 - Economic Strategy
52 Policy LLP14 - Employment Areas
60 Policy LLP15 - Housing Provision
60 Policy LLP16 - Affordable Housing
61 Policy LLP17 - Houses in Multiple Occupation
61 Policy LLP17A - Student Accommodation
62 Policy LLP18 - Older People's Housing
62 Policy LLP19 - Extensions to Dwellings and Annexes
63 Policy LLP20 - Gypsies, Travellers & Travelling Showpeople
67 Policy LLP21 - Centre Hierarchy
68 Policy LLP22 - Primary and Secondary Shopping Areas and Frontages
69 Policy LLP23 - District & Neighbourhood Areas & Shopping Parades
73 Policy LLP24 - Education and Other Community Facilities
77 Policy LLP25 - High Quality Design
78 Policy LLP26 - Advertisements and Signage
85 Policy LLP27 - Open Space and Natural Greenspace
86 Policy LLP28 - Biodiversity and Nature Conservation
87 Policy LLP29 - Landscape & Geological Conservation
88 Policy LLP30 - Historic Environment
93 Policy LLP31 - Sustainable Transport Strategy
96 Policy LLP32 - Parking
98 Policy LLP33 - Freight
99 Policy LLP34 - Public Safety Zones
101 Policy LLP35 - Communications Infrastructure
103 Policy LLP36 - Flood Risk
106Policy LLP37 - Climate change, carbon and waste reduction and
sustainable energy
107 Policy LLP38 - Pollution and Contamination
110 Policy LLP39 - Infrastructure and Developer Contributions
112 Policy LLP40 - Review of the Local Plan
Contents
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
Foreword
Foreword by Councillor Hazel Simmons
TheLutonLocalPlan(2011-31)wasadoptedbyLutonBoroughCouncilon7November2017.
It sets out our vision and approach for the sustainable growth of the Luton for the period
up to 2031.
Lutonhasgreatpotentialforgrowthandpossessessomeofthebestinvestmentopportunities
in the UK just a short distance from London. At the same time, Luton faces a number of
challenges that will need to be addressed if our aspirations of our growing, vibrant and
diverse population are to be achieved.
Luton's administrative boundaries are drawn tightly against the edge of the built-up area.
This means we are unable to accommodate all of the housing growth pressures within the
Borough. To address this we have been working, and will continue to work very closely
within our neighbours, to ensure Luton's needs are met. This will include major growth on
the periphery of Luton within both Central Bedfordshire and North Hertfordshire.
New jobs have a high priority and the local plan includes proposals for significant growth
on key strategic sites - including growth around London Luton Airport - which will help
safeguard Luton's traditional role as an important sub-regional employment centre.
The Local Plan is especially important because it provides the spatial framework within
whichLuton'sambitiousInvestmentFrameworkisset,andthefoundationstoneuponwhich
all decisions on planning applications will be assessed.
By planning positively, we will ensure that our growth aspirations are accommodated in a
way that is both sustainable and deliverable but above all helping improve the quality of
life and living standards for all of Luton's people.
Councillor Hazel Simmons
Leader
Luton Borough Council
Foreword
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
iiiFurther Information and contacts
BackgroundinformationontheLutonLocalPlanpreparationprocess,monitoringandreview
is available on the Council's website at the following url:
http://www .luton.gov .uk/environment/planning and follow the links through to the Luton
Local Plan (2011- 2031).
IfyouhaveanyquestionsregardingtheLutonLocalPlan(2011-31),pleasecontactamember
of the Strategic Planning Group at Luton Borough Council.
01582 547087 Telephone
strategicplanningteam@luton.gov.uk Email
Strategic Planning Group
LUTON BOROUGH COUNCIL
TOWN HALL
GEORGE STREET
LUTON
LU1 2BRAddress
For more detailed information and guidance on the planning system, visit the Department
for Communities and Local Government website at CLG'swebpage(1).
1https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-communities-and-local-government
Foreword
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
iv1 Introduction and
Background
Introduction
1.1The Luton Local Plan (2011–2031)
(furtherreferredtoasthe"LutonLocalPlan"
or the "Plan") sets out a set of policies,
developmentallocationsandactionstomeet
the environmental, social and economic
challenges facing the area over the 20-year
plan period.
1.2The Luton Local Plan provides a
strategy for the distribution and level of
development and supporting infrastructure,
a set of proposals to meet that strategy,
policies to deal with planning applications
and proposals for monitoring the success of
the plan.
1.3ThePlanwasthesubjectofextensive
public consultation prior to its submission
for independent examination which took
place between July 2016 and January 2017
toconsiderthelegalityandsoundnessofthe
plan. To be considered 'sound' (see
paragraph182oftheNationalPlanningPolicy
Framework) the plan must be:
Positively prepared – the plan should
be prepared based on a strategy which
seeks to meet objectively assessed
development and infrastructure
requirements, including unmet
requirements from neighbouring
authorities, where it is reasonable to
do so and consistent with achieving
sustainable development;
Justified –theplanshouldsetthemost
appropriate strategy, when considered
against the reasonable alternatives,
based on proportionate evidence;
Effective – the plan should be
deliverable over its period, based on
effective joint working on
cross-boundarystrategicpriorities;and
Consistent with national policy – the
plan should enable the delivery of
sustainabledevelopmentinaccordance
with the policies in the National
Planning Policy Framework.1.4The plan must also comply with Town
and Country Planning (Local Planning)
(England) (Amendment) Regulations 2012 as
well as the Planning and Compulsory
Purchase Act 2004 (as amended).
1.5Following receipt of the Inspector’s
Report, the Luton Local Plan (2011–31) was
adopted at a meeting of the Full Council on
7 November 2017, incorporating all of the
Inspector’s Main Modifications.
Timetable/Plan-Making Process
1.6There are a number of stages to the
plan-making process as set out in the Town
and Country Planning (Local Planning)
(England)Regulations2012.Theplan-making
stagesandtimetablefollowedareasfollows:
'Local Plan - What do
you think' Consultation
(Regulation 18)July 2012 to
August 2012
Draft Local Plan for
Luton Consultation
(Regulation 18)June 2014 to
August 2014
Pre-Submission Period
for Representation (6
weeks, Regulation 19)October 2015 to
December 2015
SubmissiontoSecretary
of StateApril 2016
Examination in Public July 2016 to
January 2017
Adoption November 2017
Background to the Luton Local Plan
1.7The Luton Local Plan (2011–31),
together with the Joint Minerals & Waste
Local Plan, will be the statutory
development plan for Luton Boroughfor the
planperiodbetween2011and2031.Ifregard
istobehadtothedevelopmentplanforthe
purpose of any determination to be made
under the planning Acts, the determination
must be made in accordance with the plan
unless material considerations indicate
otherwise.
1 . Introduction and Background
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
11.8This document identifies some of the
main characteristics of the borough and the
difficultchallengesthat the area faces both
now and in the future and then sets out a
vision for Luton for the plan period. To
address these challenges and deliver the
vision, the plan identifies ‘strategic
objectives’ for achieving sustainable
development,planningforeconomicgrowth,
meeting the social needs of a growing
population and protecting the places and
assets that make Luton a dynamic place to
visit, live and work in.
1.9ThePlanthensetsoutsiteallocations
as well as strategic and development
managementplanningpoliciesthatwillhelp
deliver new jobs, housing, retail and
community facilities; it identifies specific
sites that will be promoted for or protected
from development; it identifies the new
infrastructurethatwillbeneededtosupport
future growth; and it contains the planning
policies that the Council will use when
determiningplanningapplications,including
policies on open space, sustainable energy,
sustainable transport and policies regarding
the historic and natural environment.
1.10Strategic policies and proposals for
the development of mineral resources and
sustainablewastemanagementacrossLuton
areincludedintheMineralsandWasteLocal
Plan:StrategicSitesandPolicies,whichwas
adopted in January 2014. The Luton Local
Plan (2011–2031) updates and replaces the
generalandenvironmentalpoliciesfromthe
Bedfordshire and Luton Minerals and Waste
Local Plan (2005), where they affect the
town.
NationalPolicyandWorkinginPartnership
1.11For the Local Plan to be fit for
purpose, it needs to be consistent with a
wide range of other policies, guidance,
strategiesandplansthathavebeenproduced
not only by the Council but also by central
government, neighbouring authorities and
other public bodies and agencies. Through
the Localism Act there is also now a legal
‘dutytocooperate’withotherorganisations
and neighbouring authorities in thepreparation of Local Plans. The following
section identifies other policies, guidance,
strategies and plans that have informed the
content of the Luton Local Plan along with
the key national and local partnerships that
will be involved in delivering positive
changes in the area over the plan period.
NationalPlanningPolicyFramework(NPPF)
1.12The NPPF was formally introduced
by the government on 27 March 2012,
replacingmorethan1,000pagesofprevious
nationalplanningpolicyguidancenoteswith
a succinct 59-page document. The Council
must ensure that the Luton Local Plan is
consistent with the objectives, principles
and policies (along with the tests of
soundness) set out in the NPPF. The
framework advocates a ‘presumption in
favour of sustainable development’, which
requireslocalauthorities,intheirLocalPlans
to positively seek opportunities to meet the
development needs in their area; and meet
objectivelyassessedneeds,havingsufficient
flexibility to adapt to rapid change. The
NPPF is also a ‘material consideration’ in
determining planning applications.
Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
1.13On6March2014,theDepartmentfor
Communities and Local Government (DCLG)
launched its planning practice guidance
web-based resource that provides further
guidance to the NPPF(2). The PPG was
accompanied by a written ministerial
statementthatincludesalistoftheprevious
planning practice guidance documents that
werecancelledwhenthePPGwaslaunched.
The PPG is entirely online and includes links
between the PPG and relevant planning
practice guidance, as well as between the
differentcategoriesofguidance.ThePPGis
also a material consideration and will be
updated as needed by the DCLG.
South East Midlands Local Enterprise
Partnership (SEMLEP)
1.14LutonBoroughisincludedwithinthe
Southeast Midlands Local Enterprise
Partnership (SEMLEP), which comprises
eleven local authorities. Local Enterprise
2 http://planningguidance.planningportal.gov.uk/
1 . Introduction and Background
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
2Partnerships (LEPs) offer local areas the
opportunity to promote future economic
development as part of the government’s
drive to facilitate local decision-making.
Local authorities and businesses can also
coordinate via SEMLEP and the Local
TransportBody(Luton,CentralBedfordshire
and Bedford Borough unitary authorities) to
shape necessary infrastructure investment
and benefit from assistance in attracting
funding.TheSEMLEPStrategicEconomicPlan
for the South East Midlands (April 2014)
details how SEMLEP will grow the economy
by£10.2billionby2020,createanadditional
94,700jobsandbuildanextra70,600homes
(in association with the Regional Growth
Fund) across Bedfordshire,
Northamptonshire, Milton Keynes, Cherwell
District and Aylesbury Vale District. As part
of its Strategic Economic Plan, SEMLEP has
prioritisedinfrastructureprojectsincluding
London Luton Airport Highway Access. This
LutonLocalPlanbuildsontheborough’srole
within this partnership.
Working in Partnership
1.15While the Council’s Local Plan Team
has overseen the preparation of the Luton
LocalPlan,itisfarmorethanjustaplanning
document. It is of high importance to all
services within the Council and many of the
partners that we work with. In this context,
the Local Plan will provide a land use and
infrastructure framework for the Council’s
LutonInvestmentFramework,whichaimsto
achieveambitioustown-widetransformation
togetherwithotherstakeholders.TheLuton
Local Plan attempts to integrate the
strategiesofdifferentorganisationsbecause
working in partnership will ultimately
producethebestresultsontheground.This
includes, for example, working with the
EnvironmentAgencytoensurethatourareas
are kept safe from the risk of flooding and
working with Highways England to
understandhowdevelopmentproposalsmay
impact the strategic road network.
Cross-Boundary Working
1.16The Council also needs to recognise
the strategies of neighbouring authorities
and the 2011 Localism Act and NPPF place a
duty on authorities to cooperate with eachother on planning issues of cross-boundary
significance. Luton’s adjoining neighbours
are Central Bedfordshire Council and North
Hertfordshire District Council. Luton’s
Functional Housing Market Area, however,
coversagreaterareathantheboroughitself;
stretching into adjoining authorities as well
as Aylesbury Vale District Council. Luton
BoroughCouncilhasbeenworkingwiththese
localauthoritiesaswellasDacorumBorough
Council, St Albans City and District Council,
Stevenage Borough Council, Milton Keynes
Council and Bedford Borough Council
preparing a Luton & Central Bedfordshire
StrategicHousingMarketAssessment(SHMA)
andworkingconstructivelyoncross-boundary
matters, including where Luton Borough’s
unmet housing needs could be delivered in
other local authority areas. This
cross-boundary planning on housing needs
encompassesothersupportinginfrastructure
via respective provision of transport,
education and leisure, including green
infrastructure,wildlifecorridorsandwalking
and cycling routes into and out of the
Borough.
1.17The Duty to Cooperate is intended
to ensure that strategic cross-boundary
planning issues are adequately taken into
account following the abolition of Regional
Spatial Strategies as well as ensuring that
the prescribed bodies are effectively
engagedintheprocess.Compliancewiththe
Duty has enabled the strategic planning
contextoflocalpoliciesandtheinvolvement
and responsibilities of other bodies to be
appropriately and effectively taken into
account where there are wider than local
issues and to ensure the timely delivery and
proper coordination of strategic
infrastructure and investment priorities. In
addition to working with its local authority
neighboursoncross-boundarymatters,there
are additional prescribed bodies with which
local planning authorities are required to
cooperate and are set out in Regulation 4 of
Part 2 of the Town and Country Planning
(LocalPlanning)(England)Regulations2012.
TheCouncilwillcontinuetoworkwiththese
organisationsonanon-goingbasis.ForLuton
they comprise:
1 . Introduction and Background
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
3Environment Agency
Historic England
Natural England
Bedfordshire Local Nature Partnership
Mayor of London
Civil Aviation Authority
Homes and Communities Agency
Luton Clinical Commissioning Group
Office of the Rail Regulator
Highways England
Transport for London
Highway Authorities
Luton Borough Council Strategies
Sustainable Community Strategy (2008 -
2026)
1.18TheSustainableCommunityStrategy
was prepared by the Luton Forum (Luton's
LocalStrategicPartnership),whosemembers
were from the public, business, community
and voluntary sectors across Luton. The
Sustainable Community Strategy describes
the shared vision of how Luton will be in
2026, based on the Luton Forum's local
knowledge and informed by the aspirations
of local people through consultation.
Luton Borough Council Prospectus (2013 -
2016)
1.19The prospectus is informed by a
variety of other plans including the local
healthandwellbeingstrategythatwasitself
informed by a joint strategic needs
assessment. The prospectus’ last three
points encompasses the following three
priorities identified by the health and
wellbeingstrategy:(1)everychildandyoung
personhasahealthystartinlife;(2)reduced
health inequalities within Luton; and (3)
healthier and more independent adults and
olderpeople.Attheheartofthisprospectus
is a three point plan to:
increase income from business growth;
betterequipresidentsofallagestoget
jobs through investment in education
and training; and
work efficiently with the Police
(including the new Police and Crime
Commissioner), the NHS, schools and
academies, the University of
Bedfordshire, the voluntary sector and
JobCentrePlustoensurethatthemost
vulnerable in Luton are safe and
supported.
Luton Borough Council Corporate Plan
(2014 - 2017)
1.20This Corporate Plan draws together
all the key elements of Luton Borough
Council’s proposals as to how it will serve
thetownoverthenextfewyears.Aswellas
lookingatthecurrentstatusoftheauthority
in financial terms and in other ways, it
examinestheprioritiesandplansforservice
delivery in Luton, explains how the Council
aims to transform itself over the coming
years and also sets out the medium-term
financial plan. Drawing up service plans for
its many different areas of business has, in
particular,allowedtheauthoritytolookhard
at how it can maintain its performance
followingtheeconomicdownturn,whichwill
require the Council to find savings of some
£51m.
1.21The Council's Corporate Plan vision
is that:
Luton Borough Council will be a high
performing,financiallyviableauthority,
delivering high quality services that
improve health and opportunity for
local people and protect the most
vulnerable.
Togetherwithourpartners,wewillhelp
makeLutonaplacewhereeveryonecan
learnandthriveandwherebusinesscan
grow and prosper.
1 . Introduction and Background
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
4CelebratingandbuildingonLuton’srich
history and its vibrant cultural mix, we
will develop safe, strong and
sustainable communities.
Wewillberesponsive,accountableand
innovative–aleaderinwhatwedoand
a voice for our town.
Health and Wellbeing
1.22The Council has a statutory
responsibility under the Health and Social
Care Act (2012) to improve the health and
wellbeing of its community. It is also the
responsibilityofthelocalPlanningAuthority
to ensure that health and wellbeing and
health infrastructure is considered as part
ofthelocalplanmakingprocess. Inaddition
to highlighting the importance of achieving
sustainabledevelopment,promotinghealthy
communities is a key component of the
process. The Local Plan can play an
important role in supporting the reduction
of inequalities in health, improving social
interaction and creating inclusive
communities.
1.23ThisapproachissupportedbyLuton’s
Health and Wellbeing Strategy (2012-2017)
and the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment
(2015) where the Council has committed to
placingagreateremphasisontheunderlying
causes of ill health such as the environment
andhousing. TheLocalPlanwillsupportand
promote development that is designed,
constructed and managed in ways that
improve health and promote healthy
lifestyles.
Minerals and Waste
1.24Luton carries out its minerals and
waste policy planning jointly with Bedford
Borough and Central Bedfordshire councils
throughasharedservice.ThisjointMinerals
and Waste Local Plan: Strategic Sites and
Policies(2014)planwasadoptedbythethree
local authorities in January 2014. Minerals
and waste development will be guided by
the strategic policies of that plan, the more
general policies of the Luton Local Plan
2011-2031 and the detailed, supplementary
policies on Managing Waste in New
Developments (2006). It is recognised thatminerals and waste development can have
significant impacts on landscape, the Green
Beltandotherenvironmentalconcerns. The
policies of this plan apply as much to
minerals and waste activities as they do to
all other forms of development.
1.25NositesintheBoroughareidentified
for mineral extraction. The minerals and
waste policies map does, however, identify
siteswithinLutonthatareimportantforthe
distribution and processing of aggregates,
concreteandasphalt.Suchsafeguardedsites
are identified on the Luton Local Plan
Policies Map.
Neighbourhood Plans
1.26With the Localism Act coming into
law, local communities can prepare
NeighbourhoodPlansthroughthislegislation
and, if adopted, they become part of the
Development Plan for the area. In this way,
localcommunitiescanexpresstheirwishfor
appropriate change in a flexible and locally
distinctive manner.
1.27LutondoesnothaveParishesorTown
Councils but Neighbourhood Forums may be
designated by the Council provided that the
proposed Neighbourhood Forum meets the
criteria and regulations under the Localism
Act 2011, for the purposes of producing a
NeighbourhoodPlan,includingdemonstrating
that the Neighbourhood Forum:
consists of a minimum of 21 members
wholiveorworkintheareaconcerned;
whose membership is open to all
residents who live or work in the
neighbourhood area, and elected
councillors;
is established for the express purpose
of improving the social, economic and
environmental wellbeing of the area;
and
has a written constitution.
1 . Introduction and Background
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
5Policies Map
1.28The Policies Map that is published
alongside this Plan is a comprehensive map
displaying the spatial boundaries of all
relevant development plan policies.
1.29Where policies have a spatial
boundary or location, for example a
developmentsiteoremploymentarea,these
are shown on the Policies Map. Many of the
policies in the Luton Local Plan are
applicable to the whole of the borough and
are therefore not specifically identified on
the Policies Map.
1.30ThePoliciesMapispublishedonline.
Technical Evidence
1.31The National Planning Policy
Framework requires that Local Plans be
prepared on the basis of robust evidence.
Numerousstudieshavebeenpreparedbythe
Council, key partners and specialist
consultants on matters including
employment, housing, infrastructure, retail
and viability. Included in this is the
InfrastructureDeliveryPlan(IDP),whichhas
been prepared to support the Luton Local
Plan and identifies (as far as possible) the
critical and other infrastructure necessary
to support the delivery of the objectives,
spatial development strategy and other
policies set-out in the Local Plan. The IDP
also provides an overarching framework for
service providers’ plans and programmes,
bringing them into one place and helping
infrastructure providers to plan for the
predicted level and locations of future
growth as set out in the Local Plan. The IDP
will be regularly updated and published to
provide the latest position on infrastructure
delivery. A comprehensive list of the
technicalevidenceissetoutinAppendix10.
Deliverability and Viability of the Local
Plan
1.32Government Guidance requires that
Local Plans are deliverable throughout the
plan period. Viability assessmentsare a tool
thatcanassistwiththedevelopmentofLocal
Plans and policies to ensure that the Local
Plananditspoliciesarerealisticandprovideassurancethattheproposalsinthe Planare
viable and have a reasonable prospect of
delivery.
1.33To ensure that the Local Plan meets
these requirements and the proposals have
areasonableprospectofdeliverythroughout
the life of the plan, viability assessments
have been undertaken by independent
consultants and are published as evidence
to support the Plan. The conclusion of this
evidence is that the proposed development
strategy and the individual sites proposed
are considered sound.
1.34Understandingtheviabilityofpolicies
and development sites is an iterative
process. Viability testing has
therefore continued throughout the process
of preparing the Local Plan.
Other Necessary Assessments
1.35The Council has a statutory
requirement to carry out a number of
assessments in accordance with European
and national legislation to ensure that the
implications of policies and proposals in the
LocalPlanhavebeenfullyunderstood.Such
assessments include:
SustainabilityAppraisal(SA)/Strategic
Environmental Assessment (SEA) :
SustainabilityAppraisalhelpstoensure
that Local Plans and other planning
documentshaveasoundunderstanding
of the environmental, social and
economic characteristics and priorities
ofthearea,andthenensuringthatthey
are integrated into planning policies. A
keyrequirementisfortheSAtotestall
reasonable alternatives for the
development strategy/options for the
Local Plan. A Strategic Environmental
Assessment (SEA) is required by
European Directive to assess the
environmental effects of policies and
proposals in Local Plans. A combined
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) and SEA
has been prepared for the Luton Local
Plan and is published on the Council's
website.TheScopingReport,whichwas
consulted on previously, is also
available on the Council's website.
1 . Introduction and Background
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
6Integrated Impact Assessment: This is
a local requirement to ensure that all
Council policies, plans and strategies
support the corporate mission
statement that: ‘the needs of Luton’s
people will be first in everything we
do’. The assessment embeds
considerations of social justice
principles and practice into the
Council’s decision-making process,
ensuring adherence to the Equality Act
2010andassociatedPublicSectorDuty.
Whiletheintegratedimpactassessment
will be reported separately, its key
concerns are embedded within the SA
to avoid duplication of work.
1 . Introduction and Background
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
72 Setting the Scene
Settlement Profile / Key Issues and
Challenges
2.1Lutonisadenselypopulatedtownwith
arichhistoryofwealthcreationandcultural
diversity. Surrounded by the Green Belt and
situated within the Chilterns 'Area of
OutstandingNaturalBeauty',thetownenjoys
easy access to high quality landscapes,
wildlife areas, parks and other sub-regional
leisure attractions (e.g. Luton Hoo,Dunstable Downs, Whipsnade Zoo, Woburn
Abbey).Atthesametime,thetownbenefits
from good strategic north-south access to
theMidlandsandGreaterLondon(viatheM1
and Midland Mainline Railway) and is also
served by a busy and fast growing airport
adjacent to high quality business parks.
Significant investment in civic spaces and
transport infrastructure around the town
centre and key regeneration sites are also
improving the look, feel and safety of the
townandthewaypeopleenjoyitsshopsand
services.
Luton's regional context
For a more detailed view of the landscape protection areas surrounding Luton see the Luton Key Diagram.
2.2Luton became an established
settlement during the medieval period,
formed around the River Lea that played an
important role in the early development of
the town. Its medieval layout can be
understoodthroughmanyoftheroadnames
withinthetowncentresuchasBridgeStreet,
Castle Street and Mill Street. The town
centresawalargeexpansionduringthe19th
century at which time Luton grew into a
successfulmarkettown.Anumberoffactors
were responsible for the town's growth,
includingthe Great NorthernRailway line in
1860 and the Midland Railway in 1868. The
straw hat industry also saw great successwithin the town and, by the end of the 19th
century, was established and largely
influencedthebuiltformofthetowncentre.
2.3Luton was made a borough in 1876
and, with the development of engineering
and automotive industries, grew rapidly in
the 20th century. Vauxhall Motors located
itselfinthetownin1905.Lutonwasbombed
during the Second World War and after the
waranumberofestateswerebuiltatFarley
Hill,Stopsley,LimburyandLeagrave.London
Luton Airport was officially opened on 16
July1938as'LutonMunicipalAirport'andthe
M1 was built in 1959, the central library in
2 . Setting the Scene
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
81962 and the Arndale Centre in 1972 (now
knownasTheMall).In1997Lutonwasmade
a unitary authority. Luton Airport Parkway
and a new passenger terminal at the airport
were built in 1999.
2.4As part of an ongoing programme of
regeneration, St Georges Square was
redeveloped in 2007. The Luton - Dunstable
Busway, a high-quality service linking
Houghton Regis, Dunstable and Luton, was
opened in 2014. Today, the population of
Lutonnumbersapproximately216,800(ONS,
mid-year estimate, 2016) and London Luton
Airport is one of the UK’s largest airports
serving 10.5 million passengers in 2014 and
continues to grow.
2.5The above factors make the town
attractivetobusinessandinvestment.Luton
is accessible to skilled workers within the
wider sub-region and to businesses wishing
to access national and regional markets as
evidenced through demand to locate on
Luton’s quality business parks. Of particular
noteisagrowingaviation-relatedandskilled
engineering sector, an expanding service
sector base and developing sub-regional
business and office market. The prestige
Capability Green business park is fully
occupied while Butterfield Green research
park continues to develop.
2.6The town's industrial legacy includes
someoldermanufacturingareasthatgreatly
contribute to the character and local
distinctiveness of the town but are in need
ofeconomicandenvironmentalregeneration
in order to restore investor confidence.
These sites have the potential to add
distinctive identity and architectural value
to regeneration schemes. There is also a
need to build on rising education standards
to improve local skill levels, attract
employers and increase job opportunities.
Thiswillenablepeopletoaccesshousingand
services while making more sustainable
choices about travel, energy use, leisure,
food and health. There is insufficient
accessible open space of recreational value
within the urban area to serve some
communities and there is an increasing
demand to develop these spaces for otheruses. However, green space is typically
endowedwithimportantnatureconservation
or heritage status.
2.7As a densely populated and
multicultural town (in many ways similar to
a London borough), Luton has provided
access to relatively lower housing costs and
rented accommodation compared to
surrounding areas. However, in recent years
there has been significant demand to
accommodate a growing population, both
from existing households and from people
movingintothearea,oftenwithlowerskills
and wages.
2.8Without the greenfield land to build
sufficient new housing to meet demand,
thereisnotonlyasignificantlevelofunmet
housing need but an increasing affordability
gap, as wages lag behind market rent and
house price rises. Development market
values within the town are also significantly
low compared to neighbouring towns.
Consequently, the viability of mixed use
developmentandrecyclingcostlybrownfield
sites tends to be uneconomic or so marginal
that the market has been unable to deliver
affordable housing in recent years, except
through major intervention by the Council.
2.9Lutonisthereforeuniqueinthatithas
much potential for sustainable economic
growth, which provides quality job
opportunities to its neighbours and its own
citizens, however, it is held back by a range
of critical constraints and the most critical
of these is the severe inability to house
Luton's growing population and workers.
Poverty and poor access to suitable housing
and key services such as health and
education, leisure and green space are key
issues identified by Luton’s Health and
WellbeingStrategy(2012–2017)andtheJoint
Strategic Needs Assessment (2015), where
the Council has committed to placing a
greater emphasis on the underlying causes
of ill health such as the environment and
housing. The Local Plan will have a key role
toplayinpromotinghealthandwellbeingby
setting out clear opportunities and a spatial
strategy based on the town, district and
neighbourhoodcentreshierarchy,forLuton's
many communities to access jobs, housing,
schools,healthynutrition,leisureandgreen
2 . Setting the Scene
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
9space locally within the town that is easily
accessibleviawalkingandcyclingandpublic
transport.
Exceptional Issues
2.10Lutonisforthemostpartbuiltupto
itsboundaryandissurroundedbytheGreen
Belt. The 2016 Strategic Housing Land
Availability Assessment (SHLAA) indicates
that the town does not realistically have
sufficient capacity within its boundary to
meet all of its housing needs.
2.11Viability studies indicate that
development is challenging on brownfield
sites in Luton due to abnormal costs in
recycling brownfield employment land and
unusually low market values.
2.12There are only four significant
employment land allocations left within the
town(PowerCourt,CenturyPark,Butterfield
GreenandLandSouthofStockwoodPark)to
maintain Luton’s economic contribution to
itself and its neighbours, for businesses
wishing to invest into the area or for firms
wishing to expand. These sites (one
regeneration site and two greenfield sites
respectively) require key enabling
infrastructure. There is, however, a
significant economic growth multiplier for
Lutonandthewidersub-region,providedby
the busy and growing London Luton Airport,
which provides a range of aviation-related
skilled engineering and technical
employment and also lower skilled work
related to aviation and business services.
There will be a need to ensure that aviation
and other related growth arising from the
proximity to the airport or related business
clusters are not held back by land and
infrastructure constraints. To achieve this,
a strategic allocation comprising London
Luton Airport, Century Park and Wigmore
Valley Park, is proposed in the Local Plan.
2.13The town is attractive to business
and investment as evidenced in the 2013
Employment Land Review study. Local
industrial firms struggle to find modern,
affordableaccommodationandmustrelyon
existing industrial sites with lower rents
(oftenoflowerqualityorageingstock)until
thenewemploymentlandstockisbuiltout.2.14Lutontowncentreisperformingwell
forshoppingandaccessandhasanimproving
public realm. The town centre must,
however,expandandimproveitsretailoffer
to remain competitive in the face of stiff
competitionfromitssub-regionalneighbours
and national retailing trends.
2.15The town lacks east - west orbital
connectivity and so suffers from peak
congestion where local traffic and through
traffic conflict at key junctions and around
the town centre.
2.16Schoolprovisionisstrugglingtomeet
demand, with significant capacity concerns
in southern and central Luton.
2.17The distribution of greenspaces
across the Borough is unequal with the
western and central areas of the Borough
havingsignificantlylessoverallgreenspace.
This is compounded by their location, being
separated from open countryside and
surrounded by built up areas. The overall
current provision of greenspaces is below
thestandards(foreachtypology)devisedby
theGreenspaceStrategyReview2014.Future
pressure from expected population growth
makes the protection and continuous
improvementoftheexistinggreenspacesan
importantissueforthecommunitiesofLuton
for recreation and in terms of health and
wellbeing. The quality of the Borough's
parks, greenspaces and gardens is also an
importantindicatorofatown'sattractiveness
and is a key consideration for people and
businesses when looking to locate to the
area.
Challenges
2.18Given the above unique
circumstances, as evidenced by technical
studies and analysis, the development
strategy must ensure that Luton continues
to successfully grow its economy as a
sub-regional employer benefiting the town
and its neighbours and use its space
efficiently and effectively whilst looking to
its neighbouring authorities to contribute
quality and affordable housing and mixed
communities accessible to the town. This
will ensure that the benefits of economic
drivers, including Capability Green business
park, London Luton Airport and Napier Park
2 . Setting the Scene
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
10Strategic Allocations are shared by its
citizens and workers in neighbouring
authoritieswithoutcompromisingthetown’s
environment and economic success. To
ensure this, Luton must secure strategic
transport investment unlocking key
employment allocations whilst also
protectingexistingindustrialsitestoensure
that its economy expands and diversifies to
meet the needs of local residents.
2.19To ensure that Luton remains both
attractive to investors and as the economic
‘heart’ of the Luton Housing Market Area,
quality employment allocations must be
protected and other industrial land should
be released for housing and other uses only
when modern accommodation is completed
or where sites are already obsolete.
2.20Luton Town Centre must also deliver
increasedconvenienceandcomparisongoods
shopping on key sites and by expanding the
town centre onto Power Court, taking
advantage of the Luton - Dunstable busway,
town station improvements and inner ring
road improvements. A network of District
andNeighbourhoodCentreswillalsoincrease
access to local goods and services and focus
investment opportunities for new housing
and employment regeneration, helping to
reduce congestion as there would be less
need to travel by car.
2.21A key challenge for this Local Plan
must be to secure significant levels of
affordable housing while ensuring that
developmentremainsviableandpeoplewill
continue to work and find employment in
the borough. A significant contribution
required from our neighbouring authorities
is to provide much needed housing close to
Luton taking account of the Luton -
Dunstable busway and enabling key orbital
road improvements, which can link
communitieswhilstremovingthroughtraffic
and freeing up capacity within the town.
2.22Thislocalplanisthereforestructured
around a spatial development strategy that
will focus on a number of solutions.
2.23Luton's contribution to the
sub-regional economy needs to be
maintained and enhanced through the
bringing forward of its strategic allocationscoordinated with key infrastructure (e.g.
Century Park, Napier Park, Power Court,
Land South of Stockwood Park).
2.24Marginal employment land needs to
be protected to ensure that local firms can
affordtodobusinessinLutonuntilnewstock
is built out and the market improves. Only
employment land that is currently not
suitable or attractive to the employment
market will be released.
2.25Thetowncentreneedsregeneration
through a limited expansion to boost
competitiveness and provide an improved
offer to claw back leaked trade. A network
of Neighbourhood and District Centres need
improvement to enable housing,
employment, health and small scale retail
needs to be met locally through reduced
travel while maximising public transport
connectivity to the Luton - Dunstable
busway, Luton town centre, employment
areas and Luton Airport Parkway Railway
Station.
2.268,500 dwellings will be provided
within the borough and will contribute
towardsmeetingthefullobjectivelyassessed
need for market and affordable housing
requirements through allocations,
development at High Town, regeneration of
the town centre (Power Court) and former
employment area (Napier Park).
Neighbouring local authorities need to help
meet Luton's unmet market and affordable
housing needs in accordance with the 'Duty
to Cooperate'.
2.27The town's regeneration needs to be
secured through a program of transport
investmente.g.TownCentreImprovements,
Lutonrailwaystationimprovements,London
Luton Airport surface access, Century Park
accessandJunction10ASouthofStockwood
Park. Sufficient school places need to be
provided for local communities.
2.28The town's green spaces and green
infrastructure network, including the River
Lea and other open areas, need to be
protected and enhanced for wildlife and
accessibility for formal and informal
recreation that bring important benefits in
termsofhealthandwellbeing.Inparticular,
2 . Setting the Scene
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
11access to greenspace networks that link up
with cross boundary provision will be
encouraged.
2 . Setting the Scene
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
123 Vision and Objectives
Vision and Objectives
3.1The Local Plan for Luton represents
the long term spatial vision from which the
objectives and spatial strategy have been
derived. The ‘vision’ is a statement of what
the plan is trying to achieve.
3.2The strategicobjectivesformthe link
betweenthehighlevelspatialvisionandthe
detailed strategy. They are the objectives
needed to fulfil the vision. The policies
within the Local Plan show how this can be
achieved within the plan period.
3.3Thevisionandobjectivesbuildonand
reflect Luton Borough’s Sustainable
Community Strategy and the Council’s
Prospectus.
Vision
3.4Luton’s economic, social and
environmental resources and assets will be
used efficiently and sustainably to delivereconomicprosperityandanimprovedquality
of life, health and wellbeing for all the
residents of the Borough. Luton will
strengthen and, where appropriate,
transform the places that continue to make
the borough unique. It will continue to be a
place for diverse communities, building on
its strategic importance as a sub-regional
driver of economic growth.
3.5LondonLutonAirportwillbeimproved
to provide more jobs related to aviation
industries and other associated business
clustersandmaintainLondonLutonAirport's
key role as a sub-regional economic driver
bringing wealth and job creation (including
high skilled jobs) to the town and
neighbouring local authorities. The
completion of Butterfield Technology Park
will support more job opportunities in high
technology industries. Across Luton, a mix
of high quality and low cost business
accommodation will support a range of jobs
suitable for the skills of local and
neighbouring residents with Power Court,
3 . Vision and Objectives
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
13Butterfield Technology Park, Century Park
and Napier Park making a strategic
contribution leading to an increase in
employment. The creative and cultural
industries will grow, stimulated by the
presence of a modernised University of
Bedfordshire, the historic and distinctive
Creative Quarter and High Town.
3.6High quality housing and
neighbourhoods will be delivered in the
Boroughandinneighbouringauthorityareas
to ensure there is a sufficient supply of an
appropriatemixofdwellingtypes,sizesand
tenures to offer local residents a choice of
where to live. This includes mixed uses on
certain strategic allocations such as Napier
Park.
3.7The local workforce will be more
highly skilled and unemployment will be
reduced considerably. There will be
improved high standards in educational
establishments,withstudentsachievinghigh
levels of education. The supply of school
places will be sufficient and of good quality
to meet local demand and provide for
parental choice.
3.8Luton willrespectits classicChilterns
gap town setting in the steep-sided upper
valley of the River Lea, characterised in
parts by the Chilterns Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty, Luton Hoo and surrounded
by the Green Belt. Luton will protect and
enhance its networks of parks, heritage,
waterways and natural features, which will
continuetoprovideintegralmulti-functional
open space, leisure opportunities
and benefits to health and wellbeing in a
densely populated Borough.
3.9Luton will prosper through a
well-connected network of vibrant and
regenerated locally distinct places centred
around Luton Town Centre, District Centres
and Neighbourhood Centres which have
evolved from the borough’s rich history.
Luton Town Centre will be a sub-regional
focusforinwardinvestmentfordevelopment
including retail(3), the creative and cultural
economy, new homes and town centre uses.Power Court is a 'flagship' project shaping
the future image and function of the town
centre and what it has to offer to shoppers
and people visiting the town for
entertainment and leisure. The District
Centres at Bury Park, Marsh Farm, Marsh
Road, Stopsley and Wigmore will also be a
focusfordevelopmenttoenabletheirshops
andservicestothriveforthebenefitoftheir
local communities. Neighbourhood Centres
willbedistributedacrossthetown,between
the larger centres, to serve day-to-day
needs.
3.10Luton’s communities will be better
connected and become less dependent on
carusetopromotehealthycommunitieswith
good access to jobs, goods, services and
leisure and cultural activities. An effective
networkofTown,DistrictandNeighbourhood
Centres (including a supporting network of
DistrictandNeighbourhoodParks)willserve
as the heart of local neighbourhoods with
improved access by train, bus, foot and
cycle. Eachplacewillbuildonitsdistinctive
identity, role and function and will be well
designed, vibrant and, above all, a great
place to live.
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 1: Retain and
enhanceLuton’simportantsub-regional
roleasaplaceforeconomicgrowthand
opportunity including the safeguarding
of London Luton Airport’s existing
operations and to support its
sustainablegrowthoverthePlanperiod
based on its strategic importance.
Strategic Objective 2: To utilise
Luton’s economic, social and
environmentalresourcesefficientlyand
sustainably, including appropriate
mitigation within the limited physical
land capacity of the borough whilst
ensuring the permanence of the Green
Belt.
Strategic Objective 3: To ensure that
new housing delivers an appropriate
level of provision to meet local needs
in terms of the number of homes,
3 Luton town centre’s description as a ‘Regional Centre’ is the terminology adopted by the White
Young Green’s (WYG) Luton Retail Study Update 2015. This is sourced from Venuescore, an
acknowledged industry ranking of retail locations across the UK
3 . Vision and Objectives
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
14subject to capacity constraints and a
mixofdwellingtypes,sizesandtenures
that offer local residents a choice of
where to live and addresses issues of
affordability and overcrowding. Luton
Borough Council will work
collaboratively with neighbouring
authorities to help ensure unmet
needs are provided for in appropriate
locations outside Luton and to actively
monitor progress in terms of unmet
needs.
Strategic Objective 4: To establish an
effective network and hierarchy of
Town, District and Neighbourhood
Centres to serve as the heart of local
communities; improving health and
wellbeing through improved access by
train, bus, foot and cycle to a mix of
uses including shopping, services and
jobs.
Strategic Objective 5: To improve the
builtandnaturalenvironmenttodeliver
quality places through high quality and
sustainable design taking into account
thelandscape,settingandcharacterof
thetownandneighbourhoodswithinits
national(i.e.AONB)andlocallandscape
settings, including heritage assets and
providing safe environments that help
to reduce crime and the fear of crime.
Strategic Objective 6: Reduce social,
economic and environmental
deprivation, particularly where it is
spatially concentrated, by taking
priority measures to reduce
unemployment, improve skills and
education and renew housing,
community and environmental
conditions.
Strategic Objective 7: To safeguard
andenablenewcommunity,educational
and cultural facilities to be delivered
and expanded to meet the needs of a
growing and diverse borough.
Strategic Objective 8: Improve
accessibility,connectivity,sustainability
and ease of movement to, from and
within the borough.
StrategicObjective9: Todeliveranew
Luton football stadium in a location
capable of good access to transport
infrastructure along with associateduses,sharedvenueevents,andancillary
sports related uses.
Strategic Objective 10: Improve,
protectandenhancethebiodiversityof
naturalareaswithinthetown,including
the quality, accessibility, health and
recreationalvalue of green spaces, the
River Lea Corridor, the Chilterns Area
of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB),
the Areas of Great Landscape Value
(AGLV),AreasofLocalLandscapeValue
(ALLV) and their connectivity.
Strategic Objective 11: To safeguard
and ensure the prudent use of natural
resources, increase energy and water
efficiency and encourage and promote
theuseofrenewableenergysourcesto
help adapt to climate change, manage
pollution, natural and land use
operational hazards, avoid
inappropriate development in areas at
risk of flooding, secure improvements
in air and water quality and ensure
effective waste management.
3 . Vision and Objectives
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
154 Spatial Strategy
Spatial Development Strategy
4.1The spatial development strategy is
to focus the majority of new development
intheboroughovertheplanperiodoneight
Strategic Allocations, whilst protecting the
remainingGreenBeltfromdevelopmentand
regenerating Luton Town Centre. There will
be a presumption in favour of sustainable
development encouraging sustainable and
high quality development throughout the
borough. This preferred strategy has been
developedthroughon-goingconsultationand
engagementandthepreparationofevidence
on a wide range of topics including housing,
employment,retail,infrastructure,viability
and numerous other technical studies as set
out in Appendix 10.
4.2As the Development Strategy is
cross-cutting,alloftheStrategicObjectives
are relevant to this section of the Plan.Presumption in Favour of Sustainable
Development
4.3At the heart of the NPPF is a
presumption in favour of sustainable
development, which it explains should be a
golden thread running through both
plan-making and decision-taking.
Opportunities should be sought to address
development needs whilst seeking positive
improvements in the built, natural and
historicenvironmentandenhancingpeople’s
quality of life. Luton provides a clear
example of an area with high pressure for
different land uses where the economic,
social and environmental roles for the
planning system to perform (as set out on
paragraph 7 of the NPPF) cannot be treated
in isolation. The Vision and Strategic
Objectives of this plan reflect the range of
outcomes sought from development. This
LocalPlantakesthisapproachindetermining
itspreferredpolicyapproach.ThePlandoes
this by:
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
16Determining the objectively assessed
development needs of Luton Borough
andthefunctionalLutonHousingMarket
Area and seeking to meet those needs;
Ensuring flexibility to adapt to rapid
change where appropriate and feasible
in the Plan; and
Proposing positive policies, which
assumethatdevelopmentproposalsthat
accord with the development plan will
be approved without delay and, where
the development plan is silent, it is
assumed that planning permission will
be granted unless the adverse impacts
outweigh the benefits.
Policy LLP1 - Presumption in Favour
of Sustainable Development
A ‘presumption in favour of sustainable
development’ will be applied to
development management decisions.
Whereverpossible,theCouncilwillwork
proactively and positively with all
applicants to help shape development
proposals to deliver growth and
sustainable development that can be
approved without delay.
A.Planningpermissionwillbegranted
where applications accord with
local plan policies (and, where
relevant, with policies in
neighbourhood plans) when taken
as a whole, unless other material
considerationsindicateotherwise.
B. The Council will require all new
development in the borough to
contributetoenhancingasenseof
place, preserve or improve the
character of the area.
Development proposals should
respond to and enhance local
character, the natural
environment, heritage assets, and
the identity of the Borough.
The Council will seek to encourage
growth and sustainable development
and manage change so as to create a
networkofconnected,sustainable,high
quality, locally distinctive and healthy
places.Growthinhomes,jobsandservicesthat
constitutes sustainable development
will be welcomed; provided the growth
is directed to places with good
concentrationsofexistinginfrastructure
orareaswherethereiscapacitytogrow
with further sustainable infrastructure
investment within the plan period to
2031. The Strategic Allocations and
Luton Town Centre will be the primary
location for growth, with District and
Neighbourhood Centres also playing a
substantial role as the heart of the
communities of Luton (see the Key
Diagram).
Sustainable Development Principles
To enable the delivery of sustainable
development and sustainable
communities,alldevelopmentproposals
will, where applicable, have regard to
relevant plan policies.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
174 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
18Spatial Development Strategy
4.4This policy sets out the quantum of
objectivelyassesseddevelopmentneedsand
requirements over the plan period for the
borough and the functional Luton Housing
Market Area and the preferred locations of
growth in the borough as required of Local
Plans in the NPPF.
4.5It proposes that the objectively
assessed housing need for the borough is
17,800 net additional dwellings and 31,800
net additional dwellings in the Functional
Luton Housing Market Area over the plan
period (2011 – 2031, of which, based on a
pro-rata split based on population, 200
dwellingsfallwithinNorthHertfordshireand
400 dwellings within Aylesbury Vale and the
balance of 13,400 dwellings within Central
Bedfordshire) as evidenced by the Luton &
CentralBedfordshireSHMAupdateofsummer
2015, which provides more information/
analysis.(4)The Functional Luton HousingMarket Area (shown on the accompanying
plan(5)takenfromthereport,HousingMarket
Areas in Bedfordshire and surrounding areas
ReportofFindings,December2015)includes
allofLutonBorough,asignificantproportion
of Central Bedfordshire, and some of North
Hertfordshire District and Aylesbury Vale
District. The 2016 SHLAA identified a
potential capacity of 9,322 over the plan
period. However, some of this identified
capacityisunlikelytobedevelopedoverthe
plan period due to market conditions and
other uncertainties. Consequently, a
realisticassessmentisthatthereissufficient
capacity to deliver 8,500 dwellings. This,
therefore,isthehousingrequirementforthe
plan period. Based on the objectively
assessed housing needs and the lack of
housing land to fully meet this need, there
is a shortfall of 9,300 net additional
dwellings in the borough over the plan
period.
4 The‘BestFit’HousingMarketareaOANof47,300dwellingsisbasedonwholedistrictsandcovers
all of Luton and Central Bedfordshire Districts.
5 The HMA boundaries shown on the plan are illustrative and not to be taken as precise.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
19Source: Figure 38, page 47 of the "Housing Market Areas in Bedfordshire and Surrounding
Areas - Report of Findings - December 2015".
4.6As a result of this mismatch and the
needfortheboroughtomeetitsobjectively
assessed needs whilst protecting other
importantexistinglandusesanddesignations
in the borough such as open space and
employment land, the Council is currently
working with other local authorities in the
area to seek the delivery of Luton’s unmet
housing needs in these areas outside the
borough through their local plans under the
Duty to Cooperate. Luton is therefore
capacity capped in terms of the amount of
housingitcanmeetwithinitsadministrative
boundaryandoptionstomeetLuton'sunmet
housing needs will need to be thoroughly
testedthroughpreparationofjointevidence
and potentially met through neighbouring
authorities' local plans.4.7Luton Borough Council will seek to
ensure delivery of the housing needs, which
cannot be met within the Borough, within
thewiderHousingMarketArea.Asevidenced
through the SHMA, Luton has the strongest
functional links with Central Bedfordshire,
therefore it is expected that a significant
proportion of Luton's unmet housing needs
will be met in Central Bedfordshire.
However, North Hertfordshire District and
Aylesbury Vale District also fall within the
Luton HousingMarket Area, so Luton BC will
looktotheselocalauthoritiestoparticipate
injointworkingand,subjecttotheoutcome
of this work and preparation of joint
evidence base, make provision for Luton's
unmet housing needs in their local plans or
local plan reviews. Only in the event of the
joint work failing to meet the scale of
objectively set housing needs within the
Functional Luton HMA would those parts of
Aylesbury Vale, Central Bedfordshire and
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
20North Hertfordshire, which lie outside the
Luton HMA, as well as land within other
neighbouring authority areas further afield,
be considered.(6)
4.8The Borough Council considers that
the interests of the town and sustainability
would best be served by meeting Luton’s
unmet housing needs as close as possible to
thecommunitiesfromwhichtheneedarises.
Indeed, under the duty to cooperate and in
response to neighbouring plan preparation,
particular account should be taken of this
Council’s policy supporting development to
the west(7)of Luton and requesting a
thorough examination of strategic cross
boundaryoptionsaroundthe town(i.e. that
an assessment of options north, east, south
and west of Luton should be examined).
4.9Development of a significant scale on
or close to the edge of Luton would require
significant investment in transportation
infrastructure, including sustainable
transportmeasuresandorbitalroadcapacity
to ensure that through traffic can be
removed from traffic needing to access the
townanditsemploymentandshoppingareas
or when accessing the M1. It would be
critical to ensure that such improvements
are well coordinated to ensure adequate
infrastructure to allow traffic movements
around both the north and south/east of
Luton.
4.10Duetoverychallengingdevelopment
viability issues, it is proposed that only 20%
affordable housing is required on all new
residential development schemes.
4.11A total net additional 18,000 jobs
(i.e. 8,000 B class jobs and 10,000 non B
class jobs) are proposed as the objectively
assessed employment need of the Borough,
based on the evidence in the Employment
Land Review, balanced with the Borough's
objectively assessed housing need.4.12A range of infrastructure
requirements to deliver the preferred
strategy in the Borough are set out in the
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). The IDP
is a 'living document' that will be kept
up-to-date over the plan period.
4.13A key component of the spatial
strategy is the continued protection and
enhancement of the borough’s heritage and
natural assets including open space of
recreational value and the remaining Green
Belt. The current provision of green spaces
isbelowstandardbytypologyandisunevenly
distributed (particularly in the West and
Central areas) as set out in the Green Space
Strategy Review 2014. Green spaces are
protected in Policy LLP27, which requires
new or enhanced multi-functional green
space to be provided in accordance with
standards set out in Appendix11.
Policy LLP2 - Spatial Development
Strategy
Thereisaneedfor17,800netadditional
dwellings to support the population
growthofLutonBoroughovertheperiod
2011–2031.Overthesameperiodthere
is a need for 31,800 net additional
dwellings in the Functional Luton
HousingMarketArea(whichincludesthe
need for 17,800 dwellings in Luton
Borough).
The Local Plan will make provision for
8,500 net additional dwellings over the
planperiodintheBoroughandrequires
20% of all qualifying housing
developments under Policy LLP16
(Affordable Housing) to be affordable
dwellings.Lutonthereforehasanunmet
housing need of 9,300 net additional
dwellings over the plan period. The
level of housing provision within Luton
will not be treated as a ceiling. This is
in order to enable development
proposalstocomeforwardonsitesthat
arenotspecificallyallocatedforhousing
6 The Luton Growth Options Study covering the Luton HMA and jointly commissioned between
Luton,AylesburyVale,NorthHertfordshireandCentralBedfordshireDistrictCouncilswaspublished
in April 2017.
7 Luton Borough Council resolved at its meeting 18 January 2011 to support development west of
Luton.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
21but which comply with plan policies,
subjecttotheavailabilityofappropriate
infrastructure. Luton Borough Council
willcontinuetoworkwithneighbouring
and nearby local authorities to help
ensure delivery of the Borough’s unmet
needs in other local authority areas
underthe‘dutytocooperate'.LutonBC
will continue to work with its
neighbouringauthoritiestohelpensure
that the needs of the Luton HMA are
met within the HMA. This work is to be
informed by the Joint Growth Options
Study including ‘Areas of Search’ for
growth of Luton to the North, South,
East and West.
A. Housing in the Borough will be
delivered through (data derived
from SHLAA, July 2016):
i. historic completions
2011/12–2015/16 (2,027
dwellings);
ii. existing permissions on sites
delivering less than 5 homes
(114 dwellings);
iii. strategicallocationsatPower
Court, Napier Park, High
Town, Marsh Farm and the
Creative Quarter (a minimum
of 2,500 dwellings);
iv. housing allocations (2,266
dwellings*); and
v. identified non-allocated sites
of at least 5 homes (1,573
dwellings).
B. Employment in B Use Classes will
be delivered through:
i. around 69 hectares of
employment development on
Strategic Allocations at Land
South of Stockwood Park,
London Luton Airport,
Butterfield Technology Park,
Power Court, Napier Park,
High Town and the Creative
Quarter; and
ii. delivering net additional
employment land stock on
allocated sites prior to
releasing older unsuitableemployment land and
premises to other uses.
C. Town Centre and retail uses will
bedirectedinaccordancewiththe
Centre Hierarchy (Policy LLP21)
reinforcing and enhancing the
vitality, viability and regeneration
ofLutonTownCentreasaregional
centre** and the network of 6
District Centres and 12***
NeighbourhoodCentresservingthe
Borough.TheTownCentre,District
and Neighbourhood network will
be a focus for future investment
provisionincludingtransportaccess
andlinkages,communityfacilities,
opportunities for shared services
as well as appropriate scale
housing, retail and employment
development.
D. The infrastructure required to
support the Spatial Development
Strategywillbephasedandfunded
in line with the Infrastructure
DeliveryPlan(IDP)andthepolicies
in the Local Plan including:
i. opportunities to enhance and
benefit from the Luton
Dunstable busway connecting
thetowncentre,employment
and commercial centres with
local communities, key
transport interchanges and
the airport;
ii.thereliefoftrafficcongestion
withinthetowncentreandat
junction 10A of the M1;
iii. complete planned
accessibility and mobility
improvements to Luton Town
Centre railway station and
transport interchange;
iv. increased capacity at London
Luton Airport alongside
transport access
improvements; and
v. phasing and delivery of
schoolscapacityincludingnew
provision, necessary to
support the needs of Luton's
population.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
22E. The natural environment, historic
environment and heritage assets
of the borough will be protected
andenhancedassetoutinPolicies
LLP27, LLP28, LLP29 and LLP30 in
the Local Plan including the
protectionandenhancementofthe
Green Belt.
Footnotes:
* Capacity remaining at April 2016.
** ‘Regional Centre’ is the terminology
adopted by the White Young Green’s
(WYG) Luton Retail Study Update 2015.
This is sourced from Venuescore, an
acknowledgedindustryrankingofretail
locations across the UK.
*** The location of one Neighbourhood
Centre to be determined (see LLP21A).
Luton Town Centre
4.14The NPPF (see paragraph 23)
highlightstheimportanceofrecognisingtown
centresasbeingattheheartofcommunities
and identifying new ways of ensuring that
towncentresoffercompetitiveenvironments
by being prosperous, vital and vibrant and
thatplanningpoliciessetouthowthegrowth
of the centre will be managed over the plan
period.
4.15Luton town centre encompasses the
Town Centre Shopping Area and the Mall,
the University Campus, leisure attractions,
two Conservation areas (Town Centre and
Plaiter’s Lea), several listed buildings
includingStMary’sChurchandtheTownHalland the main public squares of Luton. The
extent of the Town Centre is, for the most
part,delimitedbythetown'sinnerringroad.
4.16Thetowncentreisthefocalpointof
Luton for shopping, leisure, culture,
education and employment in the service
andbusinesssectorsandalsoaccommodates
themajorpublictransportationinterchanges
of the borough.
4.17TheLutonTownCentreDevelopment
FrameworkwaspublishedinDecember2004
and was adopted as a Council policy. It
presents a vision and development strategy
toguidetheregenerationofthetowncentre
and is a material consideration in the
determination of planning applications.
4.18TheLutonTownCentreDevelopment
Framework (2004) has guided many of the
publicrealmimprovementsdeliveredbythe
Council(StGeorgeSquare,TownHallSquare,
Bus Interchange, Market Hill), which have
attracted further investment from the
private sector. The University Campus has
also gone through an exciting process of
regenerationandproducedsomeofthemore
interestingcontemporaryarchitectureinthe
town alongside high quality public realm.
4.19Thetowncentreisthriving;however
some parts remain in poor condition (e.g.
lack of open space and recreation facilities)
and are in need of redevelopment and
improvement. The Council will produce a
refresh of the Luton Town Centre
Development Framework document to take
into account the latest developments in the
town centre and the strategic objectives of
this Local Plan.
4.20TheCouncilhasrecognisedtheneed
toengagecloselywithbusinessesinthetown
centre. A Town Centre Team has been
formed on the back of the 'High Street
Innovation Fund' received from central
government. The group proposes and
implements initiatives to revitalise the
central area. The Council will keep on
working and engaging with these
stakeholderseitherthroughthisgroupand/or
new bespoke board groups that will be
formed in the future to work on the vitality
and viability of the town centre.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
234.21The River Lea is an important asset
of the town and, in particular, of the town
centre; proposals to open up the river may,
if viable and feasible, improve the
environmentbyprovidingamenityspacesfor
residents and visitors. Improving access to
the River Lea would help in extending the
existing Upper Lea Valley Walk.
Luton Town Centre Evidence Studies
4.22Luton Town Centre Surveys by BMG
shows that while the majority of residents
inLutonusethetowncentrequiteregularly
and visitors are generally satisfied with the
environment,thereismuchmoretobedone
to increase its vitality, accessibility and
perception of safety.
4.23Visits to the town centre decline as
the time of the day progresses and very few
peopleconsiderthetowncentretobelively
andexciting. Keyregenerationsitesremain
vacant and need redevelopment.
4.24Perceptionofbarrierstoaccessfrom
individualswhoconsiderthemselvesdisabled
is quite high while particular issues in terms
of accessibility are to be found at almost all
thegatewaysintothetowncentre.TheTown
Centre Development Framework (2004) has
highlighted that the ring road has severed
connections,inparticularwiththesouthand
west of the town centre. This issue
also impacts on the vitality and vibrancy of
the area.
4.25The Peter Brett Associates 'Review
oftowncentreoffice/businesspremisesfor
alternative re-use' (May 2013) found that
there is an underlying need for residential
accommodation driven by a growing
population. Mixed-use residential and
employment development is not viable
although purely residential development is
viableandprovidesanopportunitytoreplace
someofthepoorervacantcommercialstock
within Luton.
4.26The White Young Green 'Retail Study
Refresh' (December 2012 - Update 2015)
provides guidance and indicative figures for
future growth in retail floorspace over the
plan period. The study shows that the
proportion of comparison units in the town
centre is below the national average albeitthe proportion of floorspace is broadly
reflectiveandthedeliveryof large,modern
retail units occupied by quality national
retailers should improve Luton’s market
share by providing an improved shopping
offer to the Town (in association with
continued investment and town centre
environmental upgrade) through bringing
forward potential retail development sites.
4.27The study also found that
convenience (food store) retail is
proportionally under-represented.
4.28The study suggests that the borough
needs to continue with investment in order
to make a marked improvement in the town
centre’s competitiveness and strive to
increase what is considered a relatively low
market share for comparison goods in the
face of intensified competition from rival
centres such as Milton Keynes and in the
period from 2022 (when anticipated trading
will start) from the retail scheme at
Houghton Regis North. It considers an
increased market share scenario to be
achievable, based on the potential for the
NorthernGatewayandPowerCourtstrategic
allocations to deliver a step-change in the
quality and range of the comparison goods
sector within Luton allowing for lead times
indeliveringexistingcommitments.Asstated
inthereport,theretailfiguresareindicative
and, with the increased population growth
withinandadjacenttothetownandphasing
of development, the retail figures will be
kept under review goingforward- to ensure
that the regeneration of Power Court and
the Northern Gateway in the town centre
deliveraspirationsforanimprovedshopping
offer to combat existing deficiencies and
retail trade leakage.
4.29The Luton Hotel Study (July 2015)
and Luton Leisure Study (July 2015) sit
alongside the Retail Study Update and each
provides evidence of the additional demand
for these facilities in the plan period. The
studies respectively conclude that: a) there
is a need for an extra hotel room
requirementof1,030roomsby2020,growing
to potentially 1,830 rooms by 2030
predominantly related to aviation and
business travel in the vicinity of the airport
(i.e.notnetadditionaltowncentredemand
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
24above that already committed/allocated);
and b) a quantitative need for 10,300sqm
net of Class A3 floorspace by 2031; a
theoretical cinema capacity of circa 15-18
screensis identified to meet the totalStudy
Area need to 2031; a qualitative need for
better co-provision and distribution of
swimming/health and fitness and
multi-purpose theatres/cinemas, and
improved town centre pubs and clubs and
museum/galleries to offer local choice.
4.30The preferred policy approach for
Luton Town Centre is to focus on the
regeneration of key sites and enhancement
of heritage assets and the historic
environment to deliver new housing, retail,
creative and traditional businesses, culture
and leisure uses within the historic urban
fabric of the town centre. There are also
three key strategic allocations that are
complementary to this regeneration
approach including the Creative Quarter,
PowerCourtandHighTown,whichwillfocus
onappropriatenicherolesforredevelopment
opportunities respecting the character of
each area. Within the Town Centre, such
useswillbe appropriatealongsideproposals
for creative businesses, art and education,
building on the existing strengths and
distinctive character of the area. Land will
be used efficiently within the town centre
so that development can contribute
substantially to the delivery of the growth
identified for the future and to the creation
of a vibrant and competitive environment.
4.31There will also be an opportunity to
maximise public transport accessibility to
existing and new strategic housing
allocations in and around the town centre
through linkages with the Luton - Dunstable
busway and town centre rail station
terminus.Thisconnectivitywillhelpimprove
accesstoemploymentareasstretchingfrom
east to west across Luton from the airport,
Napier Park and Stirling Place via the town
centre and on to Dallow, Chaul End and
Dunstable. The Local Transport Plan and
othersourcesofinfrastructurefunding(e.g.
bids via the South East Local Midlands
Enterprise Partnership) will all play a part
in fostering further public transport access
linkstotheproposednetworkofDistrictand
Neighbourhood Centres across the borough.4.32TheCouncilwillworkwithdevelopers
and applicants to ensure that a cohesive,
inclusive and high quality pedestrian
environment is delivered across the town
centre that also maintains the high quality
that has been achieved in public spaces in
recent years.
4.33There are two Strategic Allocations
within the town centre that feature in the
Town Centre Strategy and are also subject
to their own specific policies:
Power Court Policy LLP9; and
Creative Quarter (including Station
Gateway-NorthernGateway-Landnorth
of St. George Square) Policy LLP11.
4.34Areaswithpotentialforregeneration
but no specific proposals identified:
University Campus; and
Castle Quarter.
Policy LLP3 - Luton Town Centre
Strategy
Luton Town Centre will be a location
for positive change and a focus for
economicandresidentialgrowthandan
improvednaturalandbuiltenvironment.
Building on the town’s rich heritage,
this mixed use area will provide a
balanced offer of high quality
residential development, offices and
studios, creative industries,
independent and national retail,
education institutions and thriving
publicspaceswithavibrantcaféculture
andnighttimeeconomy.Developments
will complement and benefit from the
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
25town centre's key strengths: a growing
connectivity as a sustainable transport
hubwithstronglinkstoLondonandthe
wider sub region, served by the Luton
Dunstable Busway and further
improvements to Luton railway station
and inner ring road. Local pedestrian
and cycling accessibility will also link
the Town Centre with key regeneration
sites and surrounding Neighbourhood
Centres. Proposalsfor deculverting and
improvingaccesstotheRiverLea,along
with new greenspaces will be
encouraged and supported by the
Council where it is feasible to do so.
A. Power Court (see Policy LLP9), the
CreativeQuarter(seePolicyLLP11)
and the University Campus (see
below) will be a key focus for
development and change over the
plan period. Development
proposals for the town centre
should address the following
criteria:
i.contributetowardsresidential
growth of around 2,100 new
dwellings that will provide a
significant contribution
towardsthenewhomesinthe
borough and create an
expanded residential
community in the centre of
Luton;
ii. contribute towards job
creation from retail, offices,
creativeindustries,education,
training and leisure;
iii. provide circa 3,400sq.m. net
convenienceretailfloorspace
in the current period and
provide circa 4,420sq.m. of
non-bulky comparison goods
for the period to 2020 and
30,096sq.m. by 2025, hotels,
and leisure uses to maintain
and enhance the retail
regional* role of the town
centre;
iv. high quality residential
development will respect the
local distinctiveness of the
town centre whilst making
the best use of opportunitiesfor higher density
development;
v. opportunities for car free
development will be
encouragedwhereitconforms
with Policy LLP32;
vi.contributetotheachievement
ofamixedareathatisvibrant
and active including
enhancing a night time
economy;
vii. new development and
redevelopment in the town
centre will contribute
positively to the economic
regeneration and reuse of
heritage assets while
respecting the existing local
distinctiveness and quality of
the heritage, including sites
with archaeological interest,
inparticularensuringthatthe
characteroftheConservation
Areas (Town Centre and
Plaiters Lea), listed buildings
and landmarks (including St
Mary’s Church and the Town
Hall) are maintained and
enhanced;
viii.proposals that fall into the
Plaiter’s Lea Conservation
Area should have regard to
theHistoricalAreaAssessment
produced by Historic England
for this area;
ix.landwithintheareaidentified
on the policies inset map as
the Castle Quarter will be
encouraged to be brought
forward within a
comprehensive scheme for a
mixed use development
(residential, retail and
leisure);
x. deliver a high quality, safe
and publicly accessible
pedestrian environment on
key routes within and
connectingtothetowncentre
including maximising
opportunities created by the
completion of the inner ring
road and other improvement
schemesthroughoutthetown;
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
26xi. make more effective use of
the River Lea as a strategic
corridor forming an historic,
cultural and ecological
landscape feature of the
town, connecting into and
through the town centre,
increasing visibility and
accessibility wherever
possible for structural and
floodmaintenance,protection
buffer zones (with native
planting), cycling and
pedestrian routes, green
spaces, and habitats of
recreational and biodiversity
value along its course;
xii. consider opportunities for
enhancing existing or the
provisionofnewqualitygreen
spaces, public art, public
leisure space and
environmental education;
xiii.development should protect
andimprovewaterqualityand
notincreasethecapacityload
on the River Lea culvert; and
xiv. consider opportunities for
inclusive use by the wider
community including publicly
accessible green space in
accordancewithPolicyLLP27.
B. University Campus: This area is
allocated for cultural uses and
higher education facilities and
supporting uses. Development
proposals should ensure:
i. quality design and materials
to complement the high
quality setting of the existing
Campus and of St Mary’s
Church; and
ii. a coordinated and accessible
quality pedestrian network
around St Mary's Church and
linking to the surrounding
streets (particularly Church
Street, Park Street and
Vicarage Street).TheCouncilwillupdatetheLutonTown
Centre Development Framework and /
or produce individual development
briefs to provide further site specific
guidance.
Footnote:
*Luton town centre’s description as a
‘Regional Centre’ is the terminology
adopted by the White Young Green’s
(WYG) Luton Retail Study Update 2015.
This is sourced from Venuescore, an
acknowledgedindustryrankingofretail
locations across the UK.
Green Belt
4.35The NPPF (paragraph 79) says that
the fundamental aim of the Green Belt is to
prevent urban sprawl, keeping land
permanently open, with the essential
characteristics of the Green Belt being its
opennessandpermanence.Italsosaysthat,
when undertaking a review of Green Belt
boundaries,localplanningauthoritiesshould:
ensure consistency with the Local Plan
strategy for meeting identified
requirements for sustainable
development;
not include land which is unnecessary
to keep permanently open;
wherenecessary,identifyintheirplans
areas of ‘safeguarded land’ between
the urban area and the Green Belt, in
ordertomeetlonger-termdevelopment
needs stretching well beyond the plan
period;
make clear that the safeguarded land
isnotallocatedfordevelopmentatthe
present time. Planning permission for
the permanent development of
safeguardedlandshouldonlybegranted
following a Local Plan review which
proposes the development;
satisfy themselves that Green Belt
boundaries will not need to be altered
at the end of the development plan
period; and
defineboundariesclearly,usingphysical
features that are readily recognisable
and likely to be permanent.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
274.36A Stage 1 Green Belt Study
(September 2014) has been undertaken by
the Council (in line with the requirements
oftheNPPF),whichreviewedtheGreenBelt
designationsandboundariesintheborough.
Theconclusionofthisstudyisthatnomajor
changes to the Green Belt should be made.
This is because the Green Belt areas serve
the national purposes of the Green Belt.
Given the level of unmet housing need in
Luton and scale of potential development
proposals on the edge of Luton, the Stage 1
Study concludes that a Stage 2 study be
undertakenonacross-boundarybasisifthere
were to be agreement between the
respective authorities to undertake such a
study.(8)The six Green Belt areas in Luton
identified on the policies map include:
Warden Hill
Stopsley Common
Oaket wood
Putteridge
Dane Street
Someries.
4.37As well as serving the key functions
of a Green Belt as set out in national policy,
Luton'sGreenBeltalsoprovidesasecondary
purpose for beneficial uses such as amenity
for the urban population and providing
opportunities for joined up planning across
the boundary for informal high quality
outdoor recreation and green space, which
islackinginLuton.TheGreenBeltareasalso
have other national and local designations
within Luton such as AONB, SSSI, County
Wildlife Site, Scheduled Monument and
RegisteredParksandGardens,whichprovide
habitat for wildlife, preserve historic sites
andtheirsettingandconservethelandscape.
4.38As the NPPF states, inappropriate
development is, by definition, harmful to
the Green Belt and should not be approved
except in very special circumstances. This
applies to all development, including
minerals and waste-related activities. The
Green Belt Policy reflects this approach.
Policy LLP4 - Green Belt
A. Within the areas defined as Green
Belt on the policies map planning
permission will not be granted for
inappropriate development:
Warden Hill
Stopsley Common
Oaket wood
Putteridge
Dane Street
Someries
B. Inappropriate development is by
definition, harmful to the Green
Belt. Only in very special
circumstances will inappropriate
development be permitted in the
Green Belt. Exceptions to
inappropriatedevelopmentareset
out in the National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF).
Strategic Allocations
4.39The NPPF (paragraph 157) requires
Local Plans to allocate sites to promote
development and the flexible use of land
and to bring forward new land where
necessary,andprovidedetailonform,scale,
access and quantum of development where
appropriate.
4.40TheLocalPlanmakeseightstrategic
allocations in the borough where the most
significant change will take place over the
plan period in terms of the increase of new
dwellings,jobs,retail ,andimprovementsto
the built and natural environment.
4.41Five of the strategic allocations are
located in the southern area of the Borough
with three strategic allocations located in
or adjacent to Luton Town Centre (Power
Court, Creative Quarter and High Town).
8 A joint Green Belt Study - which includes a Stage 2 study for Green Belt within Luton's boundary
- commissioned and agreed between Luton Borough Council and Central Bedfordshire District
Councils was published in April 2017.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
284.42The majority of the strategic
allocation sites are rolled forward and
updated from the previous Local Plan as in
the case of Butterfield Technology Park,
Land South of Stockwood Park and Century
Park (now combined with the London Luton
Airport Strategic Allocation) and these
represent the last remaining suitable
greenfield sites for strategic development.
Strategic Allocations at Napier Park, Power
Court, Creative Quarter, High Town and
MarshFarmareallpreviouslydevelopedsites
that are in need of redevelopment and
improvement. Given the economic viability
issues in the borough, as explained
previously, coupled with the extent of
environmental remediation required at a
numberofthesites,particularlyNapierPark
and Power Court, the quantum, mix of uses
and phasing of allocations on previously
developed land will need to be carefully
considered to reflect the outcome of more
detailed evidence that is currently being
prepared on economic viability and
remediation costs and consultation with
landowners and stakeholders.
4.43There are 8 strategic allocations
proposed for designation in this Plan:
Land South of Stockwood Park
LondonLutonAirport (includesCentury
Park)
Butterfield Green Technology Park
Napier Park
Power Court (Town Centre)
High Town
Creative Quarter (Town Centre)
Marsh Farm
Land South of Stockwood Park
4.44Land south of Stockwood Park,
boundedbytheM1motorwaytotheeastand
M1 spur to Junction 10a in the west, is
allocated as a prestige gateway business
development. Regard will need to be had to
theplanpoliciesasawholeand,inparticular
because of the chalk aquifer, sustainable
drainage and pollution matters in policies
LLP36andLLP38andtheadjacentlandscape
and heritage assets, which will need to be
considered with regard to the matters inpoliciesLLP29and LLP30.Theproposedsite
is accessible to the strategic road network
(e.g.Junction10aandNewAirportWay)and
alsooffersopportunitiesforimprovedpublic
transportlinkstothetowncentreandLuton
Airport Parkway railway stations. This will
beachievedbysafeguarding2haoflandfor
theprovisionofaParkandRidefacility.The
provision of the Park and Ride is not a
requirementoftheproposedB1businessuse.
Parking provision will accord with Policy
LLP32 (Parking) and the character and form
of development will respect relevant
requirements set out in Policy LLP25 (High
QualityDesign).TheB1officeuseonthesite
will accommodate a shortfall in provision to
meet an identified need for B1 office
accommodation over the plan period(9).
Followingthepublicexaminationoftheplan,
the relocation of Luton Town Football Club
andusesandpoliciesrelatingtothestrategic
allocation at Land South of Stockwood Park,
including the provision of a Park and Ride
facilitywillbeconsideredintheearlyreview
of the local plan.
PolicyLLP5-LandSouthofStockwood
Park Strategic Allocation
A.LandidentifiedonthePoliciesMap
south of Stockwood Park adjacent
to Junction 10a of the M1 is
allocated for a 14 ha prestige
gatewaydevelopmentaccordingto
the following scales:
i. B1 business use on 9.5 ha of
land to meet an identified
shortfallofofficeemployment
space over the plan period;
and
ii. the safeguarding of 2 ha of
land for a park and ride
facilitywhichwillallowscope
to secure enhanced public
transport to the town centre.
B. Subject to the following:
9 Employment Land Review Nathaniel Lichfield and Partners, paragraph 17
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
29i.developmentproposalsshould
be accompanied by a
comprehensivemasterplanfor
approval, which includes an
indicative layout and phasing
plan,sustainableconstruction
method and materials,
landscape and biodiversity
schemes and includes an
analysis of impacts from and
on the surrounding landscape
and heritage assets and sets
out details of how the Master
Planwillbeimplementedand
any identified impacts be
mitigated;
ii.thedevelopmentwillnottake
place until Highways England
is satisfied the proposals do
not have an unacceptable
impact on Junction 10a
improvements and upon the
M1 motorway, and shall not
compromisethesafetyofroad
users;
iii. public transport services are
securedtomeettheexpected
demand arising from the
development;
iv. the development will provide
a high quality southern
gateway to the town and will
use public art, green space,
built design, lighting and
topography to conserve and
enhance the appearance of
theadjoiningGreenBelt,Area
of Great Landscape Value,
County Wildlife Site, QE II
playing fields, the Registered
ParkandGardenofLutonHoo
and the Chilterns AONB;
v. the development will be of a
height and with lighting that
does not compromise the
safety of the operations of
London Luton Airport;
vi. the development will protect
features of nature
conservation interest and
heritage assets; and
vii. improving connectivity to
nearby cycle and footpaths
and existing public rights ofway and the rights of public
utility providers will be
safeguarded.
London Luton Airport
4.45London Luton Airport is a busy,
growingairportcurrentlyoperatingataround
10 million passengers per annum with a
capacity to manage up to 12.4mppa, and
with the planning consent 12/01400/FUL
allowing the airport to grow to an operating
capacity of 18mppa. This is supported by
Policy LLP6, which includes criteria to allow
additional proposals to be considered in
accordancewiththemostup-to-dateMaster
Plan (i.e. that Master Plan which is
applicable at the time of determining any
planning application). The airport provides
infrastructure and services for commercial
andbusiness-relatedaviation(in2012nearly
17% of airport passenger was for business
travel) as well as air cargo/freight and
generates significant employment for
residentsofthetownandsurroundingareas.
This includes aviation-related engineering
andservicesandotheraviation-relatedjobs.
The airport also provides and underpins
employment for a pool of workers and
businesses that use and rely on the airport
from neighbouring local authorities' areas,
inparticularBedfordshire,Hertfordshireand
Buckinghamshire.
4.46Luton lies within an airport
safeguarding area. Certain planning
applications will be the subject of
consultation with the airport operator and
there may be restrictions on the height or
detailed design of buildings and operation
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
30of cranes that impact on the flight path or
radar or on development that could create
a bird hazard as described in ODPM Circular
1/2003.
4.47Further guidance on safeguarding
issues, can be obtained from documents
includingthefollowingpublishedbytheCivil
Aviation Authority:
CAP738 Safeguarding of Aerodromes
CAP764 Policy and Guidelines on Wind
Turbines
CAP772WildlifeHazardManagementat
Aerodromes
4.48Inaddition,DepartmentforTransport
Circular 01/2010 relates to the Control of
Development in Public Safety Zones (PSZ).
PSZs are areas at either end of the runway,
within which development is restricted in
ordertocontrolthenumberofpeopleliving,
working or congregating on the ground in
thatareainordertominimisetheriskinthe
event of an accident on take-off or landing.
4.49Safeguardingmapsandmapsshowing
the PSZs are held by the Local Planning
Authority and the airport operator and are
available for reference. More complex
proposals may require modelling to be
carried out by the airport operator to
establish the impact of a development on
the airport operations.
4.50Whilst growth at London Luton
Airport is acknowledged, Policy LLP6 seeks
toencouragetheuseofsustainabletransport
measures in accordance with the airport's
own Surface Access Strategy, in preference
to the use of private motor vehicles. Whilst
it is recognised that there is a need for
airport car parking, future growth does not
necessarily require significant off-site car
parking provision. The on-site car parking
provision may provide adequate supply in
theshortterm.Thepolicydoesnotpreclude
furtheroff-siteprovision,butapplicantswill
be required to justify proposals in terms of
need (taking into account existing capacity
and occupancy). This approach has been
supported by the Court of Appeal (GPS v
SecretaryofStateforCommunitiesandLocal
Government C1/20014/1264 11th February
2015).4.51Policy LLP6 makes provision for the
airporttorespondpositivelytofuturegrowth
helpingtosafeguardLuton'skeysub-regional
economic contribution to jobs and wealth
creation while setting a clear environment
and transport framework with which to
regulate future growth. Century Park is
included within the strategic allocation for
a range of Use Class B employment
development with particular support for a
range of aviation and automotive
manufacturing-related uses to be delivered
adjacent to the airport and including hotel
provision. The Hotels Study 2015 concludes
that there will be a need for extra hotel
room provision of 1,030 rooms by 2020,
growing to potentially 1,830 rooms by 2030
and generated mostly by aviation-related
and business travel in the vicinity of the
airport. Given the strategic relationship
betweenCenturyPark,theairport(andtheir
substantialinclusionwithintheLutonAirport
Enterprise Zone designation - see Appendix
13), the sub-regional economy and local
transport network with connections to M1
Junction 10a via New Airport Way, it is
proposed that the Century Park site and
Wigmore Valley Park, as allocated in the
previousLocalPlan,areintegratedtogether
with the London Luton Airport Strategic
Allocation as a single strategic allocation.
Policy LLP6 - London Luton Airport
Strategic Allocation
The London Luton Airport Strategic
Allocation(approximately325hectares)
includes land within the airport
boundary, Century Park and Wigmore
Valley Park (as identified on the
PoliciesMap).Theallocationservesthe
strategic role of London Luton Airport
and associated growth of business and
industry,includingaviationengineering,
distributionandservicesectorsthatare
important for Luton, the sub-regional
economy, and for regenerating the
wider conurbation.
Airport Safeguarding
A. Developmentthatwouldadversely
affect the operational integrity or
safetyofLondonLutonAirportwill
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
31not be permitted. With respect to
operational and national security
considerations, this includes (but
isnotlimitedto)concernsoverthe
height of buildings, lighting, bird
activity, and proximity to Public
SafetyZones.RefertoPolicyLLP34
for the Local Plan policy for the
Public Safety Zones.
Airport Expansion
B. Proposals for expansion of the
airportanditsoperation,together
withanyassociatedsurfaceaccess
improvements, will be assessed
against the Local Plan policies as
a whole taking account of the
wider sub-regional impact of the
airport.Proposalsfordevelopment
will only be supported where the
following criteria are met, where
applicable/ appropriate having
regard to the nature and scale of
such proposals:
i. they are directly related to
airport use of development;
ii. they contribute to achieving
national aviation policies;
iii. are in accordance with an
up-to-dateAirportMasterPlan
published by the operators of
London Luton Airport and
adopted by the Borough
Council;
iv. they fully assess the impacts
of any increase in Air
Transport Movements on
surrounding occupiers and/or
local environment (in terms
of noise, disturbance, air
quality and climate change
impacts), and identify
appropriate forms of
mitigation in the event
significantadverseeffectsare
identified;
v. achieve further noise
reduction or no material
increase in day or night time
noise or otherwise cause
excessive noise including
ground noise at any time ofthe day or night and in
accordance with the airport's
most recent Airport Noise
Action Plan;
vi. include an effective noise
control, monitoring and
management scheme that
ensures that current and
future operations at the
airportarefullyinaccordance
with the policies of this Plan
and any planning permission
which has been granted;
vii. include proposals that will,
over time, result in a
significant diminution and
betterment of the effects of
aircraft operations on the
amenity of local residents,
occupiers and users of
sensitivepremisesinthearea,
throughmeasurestobetaken
tosecurefleetmodernisation
or otherwise;
viii.incorporate sustainable
transportation and surface
access measures that, in
particular, minimise use of
the private car, maximise the
use of sustainable transport
modes and seek to meet
modal shift targets, all in
accordance with the London
Luton Airport Surface Access
Strategy;
ix. incorporate suitable road
access for vehicles including
any necessary improvements
required as a result of the
development.
Airport-related Car Parking
C. Proposals for airport-related car
parking should be located within
theAirportStrategicAllocation,as
shown on the proposals plan
(excluding Century Park and
WigmoreValleyPark)andwillneed
todemonstratethattheproposals:
meetanobjectivelyassessedneed;
do not adversely affect the
adjoining highway network; and
will not lead to the detriment of
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
32the amenity of the area and
neighbouringoccupiers. Proposals
for airport-related car parking
outside this area will only be
permitted where: there is
demonstrated to be a long-term
car parking need that cannot be
met at the airport; they accord
with the sustainable development
principles as defined by the plan
as a whole; they relate well to the
strategic road network and do not
exacerbatetrafficcongestion;they
do not have an adverse impact on
amenity; and are in accordance
with the most recently approved
London Luton Airport Surface
Access Strategy.
Century Park
D. Development of Century Park will
be supported where proposals
make provision for office,
manufacturing and distribution
employment. Particular support
will be given and provision made
forengineeringandmanufacturing
forbothaerospaceandautomotive
purposes that demonstrate a need
to locate close to the airport. In
addition, a range of
accommodation types, including
small scale affordable B2 units to
facilitate the expansion and
relocation of existing Luton-based
businesses, new business start-ups
as well as significant inward
investments, will be allowed
provided that it does not generate
bad neighbour issues.
Warehousing-only developments
must demonstrate a need to
co-locate near the airport. Small
scale retail, related services and
leisure (as defined in Use Classes
A1toA3andD2)willbepermitted
in order to serve the needs,
primarily, of employees in the
area, as well as a hotel (Use Class
C1). The Council will require
proposals to be subject to a
comprehensive development brief
or Master Plan, which shall set outthe proportion and phases of
development and which shall
include the following:
i. details of the proposed
access, which shall be via the
extension of New Airport Way
(which connects the airport
to M1 J10A) and shall link
Percival Way through to
CenturyPark(asshownbythe
arrow on the Policies Map),
such access shall be designed
so as to ensure that no use is
made of Eaton Green Road to
provide access to Century
ParkortheAirport,exceptfor
public transport, cyclists,
pedestrians and in case of
emergency; and
ii. secure opportunities to link
site access via walking,
cycling and bridleways to the
wider network of routes via
Wigmore Valley Park and
access to the countryside to
the east and south.
Wigmore Valley Park
E. Wigmore Valley Park is integral to
theLondonLutonAirportStrategic
Allocation. In delivering
development and access under
clauseD(i.e.CenturyPark)above,
including any reconfiguration of
the land uses that may be
necessary, the following criteria
will need to be satisfied:
i. provision will be made to
ensure that the scale and
quality of open space and
landscaping in the area is
maintained and, if feasible,
ensure that there is a net
increase in open space
provision;
ii.bio-diversitywillbeenhanced
and improved within the
Borough;
iii. that the new open space to
replace Wigmore Valley Park
offers facilities of at least
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
33equal quality and is available
and accessible before any
development takes place on
the existing Wigmore Valley
Park;
iv. thelongtermmanagementof
open space, landscaping and
bio-diversity interest is
compatible with that for safe
airportoperationsandwillbe
of a high quality and secured
though a legal agreement
establishing long term
funding.
Design and Drainage
F. Development proposals for the
London Luton Airport Strategic
Allocation will ensure:
i. appropriate strategic
landscaping to be provided
both on and off-site, which
shall have regard to the
potentialforsignificantvisual
prominence within the wider
area of built development at
Century Park and which does
not increase risk to aviation
operations arising from
structures,lighting,birdstrike
or open water and having
regard to operational and
national security
considerations;
ii. the height and design of
buildingswillreflectthesite’s
rural fringe setting, its high
visibility from surrounding
countryside and its proximity
to London Luton Airport;
iii. provision is made for
sustainable drainage and the
disposal of surface water in
order to ensure protection of
the underlying aquifer and
prevent any harm occurring
to neighbouring and lower
land; and
iv. that development proposals,
where applicable /
appropriate will fully assess
the impacts upon heritageassets and their setting, and
should be designed to avoid
harm to the setting of any
heritageassets. Proposalswill
be considered in line with
Policy LLP30 (historic
environment).
Butterfield Green Technology Park
4.52The site contains high value,
knowledge-based businesses such as Hitech
InstrumentsandMTLInstruments,aswellas
some University of Bedfordshire uses, the
EnterpriseHubandtheBasepointInnovation
Centre. 40% of the overall developable site
hasbeendevelopedtodateandprovidesthe
onlycredibleandavailablelandwithinLuton
to attract knowledge-based activities,
includingadvancedmanufacturing(suchthe
arrival of MTL Instruments in 2008).
4.53The site has been assessed against
uses other than employment due to its
long-term vacancy (Employment Land
Review). The study concluded that
Butterfield Green Technology Park is, and
should remain, a good quality employment
site.
4.54TheanalysisindicatesthatLutonwill
have a shortage of land for B1 office
premises, which often also accommodates
R&D activities. This may include applied
researchanddevelopmentinvolvingproduct
innovation and advanced manufacturing
processes requiring B1c light industry
facilities to be provided. In addition, the
retention of land at Napier Park by Vauxhall
hasincreasedpressuretosecurealternative
opportunities for other B Class uses,
especially B2.
Issues to address during the plan:
4.55The majority of the site has
been undeveloped for a long period of
time arising from the subdued national
economy.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
344.56The Butterfield area represents
the only opportunity to provide a park
and ride facility on the A505 gateway
into Luton. The policy therefore
safeguardslandrequired,consideredto
be circa 1 hectare, having regard to
preliminary studies on the
implementation of park and ride in
Luton.
4.57TheproximityofCountyWildlife
Sites and the Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty, including the setting of
the Registered Park and Garden at
Putteridge Bury, requires a thorough
control of densities and landscaping.
Policy approach:
4.58Commercial market views were
thatthissitewouldattractdevelopment
when the property market recovers.
Recent enquiries by large employers
supportthisview.However,tostimulate
themarket,someflexibilityispermitted
for high quality B2, where compatible
with the Technology Park, and also a
limitednumberofplotsforhighquality
B8 provision contained physically and
visually within the site.
4.59Builtdevelopmentshouldbelow
rise and low density in order to retain
theessentiallyopennatureofthearea,
with generally no more than 35% of the
plot area occupied by buildings.
4.60Existing natural features and
rights of way should be retained and,
where possible, enhanced.
4.61Theexistingdevelopmentofthe
Innovation Centre and Enterprise Hub
areexamplesofsustainabledesignand
should be replicated by new
development to reduce their impact on
the natural environment as much as
possible.
4.62Appropriate public transport
facilities must be incorporated into the
detailed development proposals.
Policy LLP7 - Butterfield Green
Technology Park
The undeveloped land (23 hectares) at
Butterfield Green is allocated for:
thedevelopmentofhighqualityB1
and B2 uses that are compatible
with the technology park concept.
This will provide opportunities for
both inward investment and the
expansion and relocation of
existing businesses within Luton’s
administrative boundary;
high quality B8 use, where the
scale and nature of the use are
compatible with the technology
park concept, will be only
acceptable on the undeveloped
2.45hectareplotinthenorth-east
corner of the site and on 6.59
hectaresoflandtothewestofthe
Business Base within the existing
hedgerow/tree feature;
support will also be given to the
provisionofaparkandridefacility
to mitigate traffic in the borough
(on circa 1 hectare of land; and
otherusessuchassmallscaleretail
(A1 and A3) and leisure uses such
as a gym (Class D2) to serve the
development and support the
overall success of Butterfield as a
modern Technology Park will also
be permitted. All development
proposed will be of a quality of
design compatible with the
technology park.
A. Development should accord with
the Spatial Development Strategy,
other policies in the plan and
follow the site-specific
requirements:
i.developmentproposalsshould
be accompanied by an
indicative masterplan to
demonstrate how each plot
can be delivered without
prejudicingthedeliveryofthe
wider site requirements
referredtoin(a),(b),(c),and
(d) above;
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
35ii. new development shall have
regardtoand,wherepossible,
replicate or exceed the high
benchmark of sustainability
achieved by existing
developments at Butterfield
and be an exemplar of high
quality and energy efficient
modern development in the
town;
iii. materials should reference
those used in the existing
structures and create
continuity with the existing
development;
iv. proposals must achieve a
sense of spaciousness that
reflects the technology park
concept and for this reason
buildingsshouldgenerallynot
occupy more than 35% of the
plot area but the precise
percentage achieved will be
determined by the quality of
thedesignofthedevelopment
taking account of proposed
layout, landscaping and
positioning of buildings;
v. access to the site should be
provided by the existing
accessfromtheA505(Hitchin
Road);
vi. integrated sustainable
drainage systems are
particularly appropriate for
this site;
vii. existing landscape features
such as hedgerows and ponds
shall be retained and
opportunities taken to
enhance such features where
practicable and may include
minor alteration or
replacement elsewhere in
order to achieve this and
accommodate infrastructure
requirements;
viii.the views from the adjacent
Stopsley Common and Oaket
WoodCountyWildlifeSiteand
the setting of the Registered
ParkandGardenatPutteridge
Bury should be protected
throughsensitiveplantingandlandscaping. Typically,
buildings will be restricted to
two storeys, increased to
threestoreyswhere itcanbe
demonstrated that the
development will not
adversely impact upon views
into the site;
ix. existing rights of way shall be
safeguarded or redirected as
necessary. Opportunities to
promotepedestrianandcycle
access to the wider area will
be addressed where this is
practicable;
x. a plot of land sufficient for a
new 450 space Park and Ride
facility to be provided near
the entrance of the existing
InnovationCentre*inorderto
mitigatetrafficintheborough
andpromotesustainabletrips
to/from the development.
This land will be safeguarded
for 5 years following transfer
of the title to the Council to
enable delivery of the Park &
Ride scheme. The transfer of
the land will occur when 30%
(from the position at January
2017) of the remaining
undeveloped technology park
is developed. If the facility is
not built within 5 years from
the transfer date, the land
will transfer back to the
landowneratnilcost.Subject
to its provision, additional
S106 contributions towards
off-site transport
infrastructure or funding of
the facility from within
Butterfieldwillnotbesought;
and
xi. B2 and B8 elements will only
be permitted where the
developer can demonstrate
that these proposals will not
leadtodemonstrableharmby
wayofnoise,vibration,visual
impact (including lighting),
and any noxious emissions or
potential contamination.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
36Footnote:
* Or at an alternative location to be
proposed and agreed with the Council
in the indicative masterplan.
Napier Park
4.63NapierParkisthelargestbrownfield
site in Luton, which would contribute
considerablytothegrowthofthetownwhen
redeveloped.
4.64Around 23 hectares of the former
VauxhallPlantlendsitselftoberedeveloped
for housing, offices, light industry, retail,
leisure, tourist accommodation and car
parking. The reacquisition of a 7.58 ha plot
by GM Vauxhall for operational reasons, and
its implications for delivering B class
accommodation, will be kept under review
and be the subject of the early plan review.
4.65The Council has already delivered
newaccesstothenorthoftherailwaytracks
onto the Luton Airport Parkway Railway
Station, to ensure full accessibility to the
railserviceslinkingtocentralLuton,London,
the Midlands, the wider region and beyond.
The proximity of the Luton - Dunstable
guided busway will provide excellent
accessibilitytotheareasofLuton,Dunstable
and Houghton Regis, the main town centre
transport hub and London Luton Airport.
Key issues
4.66Thelanddropssignificantly:the
differencebeingapproximately140feet
of slope between the top western side
andthebottomeasternsideofthesite.
4.67Thelandisaseriesofplatforms
raisedaboveKimptonRoadand thereis
likely to be difficulty in providing
accessible, convenient access.
4.68Vehicular access will only be
permissible off Kimpton Road, which
will involve careful management of
traffic implications at peak hours
between the residential elements,service and employment traffic, while
still allowing access for emergency
vehicles.
4.69A covenant limits the location
of housing to the eastern side of the
site.
Policy approach
4.70The key aim for this site is to
deliverhighqualityhousing,officesand
light industry, including a new
neighbourhoodcentrecomposedmostly
of convenience retail units clustered
around a vibrant public space to serve
the needs of the new community.
4.71The proximity of Luton Airport
Parkway railway station allows leisure
and hotel uses to be delivered on the
site.
4.72Flood risk mitigation such as
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) is
required due to the flood risk issues of
the site.
4.73The public space should be
vibrant,safeandwelllinkedtotherest
of the town.
4.74Developmentshouldcomplement
andnothaveanadverseeffectuponthe
vitality or viability of Luton Town
Centre.
Policy LLP8 - Napier Park
Napier Park is a brownfield site of
around 25 hectares, located on the
former Vauxhall car plant. The site is
allocatedforamixeduseneighbourhood
developmentincludingB1businessuses
with particular support for B1a offices
and B1c light industry as well as small
scale, affordable B2 accommodation.
Provision will be made for between 600
and 1,300 residential units with a
convenience retail-led Neighbourhood
Centre and a hotel.
A. Development proposals should be
accompanied by a comprehensive
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
37masterplan for approval, which
includes an indicative layout and
phasing plan and Landscape Plan
and sets out details of how these
will be achieved.
B. Development should accord with
the Spatial Development Strategy,
other policies in the plan and
follow these site-specific
requirements:
i. a new neighbourhood centre
focused around a vibrant
public space, including green
spaces, with safe and direct
walking and cycling routes to
LutonAirportParkwayRailway
Station and the town centre;
ii. integrated Sustainable
Drainage System (SuDS) and/
orotherappropriatemeasures
will be required to mitigate
flood risk;
iii. development should respect
and minimise its impact on
the local landscape including
Hart Hill and the nearby
cemetery;
iv. parking and service access
should bewellintegratedinto
the design of the scheme
away from the main public
square or on underground
parking;
v. offices and industrial uses
shall be of a high quality
contemporary design and
energy efficiency in
accordance with Policies
LLP25 and LLP37;
vi. a range of housing densities
appropriatetothesiteshould
be provided to meet the
housing need of Luton’s
community;
vii. proposals should make best
useoftheGuidedBuswayand
LutonAirportParkwayRailway
Station and also provide
public transport and walking
and cycling routes within the
site to serve the new
residential and employment
areas to encouragesustainable travel patterns
with particular regard to the
need for disabled access; and
viii.a new access road shall be
provided off Kimpton Road
into the site and be designed
for cars, buses, walking and
cycling.
Power Court
4.75The Power Court site is located on a
disused power station and prior to this was
a residential neighbourhood. The cooling
towersoftheelectricworkswerealandmark
in the town until the 1970s when the site
wasredevelopedforamixofmanufacturing
and general industrial uses. The site is now
vacant with the exception of a small
warehouse currently in use.
4.76Thesiteisstrategicallyimportantas
itconsistsof7hectaresadjacenttothemain
shopping area of Luton Town Centre and is
a key gateway to the town from the east.
Thesitebenefitsfromexcellentaccessibility
in terms of its proximity to the main modal
transport hub of the town (formed by the
guided bus, the bus interchange and the
main train station), the university campus
and the eastern road route between the
town centre and London Luton Airport.
4.77Therefore Power Court is a major
redevelopment opportunity within Luton
Town Centre, which needs to be brought
back into effective use over the plan period
to help deliver the strategic objectives of
the Plan. Any new development on this site
should deliver a high quality scheme that
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
38manages to improve the image of Luton,
whilstrespectingtheroleofStMary’sChurch
and its grounds immediately to the south.
Key issues
4.78The area is exposed to fluvial
flooding from the River Lea and pluvial
flooding. The Chapel Viaduct/ Stuart
StreetCriticalDrainageAreaandsurface
waterfloodingmapsshowtheextentto
be much larger than the fluvial impact
alone (Surface Water Management Plan
2013).
4.79The British Geological Survey
groundwater flooding susceptibility
maps also show a high to very high risk
of fluvial (River Lea) and pluvial
flooding (e.g. Chapel Viaduct Stuart
Street Critical Drainage Area, 'CHAST').
4.80Currently the ring road is
perceived as a barrier to pedestrian
movementand the site is consideredto
be disconnected from the town centre.
4.81Contaminated land from
previous uses might impact on
development viability.
4.82The River Lea runs under a
culvertandcurrentlydoesnotmeetthe
quality standard of the Water
Framework Directive.
4.83The Retail Study Refresh (2012
- Update 2015) identifies that the site
is able to accommodate a current need
for circa 3,393sq.m. net convenience
retailfloorspace.TheEmploymentLand
Review (2013) identifies the site as
appropriate for a large mixed use
scheme,providingalsoamodestamount
of offices.
Policy approach
4.84The main objectives for Power
Court are to maximise the
redevelopment opportunity of the site
and its important location through the
delivery of a mix of uses and in a formthat complements the historical town
centre and makes the site an integral
part of it.
4.85To establish strong pedestrian
links with other parts of the area,
creating a more pedestrian oriented
environment.
4.86Make the mostofthe RiverLea,
includingopportunitiesfordeculverting
the river, which could become an
attractive feature of the town centre
asarestoredlandscapefeatureandpart
of the identity and history of Luton;
while providing an efficient flood
defence and bio retention system, and
improving water quality.
4.87Opportunities to accommodate
the convenience retail needs of the
town and expand the housing and
business supply in the town centre,
through sustainable construction.
4.88The Town Centre Development
Framework (and its proposed review –
see Policy LLP3) provides background
information for proposals at Power
Court.
Policy LLP9 - Power Court
Power Court is a brownfield site of
around7hectareslocatedinLutonTown
Centre’snortheastgatewayboundedto
the north by the route of the
Luton-DunstableGuidedBuswayandthe
railway line and to the south by St
Mary's Road.
Power Court is a key site for achieving
regeneration objectives of the plan,
which includes providing a sustainable
mixedusedevelopment,theMasterPlan
and future consent, which will extend
the primary shopping area to improve
the town centre retail offer and as an
accessible, convenient and attractive
location in which to live, shop and be
entertained. Power Court will deliver a
mix of town centre uses. The following
uses are all acceptable in principle as
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
39components of a mixed use
development:housing,convenienceand
comparison retail, leisure, cultural and
entertainmentusesandB1offices.This
development will enhance the offer of
the town to residents and students of
Bedfordshire University and also the
wider community, as well as visitors,
and tourists.
Land at Power Court, as shown on the
Policies Map, is allocated for town
centre uses in a mixed use
redevelopment. Any scheme should
includearound600dwellingsandaneed
for circa 3,393sq.m. net retail
convenience floorspace. The site could
provide for a proportion of the
borough’s overall identified need for
comparison floorspace within the town
centre.
A. Development should accord with
the Spatial Development Strategy,
other policies in the plan and
address the following
requirements:
i. proposals should be
accompanied by a
comprehensive masterplan
that includes indicative
layout, materials, access,
massing, uses and phasing,
and the proposed delivery
mechanism;
ii. proposals should include
measures to ensure that
development on the site is
accessible from the Town
Centre Shopping Area and is
perceived as being a part of
the town centre;
iii. development should respect
and enhance the setting and
context of the site and its
high visual profile. High
quality design should be
integral to the scheme to
complement adjacent
landmark buildings, adjacent
vistas and the public realm,
theUniversityofBedfordshire
CampusandtheUKCentrefor
CarnivalArtsanddevelopmentshould preserve, and seek
opportunitiestoenhance,the
character and appearance of
the Plaiters Lea Conservation
Area and the setting of the
Grade I listed St Mary’s
Church;
iv. Make more effective use of
theRiverLeaasanaccessible
strategicgreeninfrastructure
forthetownprovidinghabitat
and an accessible historic
landscape feature, and
consider options for
deculverting and redirecting
the River Lea channel, where
feasible, to link with nearby
walkingandcyclingnetworks;
v. proposals will need to
mitigate flood risk issues of
the site by integrating
Sustainable Drainage Systems
(SuDS) and/ or other
reasonablysuitablemitigation
measures;
vi. ensure that development
elevations maintain the high
visual profile of the site and
maintain views to other
adjacent vistas in the town
(e.g.HartHillandtherailway
line); and
vii. land decontamination and
works affecting the River Lea
should be carried out in line
with the best practice
available and be in
accordance with Policy LLP38
to avoid any harmful impact
on the water resources.
High Town
4.89HighTownisoneofthemorehistoric
areas of Luton and is situated immediately
to the north of the town centre with
excellent access to Luton Railway Station
and bus interchange and the rest of the
town. Originally connected to the Town
Centre, High Town developed as a small
settlement in 1815 and is one of the older
areas of Luton. The area grew rapidly and,
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
40accordingtothe1851census,wasthefastest
growing area of the town in terms of
population, hosting one sixth of the total
population of Luton. Most of the original
inhabitants of High Town worked in the hat
industry in the town centre or in a few of
the larger houses in High Town itself, which
accommodated the domestic element of
Luton's hat industry with modest workshops
attached to residential houses and small
makers producing goods to sell to central
warehouses. High Town was split from the
Town Centre by the construction of two
railway lines in 1858 and 1862. These
constructions marked the boom of the hat
industry in Luton and led to a cluster of
purpose built hat factories located near the
railway station on Midland Road and Dudley
Street. Walking along High Town Road is like
takingastepbackthroughtime.Theparade
of shops retains the original urban fabric of
the area and provides old remnants of an
active and crowded high street. A strong
rhythm of elevations and chimneys, along
with the richness of the roof lines and the
polychrome decorative elements of the
MethodistChurch,ChurchHallandotherkey
unlisted buildings, give the street a very
strong identity providing a good example of
the town’s Edwardian and Victorian legacy.
4.90The central part of High Town is
composed of a Victorian and Edwardian
paradeofshopsdesignatedastheHighTown
Road Conservation Area, with a distinctive
character and some buildings with
architectural merit. The parade of shops
accommodates specialist retailers,
restaurants and pubs. The area is suffering
from relatively poor trade and some empty
premises, however the Council has recently
invested in environmental improvements to
the area and funded the temporary use of
empty shops. This investment is beginning
to bring life back into the area, however it
isinneedoffurthersignificantprivatesector
investmenttofullyrealisetheopportunities
of the area as a vibrant historic mixed use
neighbourhood with opportunities for
start-up businesses and creative activities -
similar to and complementing the Creative
QuarteroftheTownCentre,whichisinclose
proximity.4.91A High Town Team has been formed
in this area and is working alongside the
community to devise projects and
programmes to improve the image of the
area and attract funding.
Key Issues:
4.92Ahealthcheckonthevitalityof
local retail centres (Luton Retail Study
Refresh 2012 - Update 2015)
recommended that High Town be
designated as a Neighbourhood Centre
because a lack of facilities like a bank
or post office and an anchor store do
not allow this centre to be a viable
District Centre.
4.93Itsproximitytothefacilitiesand
morevaluableassetsofthetowncentre
hinders investment in the area. In
particular, there is also an under
provision of open space (Green Space
Strategy Review 2015) and addressing
this would also make the area more
attractive to investment.
4.94The ward experiences many
problems with anti-social behaviour, in
particular, but not limited to, 'The
Paths'; a post war housing area.
4.95There are a number of derelict
and underused industrial buildings,
interspersed with land currently used
forcar parking, that are detrimental to
the vibrancy of High Town that need to
be brought back into effective use.
4.96Given the current and previous
industrial uses of the area, there is
potential for contaminated land.
4.97Sections of High Town are
locatedontheUpperLeaChalkAquifer.
Policy approach:
4.98The vision for the area is to
create a more sustainable
residential-ledmixeduseneighbourhood
including small scale offices /
workshops, live-work units (with
opportunities for start-up business and
creativeactivities)andincreasedretail
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
41provision, which will enhance the area
with better pedestrian access and
permeability, more public open space
and an enhanced natural environment.
4.99A Supplementary Planning
Document (SPD) was prepared in 2007
for the whole of the High Town Action
Area (Local Plan 2001-2011). This SPD
has been replaced by the High Town
Masterplan (adopted September 2016),
which explains how the approach in
Policy LLP10 can be achieved.
4.100 The land between the
ConservationAreaandHitchinRoadhas
been subject to further detailed
guidance through the High Town East
Village Design Codes 2009, which is
retained as SPD.
4.101 High Town is proposed as a
Neighbourhood Centre in the 'centre
hierarchy' (see Policy LLP21) and, as
such can, accommodate town centre
uses appropriate to the scale and size
of the area. However, its proximity to
the Town Centre could allow for
substantial town centre uses to be
located in the area easily accessible to
the station, provided they have been
subject to a sequential test.
4.102 The aim of the HighTown
Masterplan is to contribute to making
High Town a more vibrant
neighbourhood, improving the overall
image and perception of the area. High
Town has a strong identity of place,
whichtheMasterplanaimstobuildupon
while also strengthening the mix and
viability of employment, residential,
live/work and creative industries.
4.103 The Masterplan suggests the
use of ground floor units as live/work
spaces,studiosandoffices,whilevacant
and underused sheds and workshop
buildingstotheeastoftheConservation
Area might be redeveloped to include
housing and facilities such as
showrooms, galleries and workshops.
Themarketbaselinehasconfirmedthis
as feasible, identifying the High Town
area an appropriate location for a new
high quality residential livingenvironment, which could include a
complementary mix of employment,
retail and commercial uses.
Policy LLP10 - High Town
The High Town Strategic Allocation is
an area located to the north of the
Luton Railway Station as identified on
the Policies Map.
The vision for the area is to create a
sustainable, vibrant and historic
neighbourhood destination delivered
through residential-led mixed use
development whilst preserving and
seeking opportunities to enhance the
historical environment and heritage
assets including small scale offices /
workshops, live-work units and
increased retail provision, which will
enhance the area including increased
footfall, better pedestrian access and
permeability, more public open space
and an enhanced natural environment.
It is expected that, over the plan
period, the area can accommodate at
least 750* new residential units and
around 350 jobs, taking account of the
following:
A. To ensure the vision is realised,
development proposals must
achieve appropriate densities,
height, permeability, mix of uses;
includinghousing,employmentand
shopsaswellasnicherolessuchas
forthecreativeindustryandscope
for art and open spaces in the
public realm; in the three key
areas of change in High Town (Old
Bedford Road Block, East Village
and 'The Paths') and delivering key
infrastructure and environmental
improvements. The area benefits
from the proximity to the town
centre,whichoffersmanyfacilities
andservices:howevertheneedfor
recreationalfacilities,inparticular
for young people, has been
identifiedandshouldbeimproved.
TheHighTownMasterplanSPDand
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
42East Village Design Codes SPD
explainhowanappropriatequality
of development can be achieved.
B. High Town is situated on a Source
Protection Zone 1, as it sits on an
aquifer, very susceptible to the
potential effects of pollution.
Planning applications will need to
be accompanied by a
Contamination Risk Assessment,
addressingtheprevioususesofthe
site and the resultingpotentialfor
contamination as required by the
Environment Agency.
C. The area could be susceptible to
surfacewaterfloodingandassuch
any development will need to be
in compliance with the
recommendations set in the
Surface Water Management Plan
and Luton Local Flood Risk
Management Strategy.
D. Development proposals that
improve design, safety and visual
interpretation of the built
environment,acleardistinctionof
publicandprivaterealmandwhich
achieves better integration with
walking and cycling routes linking
toopenspace,thetowncentreand
the wider surroundings, will be
encouraged.
Footnote:
*TheJuly2016SHLAAindicatescapacity
for c840 dwelling units in High Town.
Creative Quarter
4.104 The Creative Quarter is situated
betweenLutonRailwayStationandtheMain
Shopping Area of Luton Town Centre. It
includes the Plaiter’s Lea ConservationArea
with many buildings of architectural merit
andremnantsofthetraditionalhatindustry
and is the main gateway to the town centre
from the north.4.105 The current uses in the area are
predominately eating and drinking
establishments, leisure and very limited
retail. Within the Hat Factory Arts Centre
thereareanumberofdigitalmediaagencies
with international reach, several smaller
organisations and freelancers, a recording
studio and the region's specialist film and
television studio facility. In the Mill Yard
Collective co-working spaces, independent
artists and filmmakers are housed alongside
startupcharitiesandlargercompanies.Two
newmusicvenueshaveopenedandwillhelp
reinvigorate the night-time economy. The
Bute Mills is back in use accommodating the
Youthscape charity, alongside the School of
Art and Design (University of Bedfordshire)
accommodatedintheformerWalterGurney
& Sons Hat Factory and in the Alexon
Building. All of these facilities are in a
strategicallyimportantlocation.Thecoreof
this area is in the main pedestrian corridor
between the railway station, multi-modal
transporthubandthemainshoppingareain
Luton.
Key Issues:
4.106 The area has a number of
derelictandblightedsitesandbuildings
whichneedtobebroughtbackintouse,
e.g. through the use of creative means
such as pop-up shops.
4.107 The area is mostly covered by
the Plaiter’s Lea Conservation Area.
Historic England's historic area
assessment identified the importance
of the surviving architectural fabric of
the area including many of the
remainingbuildingsandroadsandtheir
role in the historical and commercial
development of Luton arising from the
hat manufacturing era. Many of these
heritage assets are in a state of
disrepair. The assessment also
recognised the key issues in the area
relating to demolition, insensitive
alterations, deterioration and
development pressures. This made
recommendations for an effective
appraisal and management plan to be
drawn up for the area to better
understand the impact of piecemeal
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
43development and applications for
change. The Council will work with
Historic England on how to ensure that
the heritage of the area is adequately
documented and refreshed in the
future.
4.108Thescale,extentandcondition
ofthebuildingsimmediatelymarkthem
(and this area) out as being notably
different from other elements of the
town. Theconcentrationofsuchlarge,
multi-storey, hatting premises within a
small geographical area gives this area
character and uniqueness that need to
be replicated and also protected from
comprehensive development.
4.109 Most of the area is crossed by
the River Lea, which currently runs
underground, and issues with the
structural soundness of the culvert and
current poor quality of the river need
to be taken in account.
Policy approach:
4.110 This key gateway is to be
transformed into the Creative Quarter
ofthetownwithathrivingcaféculture
and night-time economy,
appropriate mix of restaurants,
galleries,retail,educationfacilitiesand
creative businesses and an excellent
qualitypublicrealm.Retailwillbesmall
scaleshops(includingpermittedflexible
use A1, A2, A3, B1 and D2) to serve
visitors, local residents and businesses,
with the exception of the Northern
Gateway where the scale of retail
provision for convenience and
comparison goods will help to ensure
that the retail role of the Town Centre
is supported.
4.111 The Council will favour
development that celebrates and
enhances a very special context by
drawingfromitsstrongcharacterwhile
addressingthepoorqualityofthepublic
realmandthelackofenclosureofmany
sites in the area.
4.112 This area is already well
established for the creative
industries that have always gravitatedaround the Hat Factory and now also
aroundMillYard.TheEmploymentLand
Review (2013), using EEFM projections
and historical trends in the region and
localmarket,foreseesthatjobsrelated
to art, entertainment and media will
grow by more than 40% (more than
1,000 new jobs).
4.113 ThepresenceoftheUniversity
of Bedfordshire and its department of
Media and Design, alongside the UK
CentreforCarnivalArts,createsfurther
opportunitiesforcreativeindustriesand
education related development.
4.114 The presence of restaurants
and pubs (including venues such as the
Hat Factory Arts Centre providing a
theatre, gallery and basement live
venue) also make this area suitable to
encourage a vibrant night-time
economy. Creative businesses globally
arealsoseenastheconduittoathriving
café culture and to active and vibrant
public spaces.
4.115Newpublicopenspaceswillbe
encouragedatthestationforecourtand
on Bute Street.
4.116 A pedestrian friendly
environment and opportunities to
pedestrianise most of Bute Street in
compliance with the Town Centre
Development Framework should be
encouraged to create a vibrant
environment. Delivery of additional
residentialaccommodationissupported
where it would contribute to
comprehensivemixed-usedevelopment
within the allocation.
4.117 Within the creative quarter,
threesubareashavebeenidentifiedfor
theirpotentialtoberegenerated.Given
thesubstantialamountofdevelopment
that could be delivered within these
areas, specific policies have been
drafted to guide their future
development:
1.TheNorthernGateway:aretailled
development to the north of the
Mall;
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
442. TheStationGateway:aresidential
and office led development to the
north of the site;
3. North of St George Square: a
leisureandretailleddevelopment
to the north of St. George Square.
4.118 The opportunity to
accommodate most of the convenience
retail need of the borough in this area
will also be encouraged in accordance
with the specific policies for the
sub-areas.
Policy LLP11 - Creative Quarter
The Council will work with developers,
landowners and stakeholders to
transform the Creative Quarter into a
thriving mixed use area with 600
residential units, a café culture and
night-time economy, appropriate mix
ofrestaurants,galleries,retail,leisure,
education facilities and creative
businesses and an excellent quality
public realm.
A. Proposals for the Creative Quarter
as identified on the town centre
inset map and comprising the 1.
Northern Gateway, 2. Station
Gateway and 3. North of St
Georges Square development
areas, will be supported where
they deliver the following
requirements as far as they are
material to the application:i. improve the mix of uses,
including education facilities
related to art, media and
design(mixofA1,A3,A4,D1,
D2, C3, B1);
ii. deliver flexible use of the
space to maintain future
viability and activity;
iii. deliver the conversion of
empty premises into studios
and spaces for artists,
work-live units and creative
businesses;
iv. enhance the night-time
economy;
v. maintain and enhance the
access;
vi. increase the level of
connectivity in the area and
ensure public accessibility
across the areas at all times;
vii. Improve the quality of the
public realm and, in
particular, the link between
the Railway Station and the
Mall;
viii.make effective use of
opportunities to extend use
outsidegroundfloorlevele.g.
cafés and the night-time
economy;
ix. ensure that development
design respects and
complementsthecharacterof
buildings and spaces in the
areaand,wherepossible,the
original urban grain of this
historical area; and
x. development proposals must
be shaped by heritage
considerations at the outset,
and the Council will carry out
an appraisal of the Plaiters
Lea Conservation Area
including heritage assets at
riskin accordancewith Policy
LLP30 (Historic Environment)
in order to assist with this
requirement.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
451. Northern Gateway
The area is composed of approximately
0.5hectaresoflandimmediatelytothe
north of The Mall allocated for a
retail-led comprehensive scheme.
B.ProposalsfortheNorthernGateway
will be acceptable if they comply
with the criteria set above and
where they deliver the following:
i. retail floorspace (including
flexible use classes A1-A3, B1
and D2), market, residential
accommodation and
complementary mixed-use
development (C3, A4);
ii. improve the north-south links
and maintain east-west
connections to Library Road
and St George’s Square;
iii. improve the quality of the
entrance to The Mall through
highqualityarchitecturethat
enhances the quality of the
visualexperienceandphysical
connectivitytoTheMallwhile
also conserving and seeking
opportunities to enhance the
Plaiters Lea Conservation
Area. Applications must be
accompanied by an
assessmentofthesignificance
oftheheritageassetsandhow
they may be affected and
conserveand,wherepossible,
takeopportunitiestoenhance
the Plaiters Lea Conservation
Area;
iv. facilitate the creation of a
new public space on Bute
Street;
v. deliver uses at the ground
floor that extend
appropriately into the public
realm, in particular around
the new public space (Bute
Square).2. Station Gateway
This area includes approximately 1.5
hectares of land located between the
railway station and the Plaiter’s Lea
Conservation Area and is allocated for
a residential led scheme.
C. Proposals for the area will need to
comply with the general policies
of the area and with the following
criteria:
i. redevelopthe train stationto
provide a well-designed
facility with an attractive,
safe, sheltered environment
for travellers, visitors and
staff;
ii. maintain and improve
accessibility to the transport
facilities and to High Town;
iii. improve the quality, safety
and comfort of the pubic
realm including opportunities
for public space and a
pedestrian friendly
environment;
iv.respectandenhancelandmark
buildingsandkeyviewsinthe
area;
v. contribute to the delivery of
a substantial amount of
residential units, in the form
of contemporary flats, and
offices and ancillary hotel,
leisureandlimitedretail(C3,
B1andC1,D1,D2,A1,A2,A3,
A5); and
vi.providecarparkinginsuitable
discreet locations.
3. North of St George's Square
The area to the north of St George’s
Square and bounded to the north by
Guildford Street is allocated for mixed
use development including leisure,
culturalandretailusestoreinforceand
complement the existing offer of the
town centre.
D. Proposals for the area will need to
comply with the general policies
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
46of the Creative Quarter and with
the following criteria:
i. incorporate leisure, cultural
andretailuses(D1,D2,A1-A5)
andmakeeffectiveuseofthe
River Lea environment to
enhance the character of
development where
appropriate and feasible;
ii. propose retail uses at ground
floor that contribute to the
café culture already
established;
iii. is of a scale and design which
complements and enhances
thehistoricaltownscape,built
character of the area and
opportunities to improve the
skyline;
iv. improves the safety, comfort
and ease of pedestrian
movements linking the area
with the wider town centre;
and
v. delivers opportunities for
education establishments to
locate in the area.
Marsh Farm
4.119 Marsh Farm, (within the Northwell
ward)isthebiggesthousingestateinLuton.
Developedinthelate1960sandearly1970s,
it is designed upon cul-de-sacs arrangement
of properties, the segregation of vehicular
andpedestrianroutesandhasoversizedwide
roads flanked by underused lawn areas.
4.120 Marsh Farm is characterised by
severe problems of multiple deprivation,
including unemployment, poverty, lack of
skills, poor educational achievement, and
poor health.
4.121Extensiveregenerationhasimproved
thecentralpartoftheneighbourhood,which
has been provided with a brand new library
andtheatreinastateoftheartnewschool,
Lea Manor, and new community centre and
facilitiesatFuturesHouse.Theareabenefits
from existing and potential walking andcycling routes connecting local places and
new amenity spaces with opportunities to
link up with a network of Green
Infrastructure extending north to the wider
open countryside.
4.122 Theconsiderablepopulationofthis
neighbourhood,theexistingservicesandthe
potential for further regeneration have
broughtrecognition,confirmedbytheRetail
Study (WYG 2012), that Marsh Farm should
bedesignatedasaDistrictCentreinthenew
hierarchyoflocalcentresestablishedinthis
Plan.Assuch,itcouldattractinvestmentto
expand the retail offer that would cater for
local needs and also attract shopping
journeys from a wider catchment area.
Policy LLP12 - Marsh Farm
Development proposals for the central
area of Marsh Farm as identified on the
PoliciesMapandfortherearrangement
of the housing estate’s layout shall be
accompanied by a comprehensive
masterplan with an indicative layout
and phasing plan setting out detail of
how it will be delivered.
A. Development should accord with
the Spatial Development Strategy,
other policies in the plan and
follow the site-specific
requirements:
i. a foodstore of around
1,000sq.m. shall be
accommodated to act as an
anchor,alongsideexistingand
improvedfacilities,increasing
the vitality of the District
Centre;
ii. a rearrangement of the
residential and retail units
should be of an appropriate
design and ensure a safer,
more vibrant area and allow
a higher level of activity in
the centre;
iii. proposals must improve the
opportunities for creating
places of local identity and
amenity easily connected to
services by walking and
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
47cyclingviaidentifiableroutes
that may connect with Green
Infrastructure to the wider
countryside to the north of
the urban area;
iv. a significant net increase in
dwellings is not anticipated
given the existing high rise,
high density nature of the
area;
v. Make efficient use of the
existing space including
investigation of the
opportunity to reduce the
land take of the nearby
roundaboutstoallowforother
uses;
vi.Improvementtothelandscape
with mature trees and
appropriate planting to build
on the natural assets and to
enhance the character of the
area;
vii. Proposals for the housing
estate should address the
current lack of natural
surveillance, poor layout and
perceptionofpoorsafetythat
characterise the area;
viii.Access and links in the area
should be convenient direct
and at level.
4 . Spatial Strategy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
485 Growing Luton's Economy
Economic Strategy
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 1: Retain and enhance
Luton’s important sub-regional role as a
place for economic growth and opportunity
including the safeguarding of London Luton
Airport’s existing operations and to support
the airport ’s sustainable growth over the
Plan period based on its strategic
importance.
Strategic Objective 2: To utilise Luton’s
economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
Strategic Objective 6: Reduce social,
economic and environmental deprivation,
particularly where it is spatially
concentrated, by taking priority measurestoreduceunemployment,improveskillsand
education and renew housing, community
and environmental conditions.
5.1The objectives above reflect the
integrated aspirations of the borough to
deliver sustainable, balanced economic,
environmentalandsocialwellbeingforlocal
people as well as visitors and workers from
neighbouringareas.Theseobjectivesreflect
the need for enhanced skills and
opportunities for younger and older people
enteringandreturningtotheworkforce.The
objectives are founded on corporate and
communityaspirationsincludingevidenceof
the key structural and capacity issues
underlying Luton’s economic performance
and future business potential.(10)
Key Issues:
5.2The key issues that the borough
faces in terms of planning for growth
and prosperity over the plan period
include the need to plan for growth of
around 18,000 jobs (8,000 B class jobs
10 i.e. Employment Land Review Study March 2013; Nathaniel Lichfield & Partners
5 . Growing Luton's Economy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
49and10,000nonBclassjobs).TheLuton
economyiscapableofgeneratingthose
jobs as evidenced by the Employment
Land Review.
5.3The deliveryofemploymentland
at strategic allocations, coordinated
with key infrastructure, would
accommodate the B class jobs required
and some mixed use non B class jobs.
The Strategic Allocations in the Plan
need to make provision for the
generation of jobs (including the
business,officeandaviationsectors)to
provide choice and flexibility to the
market. This will also maintain and
strengthen Luton's important
contribution to the sub regional
economy for skilled workers from
neighbouring areas as well as offering
job opportunities for Luton residents.
5.4Strategic allocations provide
employment space arising from:
future population growth and
migration (see housing chapter for
population considerations);
future employment land losses;
delayedornondeliveryofsitesdue
to lack of infrastructure funding
(such as access to Century Park);
displacement and relocations
within Luton; and
a10%floorspacemarketallowance.
5.5Thereisaneedtodelivermodest
B2 provision on appropriate Strategic
Allocations for local firms wishing to
relocate or expand or to move into
modern yet relatively affordable work
space. There is a simultaneous need to
protect existing key employment areas
(termed Category A) that have been
assessed as performing well and also
land that is important for the
distribution and processing of
aggregates, concrete and asphalt.
5.6The release now of a limited
number of the poorest B use
employment sites must be managed
against the need to protect marginal
employmentland(CategoryBidentified
on the policies map) in the short andintermediate period to ensure local
firms can still afford to do business in
Luton until new modern affordable
accommodation becomes available.
Safeguarded Category A sites offer the
best quality employment opportunity
sites, which includes greenfield
employment land allocations, most
recently assessed as fit for purpose.
These sites are therefore safeguarded
for employment use although it is
recognisedthat,overthelifetimeofthe
plan, exceptional circumstances may
arise that justify a different approach.
5.7The development of, and
improved access to, the London Luton
Airport Strategic Allocation, which
includes Century Park, is needed to
serveaviationengineering,businessand
logisticsrelatedgrowthandsomesmall
scale B2 accommodation for local
businesses.
5.8LandsouthofStockwoodParkwill
provide a B1 business park to meet
future office demand benefitting from
the M1 Junction 10a improvements.
5.9ButterfieldGreenTechnologyPark
will provide important opportunities in
delivering a long term diversification
and restructuring of Luton’s economy,
addressing under representation in
higher technology sectors as well as
providing opportunities for high quality
B2 and B8-only developments.
5.10The Napier Park Strategic
Allocationis a key regeneration site for
mixed B Class employment and
residential use including a convenience
retail-led neighbourhood centre linked
to guided busway and Luton Airport
Parkway Railway Station. The
reacquisition of a 7.58 ha plot by GM
Vauxhall for operational reasons, and
its implications for delivering B class
accommodation, will be kept under
review and be the subject of the early
plan review.
5.11The Power Court Strategic
Allocationis a key regeneration site for
mixed retail, B1 business, and
residentialuseintegratedwiththetown
5 . Growing Luton's Economy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
50centre and enabled by town centre
(final phase ring road) scheme
improvements.
Policy approach
5.12The National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF) published in March
2012 requires a Presumption In Favour
of Sustainable Development (a golden
threadrunningthoughbothplanmaking
and decision making). It also requires:
a clear economic vision and
strategy; a positive proactive and
sustainable approach to economic
growth and land allocation;
up-to-date evidence on demand
and supply and deliverability; and
justification for long term
protection of allocated
employment land; a sequential
approach to town centre uses that
includes employment.
5.13Policy LLP13 sets out a positive
and flexible economic strategy for
deliveringjobsandstrategicallocations
and LLP14 will regulate the process by
which land will be protected and
delivered in accordance with the
Employment Land Study. Luton’s
economyhasbeenperformingfairlywell
in terms of job growth, and its future
economic growth prospects appear
reasonably good, supported by planned
infrastructureimprovementsandAirport
growth.
5.14Luton also functions as an
important sub-regional employment
centre. However, it also has above
average unemployment, modest levels
of new firm formation and a lower
skilled workforce.
5.15Luton’seconomyismorereliant
on manufacturing and distribution than
the wider region but there has been
little job growth in these sectors.
Representation in knowledge based
sectors is generally low, although its
level of business services jobs has been
above average.5.16The Borough’s existing 1.4
million square metres stock of
employment land (78% industrial and
22% Office) is significantly ageing and
needs renewal and replacement. The
replacement or renewal of industrial
land is happening but lags behind the
region especially for completed new/
modern offices space. Uptake of land
has been modest due to the subdued
economic situation, although local
demand remains healthy.
5.17In the last decade there have
been some notable successes,
particularly on established and
emergent business parks for office, yet
overall the borough has been losing B
space stock (-18%) over the past
decade. Almost all of this loss is from
industrial stock, sustaining greater loss
thanadjacentareaswhiletheregionas
a whole has grown.
5.18Vacancy levels are about
averageforofficesbutlowforindustrial
space, reflecting higher demand even
forpoorerqualityaccommodation(e.g.
for local, small scale businesses,
start-ups, and professional business
services)becauseofitsaffordabilityand
lackofalternativespace. Theolderand
lowerqualityvacantofficestockinand
aroundthetowncentrewillbedifficult
to modernise or replace because of the
lowrentsachievable. Refurbishmentis
more likely.
5.19The scope for redeveloping
existing employment land for mixed
employmentandhousingisnotcurrently
aviableoptioninthepresenteconomic
climatewithoutcomprehensiveplanning
(e.g. parking and amenity issues) and
financial interventions. It would be
prudent to maintain most of this stock
(e.g.amberemploymentsitesidentified
Category B sites on the policies map)
until economic conditions improve and
there is progress on delivering new
accommodationontheoutstandingland
allocations and particularly, Century
Park,ButterfieldGreenTechnologyPark
and Stockwood Park (Junction 10a).
5 . Growing Luton's Economy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
51Policy LLP13 - Economic Strategy
A. Planning applications will be
granted where they deliver
sustainable economic growth and
prosperity to serve the needs of
Luton and the wider sub region.
Jobs will be generated through
businessandindustrydevelopment
on strategic employment
allocations,andwithintheexisting
keyemploymentareassafeguarded
forBclassuses,(includingsecuring
automotive and advanced
manufacturing clusters and
supportingindustries/servicessuch
as the GM / Vauxhall plant to
respond to the market and core
businessdemands)asidentifiedon
the Policies Map. Further growth
in employment in commercial and
servicerelatedindustriesincluding
retail,leisure,cultureandtourism
will be generated within the Town
Centre,DistrictandNeighbourhood
Centres including where ancillary
or proposed within the strategic
employment allocations. The
strategic allocations for delivery
are:
i. Land South of Stockwood
Park: B1 office and light
industry (see Policy LLP5);
ii.LondonLutonAirport(Century
Park): mixed aviation related
B1b-c, B2 and B8, small scale
ancillary service uses and
hotel use (see Policy LLP6);
iii. Butterfield Green Technology
Park; high quality uses in line
with Policy LLP7; and
iv. Napier Park: predominantly
B1 office light industry and
small scale affordable B2 use
and ancillary hotel use; small
scaleA1toassistregeneration
and housing provision (see
Policy LLP8).
B.Proposalsforwarehousing(B8)over
500sqmfloorspacewillbedirectedto employment locations well
connectedtothestrategichighway
network, motorway access, at rail
serveddepotsandexceptionallyat
Crescent Road . The preferred
locationsareLondonLutonAirport
(including Century Park), Sundon
Park employment area, Junction
11 Craddock Road and Chaul End
Lane, and Limbury Sidings.
Warehousing of this size will be
directedawayfromtheinnerurban
area to ease traffic issues
associated with large warehousing
developments of this nature.
C. EmploymentAreas(CategoriesA&
B) allocated on the Policies Map
and listed in Appendix 3 and
smallerexistingBuseemployment
sites not identified will be
protected to retain and deliver
jobs in the borough.
D. Provided that category B sites and
unidentified employment sites
satisfy criteria as set out in Policy
LLP14 section B, they may be
redeveloped for employment,
mixed use or other needs
accordingly.
E. Planning permission for proposals
that would increase and improve
tourismandvisitorattractionswill
be granted, provided that it does
notcauseanadverseimpactonthe
roadnetwork,anytowncentreuse
accords with the sequential
approachandisinconformitywith
the policies in the Local Plan.
Employment Areas
Policy LLP14 - Employment Areas
Category A
The existing employment areas
(Category A) set out in Appendix 3 as
shown on the Policies Map shall be
protected for B1, B2 or B8 uses. Once
developed, strategic allocations
containing B1, B2 or B8 uses are
safeguardedasCategoryAemployment
5 . Growing Luton's Economy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
52areas.Changesofuseorredevelopment
within the employment areas and sites
that would result in a lossof floorspace
for economic development uses will be
resisted.
A. Redevelopment, extensions and
intensification in these areas that
would result in additional
floorspace for B1, B2 or B8 uses
will be supported provided that:
i. it would not have
unacceptable amenity or
traffic implications;
ii. anappropriatesizeandrange
of units is provided; and
iii. appropriate levels of parking
are provided.
Category B & Existing Unidentified
Employment Sites
B. Redevelopment, extensions and
intensification in Category B and
existing unidentified employment
sitesthatwouldresultinadditional
floorspace for B1, B2 or B8 will be
supported in accordance with
clauses i to iii of part A (above).
Where a building or site within a
Category B or unidentified
employment site has been vacant
foratleasttwelvemonths,amixed
use development that retains
significant employment or
alternative redevelopment to non
Busestomeetidentifiedneedswill
be permitted where:
i. it can be demonstrated that
suitable alternative
accommodation at
comparablerentsisavailable;
and
ii. it can be demonstrated that
it is no longer suitable or
viable for B1, B2 or B8 uses
and where the site is vacant,
there is evidence of active
marketing for a reasonable
period.
5 . Growing Luton's Economy
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
536 Housing
Housing Provision
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 2: To utilise Luton’s
economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
Strategic Objective 3: To ensure that new
housing delivers an appropriate level of
provisiontomeetlocalneedsintermsofthe
number of homes, subject to capacity
constraintsandamixofdwellingtypes,sizes
and tenures that offer local residents a
choice of where to live and addresses issues
of affordability and overcrowding. Luton
Borough Council will work collaboratively
withneighbouringauthoritiestohelpensure
unmet need is provided in appropriate
locations outside Luton, and to actively
monitor progress in terms of unmet need.
Key Issues
6.1A key issue facing the Borough in
terms of planning for new homes up to
2031ispopulationgrowth,meaningthat
17,800 new dwellings are needed in
Luton Borough by 2031. There is,
however, limited developable land
availablefornewhomeswithinthebuilt
up area. The plan makes provision for
the delivery of 8,500 dwellings. This
quantumofhousingprovisionwillenable
the Council to annually identify and
updateasupplyofspecific,deliverable
sites sufficient to provide five years'
worth of housing with an additional
buffer of 5% (as required by NPPF
paragraph 47).
6.2Thereisaneedtoachievealevel
ofaffordablehousingthataddressesthe
level of objective housing need, whilst
still ensuring that developments are
viable and that much needed market
homes continue to be built in Luton.6.3The need to make provision for
housing is set against the need to allow
forlandtobeprovidedforemployment,
education, health, retail and other
community facilities in order to ensure
a good quality of life for the residents
of new housing in the long term.
Policy approach
6.4National planning policy requires
that Local Plans seek to meet their
objectivelyassesseddevelopmentneeds
and, in the case of housing, that this
should be forecast through a Strategic
HousingMarketAssessment(SHMA).The
Council prepared a joint SHMA in 2010
withtheotherBedfordshireauthorities,
which indicated that 4,700 new homes
would be required in Luton Borough
between 2007–2021 based on minimum
requirements of the former Regional
Spatial Strategy (East of England Plan),
whichwasrevokedinJanuary2013.The
SHMAwasconsequentlyupdatedin2012
to inform the Local Plan preparation
followingpublicationoftheNPPF,which
requireslocalauthoritiestoobjectively
assess housing need. The SHMA 2012
identified a need for 11,000 homes for
Luton Borough based on trend
migration. In order to take account of
the most up-to-date Central
Government population and household
data released in 2013, the Council
prepared a draft Luton & Central
Bedfordshire SHMA Refresh in 2014
subsequently updated in 2015
determining the objectively assessed
housing need for Luton as 17,800
dwellings. This was led by a SHMA
steeringgroupthatincludeseightother
local authorities (Central Bedfordshire
Council, North Hertfordshire District
Council, Stevenage Borough Council,
BedfordBoroughCouncil,MiltonKeynes
Council, St Albans City and District
Council, Dacorum Borough Council and
Aylesbury Vale District Council). The
SHMA indicates that parts of Central
Bedfordshire Council, North
Hertfordshire District Council and
Aylesbury Vale District Council are
within the functional Luton Housing
Market Area.
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
546.5The Strategic Housing Land
Availability Assessment (SHLAA) (2014)
and Sustainability Appraisal (2015) and
viability evidence demonstrate that
there is only a limited supply of land in
Luton for new homes without stifling
development, eroding open land
including the Green Belt, other locally
protected open spaces and important
nature designations. This limited
capacity also reflects the need to
provide land for other uses such as
employment, education, health and
other infrastructure to support growth
inLuton.TheSHLAAisupdatedregularly
to take account of the latest
circumstances. The Strategic Housing
LandAvailabilityAssessment(July2016)
representsthemostup-to-dateevidence
usedtoinformtheestimatesofcapacity
for housing land in this plan.
6.6Planningfortheprovisionof8,500
new homes in Luton reflects the
availability of land for development in
the Borough, the need to provide a mix
of homes to support sustainable
communities and the objective to
provideachoiceofhomesforpeopleat
all stages of life. To ensure that Luton
maximises its contribution towards
meetingitsownhousingneed,allother
sources of suitable housing supply have
been considered through strategies for
empty homes and encouraging
conversionofvacanttowncentreoffice
buildings where they are obsolete for
meeting business needs.
6.7The SHLAA methodology follows
the directions of the NPPF and PPG in
examining what land is available,
suitable and viable for housing. The
SHLAA also monitors completions and
identifies whether there is enough land
supply to meet housing requirements
for the next five years.
6.8The SHLAA has been informed by
the ‘Call for Sites’ consultation, where
landowners put forward sites as part of
thelocalplanRegulation18notification
consultation stage, and by further
capacityworkundertakenbytheCouncil
(e.g.examiningbrownfieldemployment,commercial and other previously
developedlandandalsopotentialgreen
space). Whilst the SHLAA assesses the
suitability and deliverability of land for
housing, it is the Local Plan that
determines what land should be
allocatedfordevelopment.Inpreparing
this plan, allocations have been
informedbythesustainabilityappraisal
and independent viability assessment.
6.9BasedonthefindingsoftheSHMA
2014 and 2015 update and the SHLAA
capacity work, there is an unmet need
fromLutonBoroughofaround9,300net
additional dwellings over the plan
period.
6.10There is a housing need of
31,800 dwellings in the Luton Housing
Market Area. The full extent of the
unmet need arising from this will only
be determined when the other local
authoritiesintheLutonHousingMarket
Area reveal the quantum and location
of development they intend to deliver
in the housing market area.
6.11Given the identified shortfall of
housing capacity in the borough, the
Council will continue to work with
neighbouringlocalauthoritiesunderthe
DutytoCooperateinordertoensureits
housingneedsaremet.TheCouncilwill
workwithneighbouringlocalauthorities
to prepare a Growth Options Study to
provide the evidence necessary to
determine the most sustainable growth
strategy for meeting the needs of the
Housing Market Area including Luton’s
unmet housing requirements.
6.12The Government has indicated
its intention to require a specific
provision for starter homes (at a 20%
discount) and that these will be made
exemptfromCommunityInfrastructure
Levy and section 106 obligations.
Housing sites in Luton will be expected
tomakeprovisionforStarterHomesand
Custom Build where there is a
demonstrated need.
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
55Affordable Homes
6.13Recent economic viability evidence,
undertaken by independent consultants on
behalf of the Council, has indicated that
sites are difficult to develop economically
withinLutonbecausecostsarehighandsales
valuesrelativelylow,particularlyintheearly
phases of the Local Plan due to the slow
recovery from the economic downturn
following the financial crash of 2008. This
makes the delivery of affordable housing
challenging in the first 5 years. The local
plan viability evidence, which analyses
developmentintheborough,hasfoundthat
a requirement for 20% on-site affordable
homes provision will be viable for the
majority of sites over the plan period
regardless of site size.
6.14TheCouncilconsidersthataffordable
rent homes (homes available at 80% of
market rent levels) meet a range of needs
within the sector, including the need for
social rented affordable homes due to the
availability of Universal Credit/Housing
Benefit to tenants unable to afford the full
rent for an affordable rent property.
Development proposals should be
accompaniedbyasustainablelettingscheme
to support the use of affordable rent homes
inmeetingtheneedforsocialrentedhousing
and also to develop and maintain balanced
communities.TheSHMA(2015)recommends
that at least 72% of affordable housing be
provided as affordable rented housing with
a target of 85%, and that the balance of
affordable housing be provided through
intermediate housing products consistent
withthedefinitionssetoutinAnnex2ofthe
NPPF.Giventheneedtomaximiseaffordable
housing delivery in the Borough, the split
between affordable rented housing and
intermediatehousingmaybeadjustedwhere
there are specific viability constraints
relatingtoindividualsites.Itisunlikelythat
SHMA updates would significantly alter the
recommended split between affordable
rented and intermediate housing. The
Council will monitor the delivery of
affordable housing.
6.15The presumption will be that
affordable housing will be provided on-site
for schemes of 10 dwellings or more.However, the Council acknowledges that
there may be circumstances where it is
agreed by the Council and a Registered
Provider that on-site provision is not
achievable.
6.16Table6.1showsthemodelledoutputs
for housing mix need in Luton over the plan
period based on the objectively assessed
housing need of 17,800 net additional
dwellings, which includes a need for 7,200
affordable dwellings.
6.17Due to the scale of Luton's unmet
housing needs coupled with the shortage of
development land, the Council will seek to
ensurethatappropriatehousingprovisionto
meet affordable housing needs can be
provided across administrative boundaries
under the Duty to Cooperate.
Table 6.1 Dwelling Mix 2011 - 2031
% Dwellings
59.5% 10,600 MarketHousing
40.5% 7,200Affordable
housing/
affordablerent
100.0% 17,800 All dwellings
890Annual
Average
Mix and Size of Homes
6.18The mix and size requirements for
alltenuresofhomesplannedin the borough
has been estimated in the SHMA 2015. The
findings of the SHMA are set out in Tables
6.2-6.3 below.
Table 6.2 Market Housing Mix
1.5% 1 bedroom flat
1.0% 2 bedroom flat
13.1% 2bedroomhouse
69.6% 3bedroomhouse
12.3% 4bedroomhouse
2.1% 5bedroomhouse
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
56Table 6.3 Affordable Housing Mix
3.6% 1 bedroom flat
17.2% 2 bedroom flat
15.8% 2bedroomhouse
49.0% 3bedroomhouse
14.9% 4+bedroomhouse
Housing with Specific Needs
6.19The Government’s reform of Health
and Adult Social Care is underpinned by a
principleofsustainingpeopleathomeforas
long as possible. This was reflected in the
recent changes to building regulations
relating to adaptations and wheelchair
accessiblehomesthatwerepublishedinthe
2015 edition of Approved Document M:
Volume 1 (Access to and use of dwellings),
whichsetsoutthreecategoriesofdwellings:
Category 1: Visitable dwellings –
Mandatory
Category 2: Accessible and adaptable
dwellings – Optional
Category 3: Wheelchair user dwellings
– Optional, equivalent to wheelchair
accessible standard.
6.20This Local Plan does not set out
specificpolicyrequirementsfortheOptional
Category 2 or Category 3 standards. Those
bringing forward proposals are encouraged
totakeintoaccountthefindingsofthelatest
assessment of housing needs. The changing
demographics of the area indicate that
developments that respond to residents’
current and future needs for accessible or
adaptable accommodation will provide
choice and flexibility to meet a growing
demand.
6.21The SHMA demonstrates that the
needs for these types of accommodation
affect the whole Housing Market Area. The
Council commits to keeping this evidence
up-to-dateandrecordingtheextenttowhichopportunities to meet changing needs are
beingprovided,includingaspartofdialogue
with neighbouring authorities.
6.22Thedemographicprojectionsshowed
that the population of Luton and Central
Bedfordshire was projected to increase by
around 81,900 persons over the 20-year
period 2011–31, based on long-term
migrationtrends.Thenumberofpeopleaged
65oroverisprojectedtoincreasebyaround
41,400persons,whichequatestoaroundhalf
oftheoverallgrowth. Thisincludesanextra
9,200personsaged85orover.Mostofthese
olderpeoplewillalreadyliveintheareaand
many will not move from their current
homes; but those that do are likely to need
accessible housing.
6.23TheCLGguidetoavailabledisability
data(11)shows that currently around 1 in 30
households in England (3.3%) have at least
one wheelchair user, although the rate is
notably higher for households living in
affordablehousing(7.1%).Itisalsoimportant
torecognisethattheseproportionsarelikely
to increase over the period to 2031 in the
context of the larger numbers of older
people projected to be living in the area.
6.24Inaddressingtheneedfortemporary
accommodation (e.g. hostels for homeless
people),proposalswillhave a specificfocus
on addressing local needs. This will help to
resolve the problems faced by those people
living in Luton but who struggle to access
suitable accommodation.
Quality and Standards
6.25NewhomesinLutonneedtoprovide
a choice of housing for people at all stages
of life. In order to do so, they will need to
meet minimum standards of design. Policy
LLP25(HighQualityDesign)establisheswhat
design and amenity standards are expected
fromnewandconverteddevelopments.This
policy will be applied in conjunction with
site specific policies in the Local Plan, with
theexternalamenityspacestandardssetout
in Appendix 6 and with development briefs,
masterplans and future Supplementary
Planning Documents (SPDs).
11https://www .gov.uk/government/publications/building-regulations-guide-to-available-disability-data
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
576.26Developmentswill be encouraged to
exceed Building Regulation standards
according to Policy LLP37 (Sustainable
Energy) and the energy hierarchy. Together,
these policies ensure that developments
incorporating new homes will contribute to
promoting sustainable use of resources and
the principles of good design.
People Wishing to Build their Own Homes
6.27Paragraph 50 of the NPPF identifies
that local planning authorities should plan
for people wishing to build their own
homes. NPPG (paragraph 21) states that the
Government wants to enable more people
tobuildtheirownhomesandmakethisform
of housing a mainstream housing option and
that local planning authorities should,
therefore, plan to meet the strong latent
demand for such housing. However, based
on the self-build portal run by the National
Custom and Self Build Association (NCaSBA)
there are currently no registrations from
groups and individuals looking for land in
Luton(Source:‘Need-a-Plot’PortalNCaSBA,
July 2015). The Council will continue to
monitor the register and keep a register of
eligible prospective custom and self-build
individuals, community groups and
developers.
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMOs)
6.28Thereisrecognitionatbothnational
and local levels that, whilst HMOs make a
valuable contribution to the provision of
low-cost housing, high concentrations of
HMOs can have an adverse effect on the
character and amenity of existing
neighbourhoods.
6.29The Town and Country Planning (Use
Classes) Order 1987 (as amended in 2010),
defines HMOs as houses that are inhabited
by three or more unrelated people, as their
only or main residence, who share one or
morebasicamenity(suchasakitchen).Two
types of HMOs are identified:
Small HMOs - those housing between
three and six unrelated people
(categorised under Class C4 of the
Order); and
Large HMOs - those housing more than
sixunrelatedpeople(categorisedunder
Class 'Sui Generis' of the Order).
6.30The amendment to the Use Class
Order allows the change of use from a
dwelling house (categorised under class C3
of the Order) to a HMO (categorised under
Class C4 of the Order) without the
requirementofplanningpermission,asclass
C4 has been included in permitted
development rights.
6.31An Article 4 Direction can be put in
placetoremovethispermitteddevelopment
right. This means that, once a Direction
comesintoforce,planningpermissionwould
need to be obtained to change a dwelling
house to a HMO of either type. Planning
permission is already required to change a
dwelling house or a small HMO to a large
HMO.ThereisevidencetosuggestthatHMOs
are on the increase in Luton, particularly in
older high density pre-war stock located in
andaroundthetowncentreandadjacentto
deprivedwards.Itislikelytheywillcontinue
to increase as population increases,
affordability worsens and housing land
becomes scarcer in the borough over the
plan period. The Council will keep under
review whether Article 4 Directions are
required to ensure that HMO proposals
requireplanningpermissionanddonothave
an adverse effect on the character and
amenity of existing neighbours, while
enabling closer monitoring of HMOs in the
Borough.
Older Person's Housing
6.32National Guidance requires that the
futureneedforolderpersonsisassessedand
that the assessment should set out the level
ofneedforresidentialinstitutions(UseClass
C2). Using the Housing Learning and
Improvement Network (LIN) toolkit, this
identifies future need for circa 1,300
specialist older person housing units of
various types in Luton over the 20-year
period 2011–31 (see Figure of the SHMA
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
582015). This indicates almost two thirds of
this need (63%, 630 units) is for Leasehold
Schemes for the Elderly, 240 Extra Care
units, 100 Sheltered units and 30 Dementia
units. The total need for older person's
housing represents only 5.6% of Luton's
overallhousingneed.Olderperson'shousing
needsareincludedintheoverallobjectively
assessed housing needs and Policy LLP18
(Older Person's Accommodation) sets out a
criteriabasedpolicyfordeterminingschemes
for Older Person's Housing.
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling
Showpeople
6.33National Policy for Gypsies and
Travellers is contained within ‘Planning
Policy for Traveller Sites’. This identifies
threekeycriteriaforidentifyingappropriate
sites for delivery through the planning
system. To be deliverable within five years
ordevelopablewithinyears6-15,sitesshould
be:
suitable – the site should be in a
suitable location for development;
available - the site should be available
now or there should be a reasonable
prospectthatthesiteisavailableatthe
point envisaged; and
achievable – there is a realistic or
reasonableprospectthathousingcould
be viably developed at the point
envisaged.
6.34It requires that local planning
authorities identify sufficient deliverable
sites to provide five years’ worth of sites
against their locally set targets. For years
6–10 and, where possible, for years 11–15,
they should identify a supply of specific
developable sites or broad locations for
growth. Therefore, Government indicates
that councils should assess and meet Gypsy,
Travellerandtravellingshowpeople’s(GTTS)
housing needs in the same way as other
housing needs, including providing land for
sites. Without adequate sites this group has
to resort to unauthorised sites, which might
result in problems with local communities.
It also makes it more difficult for them to
access local services and facilities.6.35A Gypsy and Travellers
Accommodation Assessment (GTAA) was
completed in 2015 to establish the need for
Gypsy, Traveller and travelling showpeople
accommodation in the Borough. The study
identifies a potential need for 19 Gypsy and
Traveller permanent pitches over the plan
period but, allowing for existing supply,
needsarealreadymetoverthefirst5years,
whereas there is a need for an additional 14
pitches over the remaining 15 years of the
plan. Need for a transit site of 10 pitches
was also identified. The study has not
identified a need for additional travelling
showperson provision. The Gypsy and
Traveller Sites - Site Identification Study
2015(G&TSSIS2015)assessedthesuitability,
availability and achievability of potential
sites, however it was unable to identify a
site(s) following assessment. However,
Government's Planning Policy for Traveller
Sites (PPTS) amended the definition of
Gypsies,Travellersandtravellingshowpeople
on 31st August 2015 after completion of the
GTAAstudy.TherecentchangestoPPTSnow
require a GTAA to determine whether
householdslivingonsites,encampmentsand
in bricks and mortar fall within the new
definition and whether their housing
needs should be assessed separately from
the wider population as required by the
Housing Act (2004). This late change in
Government policy could potentially alter
the need and provision for Gypsies and
Travellers, therefore a separate Local Plan
Part 2 (Gypsies and Travellers Site
Allocations) will be required following a
further update of the evidence base, which
may consequently change any further site
assessment work to accommodate these
needs.
6.36Policy LLP15 ensures that existing
GTTS sites are safeguarded for that use and
that the provision of accommodation for
Gypsies and Travellers is located in a
sustainable manner. In applying the policy,
the extent to which a traditional lifestyle
and a settled base can contribute to
sustainabledevelopmentwillbeconsidered.
Thelocationofnewpitchesmustenablethe
residentstoaccessservicesincludingschools
and health facilities in the same way that
residents of new houses need to be able to
access community facilities. In addition,
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
59Gypsy and Traveller sites need good access
to the road network as they often need to
move larger vehicles as part of their
livelihood and way of life.
Policy LLP15 - Housing Provision
Provision will be made for 8,500
dwellings in the borough to help meet
the housing needs of Luton and the
LutonHousingMarketAreaensuringthe
size, type and tenure (including
provision for starter homes, custom
build and households with specific
needs) provided reflects the identified
housing need requirements of the area
in the Strategic Housing Market
Assessment (SHMA).
A.Planningpermissionwillbegranted
for residential development and
mixed-use schemes on allocated
sites in line with Appendix 4.
B. Planningpermissionforresidential
development will also be granted
on sites not allocated for housing
provided that it would not lead to
alossofotherusesforwhichthere
is a recognised local need.
C. Demolition and redevelopment of
existing housing to other uses will
be permitted provided that
replacement dwellings are
providedon-siteoroff-siteorthere
is an overriding need for other
uses,whichprovidebenefitstothe
community that outweigh the loss
of housing.
Higher densities will be encouraged
within Luton Town Centre and the
districtandneighbourhoodcentres.New
housing should not result in
over-intensification of the site.
Development will achieve a mix of
different housing sizes, types and
tenures informed by the latest housing
market assessments and local
circumstances.
Affordable Housing
Policy LLP16 - Affordable Housing
Luton has an affordable housing need
of 7,200 dwellings. The application of
Policy LLP16 could help deliver around
1,700 affordable dwellings potentially
leaving an unmet need of around 5,500
dwellings.
A. The Council will require the
provisionof20%affordablehousing
unitsondevelopmentsthatdeliver
a net gain of at least 11 dwellings
and on sites of 10 dwellings or less
that have a combined floorspace
of more than 1,000sq.m.
B. Affordable housing should be
provided on-site phased alongside
markethousing,indiscerniblefrom
and well integrated with market
housing. An equivalent financial
off-site provision will only be
acceptable where there is robust
justification for off-site provision.
C. Development proposals will need
to ensure that the size, type and
tenure of affordable dwellings
provided reflects the identified
housing need requirements of the
area (and in accordance with the
Homes & Communities Agency
space standards) in the Strategic
HousingMarketAssessment(SHMA)
for future household types.
D. If the required level of affordable
housingwouldrendertheproposal
economicallyunviable,developers
will be expected to produce a
financial assessment that clearly
demonstrates the maximum
number of affordable dwellings
that can be achieved on-site,
off-site or as a commuted sum. In
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
60that case, the Council will reduce
the requirement for affordable
housing proportionately.
E. The Council will require that
affordable housing be occupied by
households who would not
otherwisebeabletoaffordtorent
or buy a dwelling of sufficient size
fortheirneedsontheopenmarket
and who either:
i. already live in the borough
and are in housing need (as
identified on the housing
waiting list); or
ii. can demonstrate a need to
live in the borough.
Intermediate tenure is to be managed
by a registered provider unless the
affordable housing is an intermediate
affordable housing product where a
discount is protected by a covenant on
the deed that will apply on resale but
where there is no equity that is owned
by a Registered Provider.
The Council will keep its affordable
housing evidence base up-to-date
including the calculation of commuted
sums. This evidence base should be
utilised when submitting and
determining planning applications.
Under the Duty to Cooperate, the
Council will seek to ensure that
appropriate housing provision to meet
affordable housing needs can be
provided across administrative
boundaries.
Houses in Multiple Occupation
Policy LLP17 - Houses in Multiple
Occupation
The sub-division of an existing building
to create a HMO or the development of
a new HMO accommodation will be
permitted provided that:
i.theproposal,orcumulativeimpact
of the proposal (including
operational and management
requirements) with other similar
proposals, would not adversely
affect the character of the area,
particularly in conservation areas;
and
ii. the accommodation units conform
withadoptedlicensingandamenity
standards and to design
requirements as set out in Local
Plan Policy LLP25 (High Quality
Design); and
iii. appropriate outdoor amenity
space, bin storage, and parking
provision are provided.
Student Accommodation
Policy LLP17A - Student
Accommodation
Proposals for student halls of residence
will be permitted where they
demonstrably meet an unmet need,
provided that the criteria for HMOs are
met and the proposals:
i. are either within 1 km of the
university or college building that
they are primarily intended to
serve, or are close to established
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
61public transport routes leading to
the relevant university or college
building; and
ii. would not have a significant
adverse impact on the amenity of
adjacent residents or businesses.
Older People's Housing
Policy LLP18 - Older People's Housing
A. The development of new
accommodation designed
specificallyforolderpeopleshould
meet all of the following criteria:
i. offer easy access to
communityfacilities,services
andfrequentpublictransport;
or, where a site is not within
easy access to community
facilities, services and
frequent public transport,
services should be provided
on-site;
ii. be well-integrated with the
wider neighbourhood;
iii. provide sufficient car parking
for visitors and residents (in
compliancewithAppendix2);
and
iv. where appropriate, provide
choice of tenures.
B. Permission will be granted for
improvements to existing older
people's housing where:
i. the measures proposed assist
people in staying in their
existing homes, for examplethrough physical adaptations
and energy efficiency
enhancements; and
ii. alterations to the external
appearance do not harm the
character of the surrounding
area.
ExtensionstoDwellingsandAnnexes
PolicyLLP19-ExtensionstoDwellings
and Annexes
A.Planningpermissionwillbegranted
toextendadwellingprovidedthat:
i. The scale, mass, layout,
designandexternalmaterials,
are consistent with and
proportionatetotheprincipal
dwelling, surrounding
properties, streetscape and
character of the area;
ii. Proposals should ensure that
the extension is of ancillary
scale to the original /
principal building;
iii. Ensure that an extension has
a roof style and pitch that is
in keeping with the original
roof;
iv. The proposed extension does
not adversely affect the
amenity of nearby occupiers,
in respect of visual intrusion,
loss of light, loss of privacy
and/or overlooking,
particularly where there is
effect on a habitable room
(bedroom, kitchen, living
room for example) and/or
patio/seating area;
v. The extension should respect
prevailing gaps and spaces
between buildings, provision
for services (e.g. waste
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
62collection), and existing
patterns of development,
especially in areas that are
spacious in character; and
vi. If incorporating an original or
innovative design element,
ensure that this will not look
out of keeping with the
existing design and character
of the building and
surrounding buildings.
Annexes
B. InadditiontothecriteriainpartA
above, the provision of annexes to
accommodatedependentrelatives
will be permitted, provided that:
i. a functional link between the
principal dwelling and the
annex or extension can be
demonstrated defined as an
immediatefamilyrelationship
betweentheoccupantsofthe
principal dwelling and the
annex;
ii. there is no boundary
demarcation or sub-division
of garden areas between the
principal dwelling and the
annexe or extension; and
iii. where an annex is detached
from the original dwelling, it
must in every respect be
ancillary to the principal
dwelling in terms of its size
and facilities.
C. If the annex would be
self-contained so that it could
function as an entirely separate
dwelling, then the proposal would
not be considered under this
policy.
Gypsies, Travellers & Travelling
Showpeople
Policy LLP20 - Gypsies, Travellers &
Travelling Showpeople
The existing Gypsy and Traveller site at
St Thomas's Road and traveller show
person site at numbers 14 and 72
WigmoreLanearesafeguardedforthese
purposes (as identified on the policies
map).
Gypsy and Traveller and travelling
showpeople pitches and plots will be
permitted or allocated in accordance
withcurrentgovernmentpolicytomeet
the needs identified in the Gypsies and
Travellers Accommodation Assessments
updated as necessary.
Planning permission will be granted for
permanent Gypsy and Traveller
provision where the following criteria
can be met:
i. the site has reasonable access to
shops,schoolsandotherfacilities;
ii. the site has adequate road access
and is well related to the primary
road network;
iii. hardstanding and basic facilities
including electricity, water
supplies, sewage disposal, and
waste collection are provided on
site; and
iv. in the case of travelling
showpeople, the site provides for
future needs and includes
sufficient space for storage and
maintenanceofequipmentandthe
parking and manoeuvring of all
vehicles associated with the
occupiers.
6 . Housing
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
637 Luton Town Centre &
District & Neighbourhood
Centres
Strategic Objectives
7.1StrategicObjective4 :Toestablishan
effective network and hierarchy of Town,
District and Neighbourhood centres to serve
as the heart of local communities and
improve health through improved access by
train, bus, walking and cycling to a mix of
uses including shopping, services and jobs.
7.2Strategic Objective 6 : Reduce social,
economic and environmental deprivation,
particularly where it is spatially
concentrated, by taking priority measures
toreduceunemployment,improveskillsand
education and renew housing, community
and environmental conditions.7.3Strategic Objective 8 : Improve
accessibility,connectivity,sustainabilityand
ease of movement to, from and within the
borough.
National Policy
7.4The NPPF has replaced all previous
policy statements and guides. The principle
of the Town Centre as the preferred place
for shopping, business and leisure remains a
key principle of planning guidance. This
serves the dual purpose of strengthening
town centres while ensuring good access to
jobs and facilities by public transport,
walking and cycling.
7.5The NPPF also requires planning
authorities to define:
a network and hierarchy of centres
resilienttoanticipatedfutureeconomic
changes;
7 . Luton Town Centre & District & Neighbourhood Centres
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
64theextentoftowncentresandprimary
shopping areas, based on a clear
definition of primary and secondary
frontages in designated centres; and
policies that define which uses will be
permitted within these locations.
7.6The planning authority must also
allocate suitable sites that meet the scale
and type of required town centre uses and,
if necessary, expand town centres to ensure
a sufficient supply of sites. Policies must be
set for town centre uses that cannot be
accommodated in or next to town centres.
7.7Applicants for main town centre uses
arerequiredtopassthesequentialapproach
to site selection and provide a full
assessmentoftheimpactoftheproposalon
thevitalityandviabilityofprotectedcentres
for applications greater than 2,500sq.m. or
a locally set threshold.
Local Situation
7.8TohelpevaluateLuton'sneedsagainst
the criteria set out above a retail study was
commissioned.(12)Withinthisreport,Luton
is defined as a regional shopping centre.
7.9Thisresearchrevealedthatmostfood
and drink shopping trips are kept within
Luton, with Dunstable stores offering some
competition. ItidentifiedthatLutonshould
increase its market share due to expected
increases in expenditure, over trading of
some existing stores and in order to help
provide choice and competition. A larger
foodstorewithintheTownCentrewouldact
as an anchor for linked shopping trips and
attract greater numbers of visitors to the
Town Centre.
7.10For non-food shopping (comparison
goods),theresearchrecommendedthatthe
AuthorityseekstomarkedlyimproveLuton’s
market share and increase its
competitiveness in the face of competition
from regional competitors such as Milton
Keynes and Watford. However, increasing
market share is in-part predicated on thetimely delivery of Luton’s opportunity sites,
which should help provide a step change in
the quality of the Luton’s comparison offer
andareaimedtobedeliveredby2025. The
delivery of the North Houghton Regis retail
scheme will further increase competition.
The research recommends the planned
delivery of comparison floorspace to help
ensure Luton’s status is maintained.
7.11The study found that the number of
evening trips to Luton Town Centre for
leisure/retail purposes is relatively low.
7.12The 2015 study found that a locally
set impact threshold policy would ensure
thatdevelopmentproposalsprovidinggreater
than 1,000sq.m. gross floorspace for main
towncentreusesinanedgeoroutofcentre
location should be the subject of an impact
assessment. Thesettingofalowerthreshold
allows scrutiny to be given to application
proposals that might threaten to have an
adverse impact on defined centres.
7.13The majority of the existing District
and Local Centres are serving their local
communitieswellandcomplementtheTown
Centre. Some have the potential to
accommodatemorecommunityuses. There
is scope for the establishment of an
additional new Neighbourhood Centre at
Chaul End Lane or Dallow Road based on
areas of search with proximity to local
facilities and communities in those areas.
Retail Strategy
7.14Accounting for committed retail
floorspace,theRetailStudyidentifiesaneed
for additional net convenience and
comparison retail floorspace as outlined
below. The Study recommends that any
additional floorspace is directed to the
Creative Quarter within the Town Centre,
Power Court and to the centre hierarchy in
line with the sequential approach as set out
in paragraph 24 of the NPPF. This will serve
tofurtherreinforcethenetworkoftheTown
CentreandDistrict,NeighbourhoodandLocal
Centres across the borough and the
12 The Luton Retail Study Refresh December 2012 - Update 2015. Luton town centre’s description
asa‘RegionalCentre’istheterminologyadoptedbytheWhiteYoungGreen’s(WYG)LutonRetail
Study Update 2015. This is sourced from Venuescore, an acknowledged industry ranking of retail
locations across the UK.
7 . Luton Town Centre & District & Neighbourhood Centres
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
65appropriate scale of retail provision
according to each centre's function stated
inthecentrehierarchyidentifiedwithinthe
Retail Study.
NetAdditionalConvenienceFloorspace*
20312030202520202015
9,064 8,4675,7576,2793,393
7.15For qualitative reasons, the
additionalfoodfloorspacerequiredcurrently
in2015willbeprovidedatPowerCourt. Up
to 2020, an additional 2,900sq.m. of
convenience floorspace may be distributed
to the centre hierarchy including at Marsh
Farm District Centre (subject to the Marsh
Farm Masterplan), Napier Park, a modest
allocation for a foodstore at Birdsfoot Lane
South(supportingthestrategicupgradingof
this centre to NeighbourhoodCentre status)
andafurtherfoodstorecommitment(foran
Aldi store) at Sundon Park (upgrading that
Neighbourhood Centre to a District Centre
function).
Net Additional Comparison Floorspace*
2031 2030 202520202015
53,715(1)49,483 30,0964,420N/A
1. *Figures represent the estimated
requirement for net additional floorspace
at a given year based on modelling of
increased populationandexpenditurefrom
a benchmark position (at 2015) and taking
into account delivery of existing
commitments
7.16The above floor space requirements
are based on an assessment of growth in
Luton'sconvenienceandcomparisonshopping
market share, which will be moderated by
a)deliveryofexistingcommitmentsmeeting
demand and b) lead times in delivering
existing commitments and new floorspace
upto2025.However,bythisperiod,despite
increased competition (e.g. from the
substantial scale retail scheme at North
Houghton Regis anticipated to be trading
potentially around 2022), the delivery of
large, modern retail units occupied by
quality national retailers should improveLuton’s market share by providing an
improved shopping offer to the Town. The
primary location for the identified
comparison floor space up to and beyond
2020 will be the town centre and Power
Court.
Sequential Test and Impact Assessments
7.17Whenconsideringedgeofcentreand
out of centre sites, preference will be given
to sites that are or will be connected to the
nearest centre. To facilitate this, it is
expected that both applicants and the
Council will be flexible on issues such as
format or scale. The sequential test will
consider the extent of the catchment area
likely to be served by the proposal,
identifying alternative sites located in and
near to existing centres within that
catchment. Where no centres exist within
the catchment (e.g. a small newsagent
proposed within a residential area), the
closest centres must be considered. When
considering the need for development to be
locatedinaspecificarea,thismustbebased
on an understanding of any deficiencies in
the range of existing facilities. Purely
commercial objectives are not an
appropriate basis. Where mixed uses are
proposed, the sequential test must consider
whethersitesindesignatedcentresareable
to accommodate any of those uses
individually or collectively. Impact
assessmentsmustconsidereffectsoncentres
as a whole. For example, the vitality and
viability of centres that are heavily
dependent on convenience retailing are
likely to be vulnerable to the effects of
large, out of centre food stores. Extensions
to existing uses will be subject to the
sequential test and impact assessment. In
suchinstances,thesequentialtestwillfocus
on the level of additional development
proposed. The impact assessment will,
however, be based on the total offering
provided at a specific site (existing
development plus any proposed extensions
and other alterations) to ensure that the
gradualgrowthofexisting,maintowncentre
usesinout-of-centrelocationsdoesnothave
asignificant,negativeimpactondesignated
centres.
7 . Luton Town Centre & District & Neighbourhood Centres
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
66Centre Hierarchy
7.18The borough's centres as defined on
the Policies Map will be the focus for town
centre uses and will promote a network of
mixed use centres accessible to local
communities, which promote linked trips to
localshopsandservicesviapublictransport,
walking and cycling. Acceptable uses in the
centresincluderetail,leisure,entertainment
(including the night-time economy)
community facilities, public space, offices,
arts and tourism. Residential development
will be encouraged in Town, District and
Neighbourhood centres provided that it
would promote the vitality and viability of
the respective centre (see policy LLP15
Housing Provision). Each centre will be
developedtopromoteitsuniqueidentityand
the overall retail hierarchy adhered to.
Planning Conditions
7.19Main town centre uses such as retail
can have a significant impact on social,
economic and environmental concerns. To
maximise beneficial impacts and reduce
negative effects, restrictions are applied to
retail frontages and conditions may be
applied to operations on a case-by-case
basis. For example, the range of goods sold
at out-of-centre retail parks might be
restrictedtosupportthevitalityandviability
of designated centres, while the operation
of food retail might be managed to support
the improvement of public and
environmental health.
Policy LLP21 - Centre Hierarchy
A. The centre hierarchy is as follows:
Town Centre: Luton Town Centre;
District Centres: Bury Park, Marsh
Road, Marsh Farm, Wigmore,
Stopsley, Sundon Park;
Neighbourhood Centres: Farley,
High Town, Round Green, Lewsey,
Bushmead,Bramingham,Hockwell
Ring,BiscotRoad,CalvertonRoad,Birdsfoot Lane South, Napier Park;
and
PotentialforanewNeighbourhood
CentreatChaulEndLaneorDallow
Road.
Proposalsformaintowncentreuseswill
address the identified scale of retail
need over the plan period, distributed
at a scale appropriate to the centre
hierarchy functions, and the allocated
Power Court and Northern Gateway
retail developments (identified on the
policiesandinsetmaps),andbesubject
to the sequential test. This requires
such uses to be located within town
centres, then edge of centre locations
and then, only if suitable sequentially
preferable sites are not available, in
out-of-centre locations. For all retail
('A' use classes), the extent of Luton
town centre comprisesthe town centre
shopping area, while the extent of the
district and neighbourhood centres
comprises the relevant shopping
frontage. For all other main town
centre uses, the extent of a centre is
the wider boundary as marked on the
policies map.
B.Applicationsforretail,leisure,and
office development over
1,000sq.m.locatedoutsideoftown
centres, not in accordance with
this Local Plan, are required to
submit an impact assessment, as
defined in the NPPF, to the
Council.
C. The Council will grant planning
permissionforretaildevelopment,
provided it is demonstrated that:
i. retail proposals meet the
sequential test; and
ii.thevitalityandviabilityofthe
towncentre,andindividually,
each District and
Neighbourhood centre in the
borough would not be
significantly adversely
affected by the development
either on its own or in
7 . Luton Town Centre & District & Neighbourhood Centres
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
67combination with other
proposals or commitments.
D. A new Neighbourhood Centre at
ChaulEndLaneorDallowRoadwill
be designated where town centre
use proposals come forward which
are of a Neighbourhood Centre
scale.
Primary and Secondary Shopping
Areas and Frontages
Policy LLP22 - Primary and Secondary
Shopping Areas and Frontages
The Luton Town Centre Shopping Area,
premier, primary, and secondary
shoppingfrontagesaredefinedforLuton
Town Centre on the Policies Map. The
premier frontage identified within the
Mall is equivalent to the primary
shopping frontage for the purposes of
applying the sequential and impact
tests.
A. Primary and secondary shopping
frontages as defined by the
frontages on the Policies Map are
the prime focus for:
i. convenience retail;
ii. comparison(non-bulky)retail
floor space; and
iii. other town centre uses as
defined in the NPPF, whichpromotejobs,leisureandthe
night-time economy.
B. Within the premier, primary and
secondary shopping frontages of
the town centre shopping area,
identified on the Policies Map,
planningpermissionwillbegranted
for the development of non-A1
towncentreusesprovidedthatthe
premises:
i. are above ground floor level
in the primary shopping area;
or
ii. are at ground floor level in
the primary shopping area,
and the proposed use will not
result in:
a. more than 10% of the
relevant premier
shopping frontage being
in non-A1 use; or
b. more than 25% of the
relevant primary
shopping frontage being
in non-A1 use; and
c. more than two adjacent
units(ofnotgreaterthan
the normal frontage
width) being in non-A1
retail use; and
d. thechangeofunitsinA1
use in part or whole
where there are vacant
non-A1 units within the
same frontage.
iii. areinthesecondaryshopping
area, and the proposed use
will not result in more than
50%oftheidentifiedfrontage
being in non-A1 use.
7 . Luton Town Centre & District & Neighbourhood Centres
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
68DistrictandNeighbourhoodShopping
Areas and Shopping Parades
Policy LLP23 - District &
Neighbourhood Areas & Shopping
Parades
The Council will approve planning
applications that help to deliver and
reinforce a network of mixed use
District and Neighbourhood centres
(which promote linked trips to local
shops and services via public transport,
walking and cycling) according to the
centre hierarchy.
A. Planning permission will normally
begrantedforthedevelopmentof
town centre uses that:
i. strengthen the functional
role, vitality and viability of
the centre;
ii.increasethemixofusesinthe
area;
iii. maintain A1 retail on 75% of
the shopping frontage;
iv. provide no more than two
adjacent non A1 units;
v. provide a service principally
to visiting members of the
public;
vi. retain existing window
displays above ground level;
and
vii. propose a flexible use of
spaces to optimise the use of
land and buildings for shared
services and facilities.
Shopping Parades
B. Inexistingsmallshoppingparades,
planningpermissionwillbegranted
for developments that:
i. retain existing shops selling
convenience goods;
ii. propose convenience retail
(A1);
iii. propose non A1 uses provided
that a minimum of 75%shopping frontage remains in
A1 use;
iv. propose a service to visiting
members of the community
provided that the traffic
generated is appropriate for
the site; and
v. maintain a shop front or an
equally active frontage.
C. Loss of A1 facilities will be
permitted where:
i. there are equivalent
alternativeshoppingfacilities
within a convenient walking
distance of the catchment
area of the existing shop; or
ii. the existing use is
demonstrably no longer
viable.
7 . Luton Town Centre & District & Neighbourhood Centres
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
698 Education and Other
Community Facilities
Education and Other Community
Facilities
Strategic Objectives
8.1Strategic Objective 2: To utilise
Luton’s economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
8.2StrategicObjective4: Toestablishan
effective network and hierarchy of Town,
District and Neighbourhood centres to serve
as the heart of local communities and
improve health through improved access by
train, bus, walking and cycling to a mix of
uses including shopping, services and jobs.
8.3Strategic Objective 7: To safeguard
andenablenewcommunity,educationaland
cultural facilities to be delivered and
expanded to meet the needs of a growing
and diverse borough.
Key Issues
8.4The borough faces various issues
involving planning for education and
community services up to 2031.
8.5There is a need to serve the
social, community safety, learning and
leisure needs of a growing Luton
populationinanurbanareawithashigh
a density in some places as London
boroughs. This will increase demands
upon existing schools and other
community facilities (including within
the private, public and voluntary
sector), many of which are already at
or exceed their designed capacity.
8.6There are limited opportunities
toaccommodatenewfacilitiesbecause:
there isn't enough suitable land of
the right size and location
(particularly greenfield land);
developmenttendsnottobeviable
within Luton on brownfield land
and so there is likely to be
8 . Education and Other Community Facilities
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
70insufficient investment from
developer contributions towards
much needed new or improved
facilities; and
public investment in future
provision,maintenanceandrunning
of existing schools and other
community facilities is being
restrictedbecauseofspendingcuts
and changes in national policy.
There is, therefore, a need to
prioritise spending with efficiency
gainsmetthroughrationalisingand
making more effective use of
schools and services (e.g. shared
use of libraries and community
centres). In some cases, facilities
mightbelosttolocalcommunities
unlessanduntileconomicrecovery
and Government finances improve
over the plan period.
8.7Additional capacity is needed for
theequivalentofa900-placesecondary
school and 500-place primary school
over the next 5 years and further high
school places over the plan period in
central and southern Luton. Two sites
are allocated for this purpose on land
attheBrache(formertenniscourtsand
former GM Vauxhall cricket ground) to
meet this need.
8.8Additionaleducationneedsarising
in other parts of the borough will be
met through careful management (e.g.
expansion) of existing education
facilities.
8.9There is a need to reduce costs
and adapt and make more efficient use
of existing community services to meet
modern provider expectations (e.g.
ambulance, fire and rescue, police,
primaryandsecondaryhealthcare,GPs,
dentistsurgeries)andcorporateservice
objectives via integrated and shared
facilities (e.g. libraries, leisure and
communitycentres,swimmingpoolsand
children's play facilities).
8.10There is a need to collocate
shared social and health support
services, schools and other community
facilitieswithnewinfrastructurebasedonanaccessiblenetworkofDistrictand
Neighbourhood Centres, distributed
across the borough.
8.11In the face of pressure for
housing development, it will be
important that Luton has the evidence
to retain its attractions and green
spaces as well as facilities for sport,
play, formal and informal leisure and
worship. These are critical to the
health and wellbeing of the town's
communities and visitors and they help
to promote the cultural diversity and
cohesivenessofLutonanditsreputation
as a place to stay, do business or be
entertained. The recycling of land and
buildings to establish facilities that
meet community needs including
culture,worship,educationandleisure,
will have to be sensitive to the safety
andamenityofusers,adjacentresidents
andoccupiersandthecharacterofeach
location.
Policy approach
8.12The NPPF urges that planning
policies reduce the need to travel by
balancing land uses for employment,
shopping, leisure, education and other
activities within their area (NPPF
paragraph 37).
8.13Large scale residential
development should provide
opportunities for living and working
on-site and for daily linked trips to key
facilities such as primary schools and
localshopsthatshouldbelocatedwithin
walking distance of most properties
(NPPF paragraph 38). A sufficient
choice of school places to meet needs
might be delivered through joined up
working with services and applicants
(e.g. give great weight to the need to
create, expand or alter schools (NPPF
paragraph 72)).
8.14Smarter working between
authorities, services and providers to
assess the quality and capacity of
infrastructure (e.g. transport, water
supply, energy utilities, waste, health,
social care, education, flood risk) to
meet forecast demands including
8 . Education and Other Community Facilities
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
71strategic infrastructure and nationally
significant infrastructure (NPPF
paragraph 162).
8.15High quality communications
infrastructure (e.g. broadband) is
essential for sustainable economic
growth and in enhancing the provision
of local community facilities and
services (NPPF paragraph 43).
8.16Sustainablecommunitiesshould
be planned positively for shared space,
retention and integration of social and
community facilities with housing to
allow communities to meet their needs
(NPPF paragraph 70).
Evidence base
8.17Luton's growing population is
characterisedbyayoungerpopulationprofile
than the regional average, leading to a
significantnaturalincreasewithmorebirths,
fewer deaths and a rising school age
population. There is demand for childcare
facilities and school places, in particular
primary school places.
8.18Most of the identified sites for new
housing developments are located in the
south or centre of the town. The ability of
the Council to find and afford land for new
schoolsislimitedandtheimplicationsofnot
securing additional schools close to new
housing is that children will have to travel
excessivedistancestoaccessaschoolplace.
This will be difficult for families to manage
and would have an adverse impact on the
Council’s revenue budget.
8.19Good quality education underpins
employment prospects for the town’s
residents and the prosperity of the local
economy. An expanding university with a
modernised new and enhanced campus and
leisure offer is based in the town centre.
BarnfieldCollegeandothercollegespresent
in the town are rationalising their portfolios
andthereareopportunitiesforconsolidation
inandaroundtheTownCentreand'Creative
Quarter'.8.20Luton's population is also ageing and
facing an increase in single person
households in line with national trends,
however migration, ethnic mix and cultural
expectations also lead to larger family sizes
and extended families with an increased
demand for shared properties, e.g. 'granny
annexes',loftconversions,housesinmultiple
occupation etc.
8.21Language barriers, lower skills and
wages attained by many in the resident
workforce (including women, carers and
parents wishing to return to work) have
increasedtheincidenceofsocialdeprivation
insomeLutonwards. Thisincreasesreliance
on public support services such as childcare
and healthcare, social services and
emergency and community safety.
8.22The Luton and Dunstable hospital
provides the major general and specialist
health care facilities although it is
developing its strategy for decentralising
certain outpatient clinics into the wider
community.
8.23ThePlayingPitchStrategy(PPS2014)
sets out key aims and supporting objectives
for sport provision in the Borough. The PPS
recognisesLuton’sconstrainedsupplyofland
for facilities, growing demand in some
sporting sectors as the population is set to
grow with a consequent increasing pressure
to develop sites for alternative uses.
Essentially,thekeyaimsseektoprotectand
enhance levels of outdoor sports facilities
and better manage the resources including
maximising shared access (e.g. to
educationalsportsfacilities)andinvestment.
8.24Aprioritisationlistisincludedwithin
the Strategy, which identifies the future
sportbysportdemands(e.g.football,rugby,
tennis, cricket etc.) and trends. In this way,
the PPS provides guidance for planning
decisions across Luton up to 2021; a further
Indoor Sports Facilities Strategy 2015 (ISFS
2015) has also been published. This sets out
a vision to increase access to, and better
manage, indoor sports facilities to improve
social inclusion and healthy lifestyles with
objectives seeking to protect, provide and
enhance provision (both the PPS14 and ISFS
2015 include supplementary guidance on
8 . Education and Other Community Facilities
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
72developer contributions). The Luton Green
Spaces Strategy 2014 (GSS 2014) has been
publishedinpartnershipwiththeGreensand
Trust in 2014. It sets out the scale and type
of green space provision across the borough
and its role including spatial analysis of the
accessibility, standard and shortfall/deficit
ingreenspaceprovisionbytypeandlocation
in order to guide planning decisions. This
evidence is also supported by the Luton
Green Infrastructure Plan published in
partnershipwiththeGreensandTrustin2015
and this identifies a strategic network of
green infrastructure across the borough.
Policy LLP24 - Education and Other
Community Facilities
Protection of education and other
community facilities
A.Planningpermissionwillbegranted
for development that contributes
towards an identified need for
community facilities and services
arising from the impact of the
development either on-site or
off-site within service hubs based
in District or Neighbourhood
Centres. Development that would
lead to a loss of community
facilities will be permitted where:
i. existing facilities elsewhere
in a suitable location can
meet the displaced needs; or
ii.itisunsuitableforalternative
community uses for which
thereisademonstrableneed;
or
iii. equivalent or better
replacement facilities in
terms of quantity and quality
are provided in a suitable
location.
New and extended education,
childcare, nursery, and other
community facilities
Provisionfortheequivalentcapacityfor
sufficientprimaryandsecondaryschool
places over the plan period will be
supported. Subject to a review by theEducation Service, this will include any
scope for an expansion of existing
schools through innovative design and
density, opportunities for shared
facilities (including multi-storey
facilities) and primary and secondary
school allocations on former tennis
courts south of the Brache and former
cricket ground east of the River Lea on
theBrache(asidentifiedonthepolicies
map).
B. New and extended education,
childcare, nursery, and other
community facilities will be
granted planning permission
provided that:
i. a demonstrable local or
regional need is established,
andthefacilityiswellrelated
to the area it serves;
ii. it would not adversely affect
the viability and vitality of a
District or Neighbourhood
centre;
iii. there would be no
unacceptable effect on the
amenity of any surrounding
residential dwellings and
other uses;
iv. itdoesnottakelandeitherin
or allocated for other uses,
unlessitisdemonstratedthat
the need for the facility
outweighsthatfortheexisting
or allocated use;
v. there is suitable vehicular
access and safe dropping off
and picking up areas; and
vi. where the proposed facility
wouldbeinpremisesthatare
used for another purpose, it
remains subordinate to the
main use of the premises.
Integrating Facilities
C. Increased local and integrated
service delivery will be supported
in conjunction with local
communities (unless such use
would have an adverse impact on
the delivery of the educational
8 . Education and Other Community Facilities
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
73service or adverse impact on the
character of the area or amenity
of nearby residents/ properties),
particularly:
i. flexiblemulti-usebuildingsin
public and community
ownership;
ii. co-location of sports centres
and playing pitches with
schools;
iii. agreements to use schools
facilities and other public
buildings for community use;
iv.co-locationofdoctor,dentist,
and pharmacy facilities; and
v. toshareandintegratepolice,
fire,andambulancefacilities.
8 . Education and Other Community Facilities
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
749 High Quality Design
High Quality Design
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 2: To utilise Luton’s
economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
Strategic Objective 3: To ensure that new
housing delivers an appropriate level of
provisiontomeetlocalneedsintermsofthe
number of homes, subject to capacity
constraintsandamixofdwellingtypes,sizes
and tenures that offer local residents a
choice of where to live and addresses issues
of affordability and overcrowding. Luton
Borough Council will work collaboratively
withneighbouringauthoritiestohelpensure
unmet need is provided in appropriate
locations outside Luton, and to actively
monitor progress in terms of unmet need.Strategic Objective 4: To establish an
effective network and hierarchy of Town,
DistrictandNeighbourhoodCentrestoserve
as the heart of local communities and
improve health through improved access by
train, bus, walking and cycling to a mix of
uses including shopping, services and jobs.
Strategic Objective 5: To improve the built
and natural environment to deliver quality
places,throughhighqualityandsustainable
design taking into account the landscape,
setting and character of the town and
neighbourhoods within its national (i.e.
AONB)andlocallandscapesettings,including
heritage assets and providing safe
environments which help to reduce crime
and the fear of crime.
StrategicObjective8: Improveaccessibility,
connectivity, sustainability and ease of
movementto,fromandwithintheborough.
Strategic Objective 10: Improve, protect
and enhance biodiversity of natural areas
within the town, including the quality,
accessibility, health and recreational value
of green space, the River Lea Corridor, the
ChilternsAreaofOutstandingNaturalBeauty
9 . High Quality Design
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
75(AONB),theAreasofGreatLandscapeValue
(AGLV) and Areas of Local Landscape Value
(ALLV) and their connectivity.
Strategic Objective 11: To safeguard and
ensuretheprudentuseofnaturalresources,
increase energy and water efficiency and
encourageandpromotetheuseofrenewable
energy sources to help adapt to climate
change, and manage pollution and natural
hazards, avoid inappropriate development
in areas at risk of flooding, secure
improvements in air and water quality and
ensure effective waste management.
9.1National Planning Policy says that
planning should always seek to secure high
quality design and a good standard of
amenityforallexistingandfutureoccupants
of land and buildings. Good design is a key
aspect of sustainable development (e.g.
mitigation and adaption to climate change
and sustainable use of resources including
energy, water supply and quality with
particularregardtopolicesLLP37andLLP38)
and is indivisible from good planning, and
shouldcontributepositivelytomakingplaces
betterforpeople. Localplansshouldcontain
robust and comprehensive policies that set
out the quality of development that will be
expected for the area.
9.2Nationalpolicyalsoexplainsthatlocal
planning authorities should consider using
design codes where they could help deliver
high quality outcomes. Design policies
should, however, avoid unnecessary
prescriptionordetailandshouldconcentrate
on guiding the overall scale, density,
massing,height,landscape,layout,materials
and access of new development in relation
to neighbouring buildings and the local area
more generally. Local planning authorities
should have local design review
arrangementsinplacetoprovideassessment
and support to ensure high standards of
design. In assessing applications, local
planning authorities should have regard to
therecommendationsfromthedesignreview
panel.
9.3Planningpoliciesanddecisionsshould
addresstheconnectionsbetweenpeopleand
places and the integration of newdevelopment into the natural, built and
historic environment. An early engagement
on design produces the greatest benefits.
9.4In determining applications, great
weight should be given to outstanding or
innovative designs that help raise the
standard of design more generally in the
area. Permission should be refused for
developmentofpoordesignthatfailstotake
theopportunitiesavailableforimprovingthe
characterandqualityofanareaandtheway
it functions.
9.5Local planning authorities should not
refuse planning permission for buildings or
infrastructure that promote high levels of
sustainability because of concerns about
incompatibility with an existing townscape,
if those concerns have been mitigated by
good design (unless the concern relates to a
designated heritage asset and the impact
would cause material harm to the asset or
its setting, which is not outweighed by the
proposal’s economic, social and
environmental benefits).
9.6Poorlyplacedadvertisementscanhave
a negative impact on the appearance of the
built and natural environment. Control over
outdooradvertisementsshouldbeefficient,
effective and simple in concept and
operation.Onlythoseadvertisementswhich
will clearly have an appreciable impact on
abuildingorontheirsurroundingsshouldbe
subject to the local planning authority’s
detailed assessment. Within conservation
areas, internally illuminated adverts are
unlikely to be acceptable but will be
considered on their merits having regard to
thecharacteristicsoftheconservationarea.
9.7TheNPPFalsohighlightstheimportant
role planning and design play in creating
healthy, inclusive communities and that
planning policies and decisions should aim
to achieve places which promote:
opportunities for meetings between
members of the community who might
not otherwise come into contact with
eachother,includingthroughmixed-use
developments, strong neighbourhood
centres and active street frontages,
which bring together those who work,
live and play in the vicinity;
9 . High Quality Design
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
76safeandaccessibleenvironmentswhere
crime, disorder, and the fear of crime
do not undermine quality of life or
community cohesion; and
safe and accessible developments,
containing clear and legible pedestrian
routes, and high quality public space,
which encourage the active and
continual use of public areas.
9.8The proposed design policies reflect
the Government's approach and the Council
recognises the very important role design
playsindevelopingsustainablecommunities,
including attracting investment to the
borough. The look and feel of the built
environment is a key determinant of health
and fundamental to the creation of
sustainable environments. The quality of
internal and external spaces can impact
greatly on physical and mental health and
wellbeing. Good quality environments can
also support many local strategies and
initiativessuchastheLutonDementiaAction
Alliance.
9.9Land within the borough is a finite
resourceandtheCouncilwillseektoensure
thatitisdevelopedandusedefficientlyand
effectively to meet demand and a range of
local community needs including
opportunities to promote sport, leisure and
other physical activity in order to pursue
healthy communities and lifestyles. For
example, there is an under-provision of
allotments to fully meet demand in Luton
and development should therefore include
layouts and design features to provide
opportunities for allotments and communal
Green Space/ Green Infrastructure as well
as private space, for residents to grow their
own healthy produce. Using density as a
measurement does not adequately address
issues of character and context; therefore
development must also have regard to plot
ratio, development mix, scale and form to
help identify spaciousness as a reflection of
character. The future application of
development densities also needs to be
informed by securing adequate internal and
external space, privacy, sunlight and
daylight, which becomes increasingly
importantasdensitiesincrease.TheCouncil
will require new developments to
demonstratethatallhousinghasacceptableprivatespace,privacy,daylightandsunlight
having regard to the requirements of future
occupiers, site specific circumstances and
the character of the locality.
9.10Development potentially affecting
the Chilterns AONB its setting should refer
to the ChilternsBuildingDesignGuidance to
ensure consistency of design and materials
across the Chilterns and the Chilterns
Conservation Board's Position Statement on
Development Affecting the Setting of the
Chilterns AONB where appropriate.
9.11Development provides opportunities
tosecureamoreaccessibleenvironmentfor
everyone including those with mobility
concerns such as wheelchair users, people
with impaired vision, elderly people and
those with young children. Further
consideration will be given to the need and
appropriateness of producing a
Supplementary Planning Document and
development briefs for the design of new
development.
Policy LLP25 - High Quality Design
Buildings and spaces will be of high
qualitydesignwithdistinctivecharacter
and be safe and easily accessed by all
members of the community. Proposals
will need to demonstrate adherence to
the best practice principles of urban
design to help create quality places in
the Borough.
Inparticular,wherethefollowingdesign
criteria are material to an application
site, its context and development
proposals,provisionshouldbemadeto:
i. enhance the distinctiveness and
characteroftheareabyresponding
positivelytothetownscape,street
scene, site and building context,
form, scale, height, pattern and
materials, distinctiveness, and
natural features including bio
diversity;
ii. create or enhance attractive safe,
accessible, and active open public
spaces, creatively using hard and
soft landscaping and public art for
all members of the community;
9 . High Quality Design
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
77iii. provide continuity of built form,
connectivity,activefrontages,and
enclosure;
iv. optimiseandimproveaccessibility
to walking and cycling and
connections to public transport,
local services, open spaces, and
community services and facilities;
v.optimisehigherdensitiesandavoid
backland development where it
would give rise to averse amenity
whilst meeting the other
requirements of this policy;
vi. provide green infrastructure and
measures to protect, conserve, or
enhance natural assets and
biodiversity;
vii.beadaptabletochangeofusesand
flexible to accommodate changing
livingandworkingrequirementsof
allthemembersofthecommunity;
viii.reduce carbon emissions, risk of
flooding, and increase energy and
water efficiency and quality;
ix.promotesportandphysicalactivity
and healthy communities(13);
x.promoteopportunitiesforreducing
crime and anti-social behaviour;
xi. deliver new housing in accordance
with external amenity space
standards set out in appendix 6,
and minimises noise, overlooking
and overshadowing/loss of light,
address tall buildings and the
protectionofimportantviews,and
ensure access to storage and
privacy; and
xii. deliver and integrate public art,
particularlyinstrategicallocations.
The Council will use a Design Review
Panel to review major development
proposals where appropriate and will
take into consideration its
recommendations when considering
applications.
Supplementary guidance through SPDs
and Development Briefs on high quality
design may be produced to expand andcomplement the principles established
in this Plan and to provide clear
guidance to applicants.
Advertisements and Signage
Policy LLP26 - Advertisements and
Signage
A. Consent will be given for
advertisements, signage, and
displays that do not:
i.adverselyaffectthecharacter
or appearance of the building
or area;
ii. hinder the view of a valued
landscape, or feature;
iii. cover important decorative
featuresofahistoricbuilding;
iv. result in proposals that are
outofkeepingintheirsetting
in terms of size, design,
illumination, materials, or
colour; or
v. have an adverse effect on
traffic safety, including
pedestrian safety.
B. Advertisement consent for
hoardings around development
sites will only be granted for a
limited period.
13http://www .sportengland.org/facilities-planning/planning-for-sport/planning-tools-and-guidance/active-design
9 . High Quality Design
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
7810 Natural & Historic
Environment
Natural & Historic Environment
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 5: To improve the built
and natural environment to deliver quality
places,throughhighqualityandsustainable
design taking into account the landscape,
setting and character of the town and
neighbourhoods within its national (i.e.
AONB)andlocallandscapesettings,including
heritage assets and providing safe
environments which help to reduce crime
and the fear of crime.
Strategic Objective 10: Improve, protect
and enhance biodiversity of natural areas
within the town, including the quality,
accessibility, health and recreational value
of green space, the River Lea Corridor, the
ChilternsAreaofOutstandingNaturalBeauty
(AONB),theAreasofGreatLandscapeValue
(AGLV) and Areas of Local Landscape Value
(ALLV) and their connectivity.10.1The objectives above reflect the
integrated aspirations of the borough to
deliver quality places through high quality
designandsustainabledevelopmentthatwill
enhance and protect the natural and built
environment and the amenities of its
residents. This includes protection of the
town’s important natural and built assets as
well as bringing such assets back into
productive use in sympathetic and
appropriate ways through conservation and
enhancement measures for built heritage,
valued landscapes, green spaces, important
wildlife habitats and geological sites.
10.2In particular, objective 5 is founded
on national legislation that requires local
planning authorities to recognise heritage
andhabitatassetsasirreplaceableresources
and to set out positive strategies for their
conservationandenjoyment.Tohelpachieve
this, Luton will seek to work with
stakeholders and other bodies to maintain
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
79anup-to-dateevidencebaseusingobjective
and local expertise. Relevant parties
will include the Bedfordshire & Luton
Wildlife Working Group (and its various
sub-groups), Bedfordshire Local Nature
Partnership, Upper River Lea Catchment
Partnership,GreensandTrust,LutonFriends
ofParksandGreenSpacesandtheBiological
Records & Monitoring Centre (BRMC).
Key Issues:
10.3The population of the town is
expected to grow significantly over the
plan period. This will increase the
demand placed on Luton’s limited and,
in some communities, deficient supply
ofgreenspaceandwildlifehabitatsand
also upon local heritage and valued
landscapes of national and local
importance.
10.4Future development will
consequently need to protect, enhance
and, where feasible, increase the
limited supply of recreational green
spaceandgreeninfrastructurenetworks
within the borough in order to remedy
deficiencies (e.g. in areas deficient in
open space of recreational value) and
achievelocalstandards,asidentifiedin
the Greenspace Strategy Review (2014)
and the Green Infrastructure Plan for
Luton (2015). This evidence identifies
the strategic role and importance of GI
across the borough and its
interrelationship with green networks
crossing the boundary linking with GI in
neighbouring local authorities (see
Appendices11and12):tomakepublicly
accessible open space assets available
to all Luton residents as the population
grows significantly over the next 20
years.
10.5A need to ensure that green
infrastructurenetworksofqualitygreen
and blue space (e.g. ponds, rivers,
streams and lakes etc.) continue to
contribute towards improving the
quality of life, health and recreation
opportunities for Luton’s existing and
future residents and visitors. Greeninfrastructure networks should also
make important contributions to
conserving wildlife, habitats and
landscapes in order to promote
biodiversity and opportunities for
climate adaptation at a strategic and
locallevel.Itshouldberecognisedthat
ordinary householders can also
contribute through positive gardening
for wildlife. School and community
ecological projects (potentially within
other public or institutional land) play
an important role in the ecology of the
Borough.
10.6A need to protect the most
importantgreenspace(includingDistrict
and Neighbourhood Parks) and future
designations from the community of
Local Green Space (as defined in the
NPPF) and only in exceptional
circumstances allow losses arising from
development. Natural open space and
green infrastructure may include parks
and gardens (including Neighbourhood
and District parks) for informal leisure
and recreation. In Luton, such open
space is often multi-functional,
recognising the need to maximise the
utility of scarce open space and green
infrastructurethatcombinemoreformal
provisionforoutdoorandindoorplaying
pitches and sporting activities. Policy
LLP24 will, however, specifically apply
inrelationtoformalindoorandoutdoor
sporting facilities. It is not realistic to
expect significant net additional
provision of open space and green
infrastructure, given the constrained
land available within a built up area
such as Luton. Protection and
enhancementofexistingopenspaceand
green infrastructure, including for
multi-functional purposes, is therefore
asignificantrequirementandreflected
in the policy LLP27.
10.7A need to ensure that
development delivers an appropriate
quantity and quality of green space
including on and off-site provision,
replacementfacilities,commutedsums
and management costs.
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
8010.8Ensure the statutory protection
ofdesignatedwildlifeandgeologywhile
seeking net additional contributions to
the stock of biodiversity and plant and
animal habitats with regard to Section
40oftheNaturalEnvironmentandRural
Communities Act 2006.
10.9Trees, including mature and
veteran trees and those protected by
tree preservation orders, provide
valuable eco-system services and
environmental benefits. These
includecarbonreduction,filteringfrom
noiseandintrusion,coolingeffectsand,
together with hedgerows, also act as
strategic wildlife corridors and havens,
which harbour many diverse plant and
animal species that need protection.
10.10Requirethattheenvironmental
impacts and significant effects of
development are clearly identified and
supplied under the statutory regime
((Town and County Planning
(Environmental Impact Assessment)
(EnglandandWales)Regulations1999)).
This should be via an Environmental
Statement. Impact assessments might
also be required in cases where forms
of development are not proscribed in
regulationsbutcan,dependingontheir
nature, also have significant
environmental effects.
10.11 The need to conserve and
enhance important nationally
designated landscapes such as the
Chilterns AONB (within and adjacent to
the borough), scheduled monuments,
registeredparksandgardens,registered
common land and access land, Queen
Elizabeth II Playing Fields and local
designations including the AGLV and
ALLV (see Policies Map and glossary) to
ensure that development is sensitively
located and designed to protect
importantlandscapesandtheirsetting.
10.12 Ensure statutory protection of
allotmentswhileseekingnetadditional
contributions in line with the standards
identified in the Greenspace Strategy
(see greenspace standards in Appendix
11).10.13 To improve the built
environment by delivering high quality
places that take into account heritage
assets, bringing them back into an
appropriateusethatconservestheasset
for future generations. This will be
achieved by encouraging development
that makes a positive contribution to
local character and distinctiveness,
which is sensitive to its context and,
where appropriate, ensures that any
impact on the archaeological resource
for the borough is properly mitigated.
10.14 Ensuring appraisals are
producedforeachoftheborough’sfive
ConservationAreasand toreviewother
areas for potential designation.
10.15TomaintainandreviewLuton’s
local list of heritage assets to ensure
important designated heritage assets
(includinglistedbuildings,conservation
areas and scheduled monuments) and
non-designated heritage assets
(including locally listed buildings and
archaeology)arevalued,conservedand
givenpolicyprotection.Non-designated
heritage assets are those elements of
thehistoricenvironmentthatcontribute
to the unique character and identity of
the town.
10.16Toensurethatalldevelopment
affecting heritage assets with
archaeological interest give due
consideration to the archaeological
resource and include appropriate
mitigation measures. Information on
heritage assets gathered as part of the
plan making or development
management processes will be made
publicly available by depositing it with
the Historic Environment Record and
archives with Luton Culture.
10.17 To ensure that those heritage
assetscurrentlyconsideredtobeatrisk
ofneglectordecayandincludedonthe
Historic England at Risk Register are
effectively managed and protected.
These currently include:
Plaiters Lea Conservation Area
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
81DraysDitchesScheduledMonument
Putteridge Bury Registered Park
Policy approach
National Policy
10.18 Local planning authorities
should set out a strategic approach in
theirLocalPlans,planningpositivelyfor
the creation, protection, enhancement
and management of networks of
biodiversity and green infrastructure
(NPPF paragraph 114).
10.19 Local planning authorities
shouldsetcriteriabasedpoliciesagainst
which proposals for any development
on or affecting protected wildlife or
geodiversity sites or landscape areas
will be judged. Distinctions should be
made between the hierarchy of
international, national and locally
designated sites, so that protection is
commensurate with their status and
gives appropriate weight to their
importance and the contribution that
theymaketowiderecologicalnetworks
(NPPF paragraph 113).
10.20 Thedutytohaveregardtothe
Chilterns AONB and give great weight
to conserving its landscape and scenic
beauty and its protection from major
development,whilstalsoprotectingand
enhancingvaluedlandscapes,geological
conservation interests and soils (NPPF
paragraphs 109, 115 and 116 and
NPPG Ref ID: 8-003-20140306);
recognising the wider benefits of
ecosystem services (NPPF paragraph
109); and minimising impacts on
biodiversity and providing net gains in
biodiversitywherepossible,contributing
to the Government’s commitment to
halt the overall decline in biodiversity,
including by establishing coherent
ecological networks that are more
resilienttocurrentandfuturepressures
(NPPF paragraph 109).
10.21Localauthoritiesshouldsetout
a positive strategy for the conservation
and enjoyment of heritage assets most
at risk through neglect decay or other
threats (NPPF paragraph 126).10.22 Local authorities should look
for opportunities for new development
within Conservation Areas and in the
setting of heritage assets to enhance
and better reveal their significance
(NPPF paragraph 137).
10.23 Local authorities should have
an up-to-date evidence base about the
historic environment in their area to
assessthesignificanceofheritageassets
and the contribution made to the
environment (NPPF paragraph 169).
10.24 Planning (Listed Buildings and
Conservation Areas) Act 1990 requires
thatlocalplanningauthoritiesformulate
and publish proposals for the
preservation and enhancement of any
partsoftheirareathatareconservation
areas. A key issue for Luton’s
Conservation Areas, and particularly
PlaitersLea,arisesfromthedemolition
of buildings.
Evidence base
10.25 The Bedfordshire & Luton, Local
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) 2001 and
legacy plans are as updated via the 'UK
Post-2010BiodiversityFramework',published
in July 2012 and the Habitat and Species
action plans set out under Rebuilding
Biodiversityin Bedfordshire& Luton Volume
1 (2006) and Volume 2 (2007) are available
on the BRMC website. The 1992 Nature
Conservation Strategy for Luton is currently
under review.
10.26 Therearecurrentlynoexamplesof
SpecialProtectionAreas(SPA),SpecialAreas
ofConservation(SAC),RamsarSitesorother
internationally protected sites within the
borough. Similarly, there are currently no
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs)
within Luton.
10.27 However, Natural England have
recently indicated a desire to review SSSIs
associated with the Bedfordshire chalk, and
surveys of Bradger's Hill (2003 & 2012),
Dallow Downs (2003 & 2012) and Cowslip
Meadow(2012)haveallindicatedthesesites
to be of SSSI quality, and designation may
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
82follow in due course. SSSIs can be regarded
as the 1st tier of UK biodiversity site
designations.
10.28 County Wildlife Sites (CWS - see
Glossary)representtheprincipalcomponents
of the ecological network in the borough,
(formerly known as ‘Prime Sites of Nature
Conservation Interest’) and they were
reviewed in 2012 by the independent panel
applying DEFRA criteria and guidelines. An
additional CWS was recognised at the land
tenanted by the Sunshine Riding Stables.
Recognition as a CWS does not confer
statutoryprotectionofthesite,noranyright
of access. The 25 CWSs in Luton can be
regarded as the 2nd tier of UK biodiversity
site designations:
1. Biscot Churchyard (Holy Trinity, Trinity
Road)
2. Castle Croft and Bluebell Wood
(includes meadows off Roebuck Close)
3.BradgersHill(includespartsofStopsley
Common, the old Hexton Highway and
parts of the former Nail's Hill Common
in Bushmead Park)
4. Bramingham Wood (includes
Bramingham Long Field)
5. The Chase (also known as Mixes Hill
Wood)
6.ChurchCemetery(CrawleyGreenRoad)
7. Cowslip Meadow
8. Croda Colloids (New Bedford Road)
9. Dallow Downs (includes Runley Downs
& Wood and Winsdon Hill)
10. Honeygate and Crick Hills
11. LeagraveCommon(includesWhitefield
SpinneyandCastleWay(SpinneyWood)
and Wauluds Bank)
12. Fallowfield
13. Oaket Wood (part lies in Hertfordshire)
14. Oosey Hill (part lies in Central
Bedfordshire)
15. People's Park
16. River Lea (includes headstreams and
tributaries and sections of adjoining
open spaces)
17. Riverside Walk (Riverside Park)
18. Slaughters Wood and Green Lane (also
known as Haverings)
19. Stockwood Park (part)
20. Stony Hill (also known as Icknield
School)21. Wigmore Park
22. Wandon End Park
23. Winch Hill Wood (part lies in
Hertfordshire)
24. Sunshine Riding Stables
10.29 District Wildlife Sites (DWS) are a
third tier designation which replace ‘other
sites of nature conservation Interest’ and
are designated via the ‘Local Sites
Partnership’ using criteria on the BRMC
website (see Glossary). There are 14 DWS in
the Borough:
1.DairybornScarp(formerCWSalsoknown
as Spittlesea Hill)
2. Dallow Lane
3. Foxdell
4. Great Bramingham Park
5. Great Hayes Wood
6. Hatters Way
7. Hay Wood & Stopsley Common
8. Hitchin Road Spinney
9. Lewsey Park
10. Luton Parkway Verges
11. Mixes Hill
12. River Lea
13.StockingstoneHill(sometimesknownas
Cowridge End)
14. Stockwood Park (part)
10.30 The Green Spaces Strategy Review
includesahierarchyofparksandopenspace
and identifies in more detail the needs and
deficiencies in the town in relation to open
space of recreational value, natural and
semi-natural habitats and for allotments
(please refer to Appendix 11 for space
standards). The Green Infrastructure Plan
2015 also sets out the network of green
space across the borough and its boundary
linking up with networks in other local
authorities (see Appendix 12).
10.31 The following comprise District
Parks (as identified in the Policies Map):
1. Leagrave Park
2. Lewsey Park
3. Stopsley Common
4. Stockwood District Park
5. Wardown Park
6. Wigmore Valley
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
8310.32 The following comprise the
Neighbourhood Parks (as identified in the
Policies Map):
1. Addington Way Sports Field
2. Aschroft Road
3. Birdsfoot Lane
4. Blundell Road Rec
5. Brantwood Neighbourhood Park
6. Buckingham Tip
7. Chaul End Lane Neighbourhood Park
8. Crawley Green Rec
9. Crawley Green Road/Colwell
Rise/Linbridge Way
10. Dallow Downs
11. Foxdell Neighbourhood Park
12. Great Bramingham Park
13. Mayne Avenue (1)
14. Mayne Avenue (2)
15. Icknield Recreation Ground
16. Kingsway Rec Neighbourhood Park
17. Lancaster Avenue
18.LeaManorRecreationGroundNorthwell
Drive/Whitehorse Vale
19. Lewsey Green/Regis Rec
20. Little Bramingham Park
21. Manor Road Neighbourhood Park
22. Memorial Neighbourhood Park
23. Peoples Park and Popes Meadow
24. Powdrill's Field Neighbourhood Park
25. Freeman's Green Marsh Farm
26. The Moor
27. Wandon Close
28. Whitefield
10.33 The Greenspace Strategy Review
will provide evidence on Luton's strategic
green space resources and needs.
10.34 The Luton Rights of Way
Improvement Plan (2008) sets out a number
of actions, building upon improvements to
the network of paths and cycleways in and
around the town, together with various
initiativestoencouragegreateruseofthem.
10.35 When development includes the
provisionofplayingpitches,thePlayingPitch
Strategy (2014) provides useful information
for playing space standards and other
requirements.10.36Thegreenspacerequirementwithin
specialist accommodation (e.g. communal
housing for the elderly) will be confined to
provision of amenity space as part of the
scheme.
10.37 The following are evidence studies
relating to landscape:
Chilterns AONB Management Plan
(2014–2019).
Chilterns Conservation Board's Position
Statement on Development Affecting
theSettingoftheChilternsAONB,2011.
LutonLandscapeCharacterAssessments
(LCA), drafted in 2014 as evidence for
a‘ProposedLandscapeDesignationsfor
Luton’study(GreensandTrustandLocal
Landscape Working Group) provide
evidence for a 2 tier designation of
areas of local landscape importance.
Tier 1 Areas of Great Landscape Value
(AGLV) and Tier 2 Areas of Local
Landscape Value (ALLV) as identified
on the Policies Map. These are as
follows:
AGLV
Stopsley Common
Dallow Corridor (includes Bluebell
Wood)
Stockwood Park
Bradger's Hill Corridor (includes
Popes Meadow and Bell’s Close)
Bramingham Wood Corridor
Great Bramingham Park
ALLV
Hart Hill
SomeriesFarm&DaneStreetFarm
Turnpike Drive
Lower Lea Valley
Lewsey Park
Wigmore Rural
Upper Lea Valley
Putteridge Edge
This LCA evidence also identifies
Landscape Opportunity Areas that
provideguidanceonwheretheCouncil,
in partnership with another agencies
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
84and bodies, might consider targeting
further enhancements to improve
landscapes not currently at a standard
for designation.
10.38 The following are evidence studies
related to heritage assets:
Luton Local List of Heritage Assets
updated in 2010 and subjected to
detailed assessment through public
engagement against a set of criteria.
Buildings of special local, historical or
architecturalinterestfeatureinthelist.
Plaiters’ Lea Conservation Area, Luton
Historic Area Assessment (English
Heritage June 2011).
CentralBedfordshireandLutonHistoric
Environment Record including a survey
of Borough owned heritage sites.
The National Heritage List for England.
Archaeological Assessment of Strategic
Housing Land Availability Assessment
(SHLAA)andPotentialEmploymentSites
(Central Bedfordshire Archaeological
Service 2013).
The Hat Industry of Luton and its
Buildings (English Heritage October
2013).
Urban Panel Review Paper (CABE /
English Heritage October 2009).
PolicyLLP27-OpenSpaceandNatural
Greenspace
The Council will work with developers,
landowners, and stakeholders and
support proposals that safeguard and
enhanceexistingnetworksofopenspace
(including the District and
Neighbourhood Parks identified in the
Policies Map) and establish new green
infrastructure within the borough in
accordance with standards established
in the Green Infrastructure, Nature
Conservationand GreenspaceStrategies
(including for recreation and
biodiversity).
A. Where there is a shortfall of open
space to meet the needs of
occupants of new housing
development, proposals whichgenerate demand for new or
enhanced open space and Green
Infrastructure will be supported in
accordance with the following
sequence:
i. The type, quantity, and
quality of open space needed
to support the development
is provided on-site in
accordance with open space
standards (Appendix11) and
existing deficiencies to be
addressed within the locality,
asidentifiedbythelocalplan
evidence; or
ii. An equivalent provision is
made in the vicinity where
on-site provision is not
practicable; or
iii. Anequivalentcommutedsum
is provided to enhance
existing off-site facilities
including provision for long
termmaintenancewhereopen
space is transferred to the
Council or to a third party.
Loss of Open Space
B. Development proposals that result
in the loss of open space, parks,
allotments,importantgreenspace,
and green infrastructure will only
be permitted where the most
up-to-dateevidencedemonstrates
that the open space is not in an
area of identified deficit in the
locality and is surplus to
requirements.Exceptionally,losses
will also be permitted where:
i. replacement open space
provision can be made that is
ofanequivalenttype,quality,
and quantity or better and is
accessible and within the
vicinity; or
ii. theproposalisforalternative
or ancillary sports and
recreational provision, the
need for which clearly
outweighs the loss.
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
85Development on Open Space
C. Development will only be
permittedonparks,playingfields,
other outdoor sports facilities,
allotments, or other important
greenspacesshownonthePolicies
Map, where development is
ancillary, complementary, and
limited in scale securing the
efficient and effective use of the
existing green space.
Biodiversity and Nature
Conservation
PolicyLLP28-BiodiversityandNature
Conservation
The Council will work with partner
organisations to positively assess,
manage, and designate sites and
ecological networks including giving
support to development proposals that
addtothenetstockofwildlifehabitats
orwheretheyhelptodeliveranetgain
in the conservation and enhancement
of such sites. The protection given will
be commensurate with their status,
giving appropriate weight to their
importance and the contribution they
make to ecological networks.
A.Developmentproposalsthatimpact
adversely on statutory or other
designated sites, and ecological
networkswillneedtodemonstratecompliance with the following
sequential criteria:
i.avoidance,whereverpossible;
otherwise
ii. the benefits of the proposal
must clearly outweigh the
intrinsic nature conservation
interest;
iii. mitigation must be used,
including retention,
protection,enhancement,and
appropriate management to
minimiseanyharmduringand
after development; and
iv. compensation, through
acquisition and management
of an alternative habitat of
equivalent wildlife value in
the vicinity.
B. Allexistinghabitatsandecological
networks will be afforded a level
ofprotectionfromharmaccording
to statutory and non-statutory
nature conservation hierarchy
designations and the contribution
they make to wider ecological
networks. Tier 1 designations are
of national statutory importance
andtier2andtier3areofregional
orlocalimportancebutwithpolicy
protection in this statutory local
plan:
tier 1 National Nature
Reserves and Sites of Special
Scientific Interest;
tier 1 National Biodiversity
Action Plan;
tier 1 Habitats and Species
listed in section 41 of the
Natural Environment & Rural
Communities Act (2006);
tier 1 Species protected by
law;
tier 1 or 2 Ancient Woodland;
tier 2 Local Nature Reserves
including those previously
proposed;
tier 2 County Wildlife Sites;
tier 2 Sites of Heritage
Interest to Natural England;
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
86tier2LocalBiodiversityAction
Plan;
tier 3 District Wildlife Sites;
or
tier 3 other features of
biodiversity value within the
green network including aged
or veteran trees.
C. Sites within Luton deemed of tier
1 importance by Natural England
for potential SSSI designation in
association with the Bedfordshire
ChalkincludeBradgersHill,Dallow
Downs, and Cowslip Meadow.
D. Where there is a reasonable
likelihood that a development
proposal could have an adverse
effect on habitats or species of
biodiversity interest, the
prospective developer will be
required to submit an ecological
assessment with the planning
application. This should normally
include a phase 1 habitat survey
andprotectedspeciesinformation.
If invasive weed species listed on
Schedule 9 of the Wildlife and
Countryside Act in England and
Wales are present, such as
JapaneseKnotweedandHimalayan
Balsam, an invasive species
management plan should be
submitted.
E. Development site layouts should
retain any existing areas of
NationalPriorityHabitatswherever
possible, and to enhance their
visual and biodiversity value with
appropriate planting of locally
native trees, shrubs, and
hedgerows but only in such
locationsthatthelongtermimpact
on existing habitats (grasslands,
hedgerows, ponds, etc.) is not
deleterious through effects of
shading,leaffall,orotherimpacts.
Landscape and Geological
Conservation
PolicyLLP29-Landscape&Geological
Conservation
A. Development proposals will be
supported where they protect,
conserve, or enhance the
character, setting, and natural
beauty of national and local
landscape areas, according to the
followinghierarchyofdesignations:
i.Tier 1 National landscape
areas
the special character,
natural beauty,
landscape and setting of
the Chilterns Area of
Outstanding Natural
Beauty;
the historic character
and environmental
quality of Registered
Parks and Gardens and
their settings;
the historic integrity,
biodiversity and
recreational value of
Registered Commons,
and their settings; and
the environmental and
recreational value of
Access Land and
Section15 Land as
identified under the
Countryside and Rights
of Way Act (2000)
ii. Tier 2 Local landscape areas
A robust two –tier system of
designated local landscape
areas has been introduced to
replace the ad hoc local
landscape designations in
earlier local plans. It is
derived from the Landscape
CharacterAssessmentsof2014
and sites assessed against a
standard range of landscape
criteria. The most significant
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
87local landscapes are
designated and shown on the
Policies Map as:
a.Areas of Great
LandscapeValue(AGLV)
that include the most
important green
corridors and sites
adjoining the Chilterns
AONB:
Stopsley Common
DallowCorridor(includes
Bluebell Wood)
Stockwood Park
Bradger’s Hill Corridor
(includes Popes Meadow
and Bell’s Close)
Bramingham Wood
Corridor
Great Bramingham Park
b.Areas of Local
LandscapeValue(ALLV)
that include areas of
more limited value
withinthelocalcontext:
Hart Hill
Someries Farm & Dane
Street Farm
Turnpike Drive
Lower Lea Valley
Lewsey Park
Wigmore Rural
Upper Lea Valley
Putteridge Edge
Geological Landscapes
Regionally Important
Geological Sites that are a
statutorydesignationwillalso
be afforded a level of
protection from harm
consistent with their tier 1
statutory designation.
B. Planning applications will be
supported where they protect or
enhanceandaddtothedesignatedROW network (including informal
pedestrianroutes)givingaccessfor
all users, where feasible, to the
countryside and green space,
provided that:
i.traditionalandhistoricroutes
are maintained, such as
Icknield and Theed ways,
HextonWay,DallowLane,and
the Old Bedford Road; and
ii. access is designed and
regulated to encourage
biodiversity and prevent
inappropriate use of
materials, planting, signage,
and potential anti-social uses
e.g. from motorcycles and
vehicles.
Historic Environment
Policy LLP30 - Historic Environment
A. To protect, conserve and enhance
Luton’s unique and rich heritage,
identity, and sense of
place,developmentproposalsmust
take account of the character,
setting, and local distinctiveness
(including materials and detailing)
of local affected heritage assets,
and features of particular
importance including:
i. the manufacturing industry
and the hat industry;
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
88ii. registered parks and gardens
including Luton Hoo and
Wardown Park;
iii. historic landscape features
such as the Chilterns and
River Lea; and
iv. prominent listed buildings
including within the town
centre, the medieval street
patterns, the Town Hall, and
the Parish Church of St. Mary.
Any degree of harm and benefit arising
from development proposals will be
assessedagainstthe significanceofany
affected heritage assets including:
Designated heritage assets :
listed buildings
conservation areas
scheduled monuments
registered parks and gardens.
Non-designated heritage assets :
locally listed buildings
archaeology
B. There will be a presumption in
favouroftheretentionofheritage
assets.Developmentproposalswill
be supportedwhere they conserve
heritageassets,bringingthemback
intoappropriateuseforthebenefit
of future generations.
C.Anyharmorlosstoaheritageasset
requires clear and convincing
justification. Substantial harm to
or loss of a designated heritage
asset should be exceptional or
wholly exceptional depending on
the significance of the affected
heritage assets. It will only be
permitted where there are
substantial public benefits that
outweigh the harm or loss, or the
natureoftheheritageassetissuch
that no reasonable alternative use
includingconversioncanbefound,
and that appropriate marketing or
options for grant-funding or
charitable/public ownership have
been exhausted. Less thansubstantialharmtothesignificance
of a heritage asset should be
weighedagainstthepublicbenefits
of the proposal.
The loss of a building or other
element that makes a positive
contribution to the significance of
a conservation area should be
avoided and treated as substantial
harmorlessthansubstantialharm
depending on the circumstances.
D.Proposalsaffectingdesignatedand
non-designated heritage assets
require a Heritage Statement for
validation (which may be included
within a Design and Access
Statement), setting out the
significance of the asset, the
resulting impact, and mitigation,
addressingthesettingoftheasset.
E. Where a site includes, or has the
potential to include, heritage
assetswitharchaeologicalinterest,
developers should submit an
appropriatedeskbasedassessment
and, where necessary, a strategy
for field evaluation using
non-invasive and invasive
techniques prior to the
determination of the planning
application. On the basis of this
assessment, an appropriate
conservation strategy will be
developed, which may include
preservation in situ where
appropriate and/or full or partial
recording, with the record of
evidence being made publically
accessible. If non-designated
heritage assets of archaeological
interest are of equivalent value to
a designated asset, they would
need to be subject to the same
policies for designated heritage
assets.
F. Applicants will be required to
record and advance an
understanding of heritage assets
that are to be lost (wholly or in
part). The recording will be in a
manner proportionate to their
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
89importance and the impact. This
evidence (and any archive
generated) should be made
accessibletothepublic.Recording
and advancing the understanding
ofheritageassetswillberegulated
bylegalagreementsonthephasing
of demolition and development.
The Council will seek to:
maintain a regularly updated
schedule of Luton’s Designated
Heritage Assets and locally listed
heritage;
ensure that heritage assets
considered to be at risk of neglect
or decay, included on the Historic
England's at Risk Register, are
effectively managed and
protected; and
work with stakeholders and the
community to establish
Conservation Area Appraisals and
Management Plans for its
Conservation Areas.
10 . Natural & Historic Environment
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
9011 Transport,
Communications & Climate
Change
Sustainable Transport Strategy
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 1: Retain and enhance
Luton’s important sub-regional role as a
place for economic growth and opportunity
including the safeguarding of London Luton
Airport’s existing operations and to support
the airport ’s sustainable growth over the
Plan period based on its strategic
importance.
Strategic Objective 4: To establish an
effective network and hierarchy of Town,
DistrictandNeighbourhoodCentrestoserve
astheheartoflocalcommunities;improving
health and wellbeing through improved
access by train, bus, walking and cycling to
a mix of uses including shopping, services
and jobs.StrategicObjective8: Improveaccessibility,
connectivity, sustainability and ease of
movementto,fromandwithintheborough.
Key Issues
11.1Luton faces significant traffic
congestiondominatedbycartravel.The
town’s radial road pattern and lack of
orbital routes and chalk scarp
topographyfunnelsroadtrafficintothe
centralareaoralonga smallnumberof
key routes. However, sustainable
transport choices are possible to tackle
congestion. Luton's high population
density and its compact form makes
public transport, walking and cycling
potentially the preferred mode of
transport to car use because most
journeys are short.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
9111.2The Local Plan is required to
safeguard land committed for major
road schemes. The Council recognises
the economic benefits that will result
fromincreasingroadcapacity,including
improvedaccesstotheAirport,butwill
improve infrastructure for pedestrians
and cyclists as part of these schemes.
The Local Transport Plan sets out a
strategy for transport improvements
designed to overcome existing
environmental problems caused by
traffic and to facilitate the efficient
operation of public transport, walking
and cycling networks.
11.3The East Luton Circular Road
(north) route is safeguarded as a long
term option that might be required to
support future development. Running
betweenStopsleyandtheA6,including
a link to Barton Road along the line of
Weybourne Drive, it could allow the
introductionoftrafficcalmingmeasures
tocertainroutes.Sometrafficcouldbe
diverted away from the town centre
while access to the airport and key
employment areas to the east of the
town could be improved. Any road
proposal will be considered against
nationalpolicyandguidance,localplan
policy and legislative requirements
relating to heritage, biodiversity and
landscape.
11.4There is a need to improve
accessibility to key services by all
members of society, including the
mobility impaired and non-motorised
users. Major new development
including new transport interchange
facilitieswillneedtoaccommodatebus
accessibility improvements and, where
appropriate, safeguard and enhance
pedestrian and cycle routes.
11.5Mitigation will be required
against:
freight traffic on the network as a
resultofanincreaseindistribution
and warehouse development; and
any additional load on the local
transport network arising from
airport growth.Policy approach
11.6Government policy requires
significant traffic generating uses to be
supported by a Transport Statement or
Transport Assessment (NPPF paragraph
32).Developmentplansshouldpromote
sustainable transport solutions and a
pattern of development that supports
reductions in greenhouse gas emissions
andreducescongestion(NPPFparagraph
30).
11.7Localplanningauthoritiesshould
identify and protect routes and
infrastructuretowidentransportchoice
(NPPF paragraph 41). They should work
with other authorities and providers to
assess the quality and capacity of
infrastructure (e.g. for transport,
energy, telecommunications etc) to
meetforecastdemandandtheneedfor
local strategic and national
infrastructure (NPPF paragraph 162).
Evidence base
PAS–Astepsapproachtoinfrastructure
planning and delivery June 2009
Creating Growth - Cutting Carbon,
Department for Transport, 2012
Network Management and Congestion
Strategy 2008-2012 section 4.2
Local Transport Plan 2011-2026
sections, 5.3, 6.2 and 9.2
Sustainable Travel Plan 2011-2015
Action for Roads, Department for
Transport, 2013
Understanding Walking and cycling,
2011
Localmeasurestopromotewalkingand
cycling, NICE, 2012
Europehealtheconomictoolforwalking
and cycling, WHO/HEAT
South East Midlands LEP Transport
Strategy March 2014 WYG
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
92Policy LLP31 - Sustainable Transport
Strategy
The strategy for sustainable transport
in Luton is based on the vision for the
Local Transport Plan 2011-2026, which
is to ensure that an integrated, safe,
accessible, and more sustainable
transportsystemsupportstheeconomic
regeneration and prosperity of the
town.
A. The Council will work with its
partners, agencies and developers
to deliver:
i. reduced congestion around
the town centre and key
strategic routes including
seeking to deliver targeted
road and junction
improvements needed to
accommodate Luton's growth
including strategic and local
improvementstoaddresscross
boundary growth while
promoting sustainable modes
of transport;
ii. sustainable connections via
the Luton Dunstable busway
serving the conurbation with
potentiallinkstoneighbouring
authorities and key
developments in Luton;
iii. improved accessibility and
connectivity for a more
pedestrian friendly town
centre environment for all
users;
iv. controlled parking within the
town centre, district, and
neighbourhood centres to
support sustainable local
service delivery, housing, and
jobs, linked trips and
accessible destinations; and
v. controlled freight traffic and
facilities by using traffic
managementonkeycorridors
and routes into Luton and
potential development sites
on its borders.B.PlanningPermissionwillbegranted
for proposed developments that
meet the criteria below, where
thesearerelevanttotheproposal:
i. minimises the need to travel;
ii. provides a sustainable
transport choice with priority
for buses, pedestrians, and
cyclists;
iii. reduces road congestion
particularly at peak times;
iv. reduces the safety risk to
motor vehicles,
non-motorised,andvulnerable
users;
v. provides cycle parking /
storage; and
vi. ensures the quality of the
local environment is not
compromised.
C. Transport Assessments, Transport
Statements, and Travel Plans
should be provided for
developments (as set out in
Appendix7)andshouldconformto
the stated requirements.
London Luton Airport
D. Support for the continued
economic success of London Luton
Airport as a transport hub (policy
LLP6) will be delivered through:
measures to ensure there is
capacity at strategically
important junctions; and
continued enhancement of
sustainable modes of
transport via the Airport
Surface Access Strategy.
Improvements Needed and
Safeguarded Land
E. The following strategic
infrastructureschemesareneeded
to support proposed development
and land is safeguarded for this
purpose where needed as shown
on the Policies Map:
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
93LutonAirportParkwayRailway
Station North Entrance -
dedicated tunnel to
accommodate a feasible and
viable public transport based
solution linking to the airport
Century Park Link - Access
road to Century Park
East Luton Circular Road
(North including the
Weybourne Link)*
Luton Railway Station
improvements
F. In addition to the above new
sections of road, the following
junctions on the priority traffic
network in Luton will require
improving to cater for increased
travel generated, in particular by
strategic allocations both within
Luton and neighbouring areas,
some of which may require
additional land to be safeguarded
as shown on the Policies Map:
New Bedford Road / Austin
Road / Kingsdown Avenue
signals - widening of New
Bedford Road approaches
ChapelViaduct/CastleStreet
roundabout - conversion to
signal control or grade
separation
HattersWay/ChaulEndLane
roundabout - additional
approach lanes on Hatters
Way (sign cyclists via
underpass/ busway route)
VauxhallWay/CrawleyGreen
Road - additional/longer
approach lanes on Vauxhall
Way
Vauxhall Way / Stopsley Way
/ Hitchin Road - additional
approach lanes on StopsleyWay&VauxhallWay(includes
dedicated slip for this left
turn movement)
Vauxhall Way / Eaton Green
Road - additional approach
lanes
Kimpton Road / Vauxhall Way
roundabout - replace
roundabout with signals
Hitchin Road / Stopsley Way
/ Ashcroft Road –
improvements to existing
roundabout
Old Bedford Road / Barnfield
Avenue signals - additional
approach lanes on Barnfield
Avenue
Eaton Green Road / Lalleford
Road roundabout - additional
approach lanes on Eaton
Green Road
Old Bedford Road /
Stockingstone Road signals -
additional approach lanes on
Old Bedford Road (south)
Footnote:
* The East Luton Circular Road is a
safeguarded route option and is not
currently a formal transport proposal.
Any road proposal will be considered
against national policy and guidance,
local plan policy, and legislative
requirements relating to heritage,
biodiversity, and landscape.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
94Parking
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 3: To ensure that new
housing delivers an appropriate level of
provisiontomeetlocalneedsintermsofthe
number of homes, subject to capacity
constraintsandamixofdwellingtypes,sizes
and tenures that offer local residents a
choice of where to live and addresses issues
of affordability and overcrowding. Luton
Borough Council will work collaboratively
withneighbouringauthoritiestohelpensure
unmet need is provided in appropriate
locations outside Luton, and to actively
monitor progress in terms of unmet need;
Strategic Objective 4: To establish an
effective network and hierarchy of Town,
DistrictandNeighbourhoodCentrestoserve
as the heart of local communities and
improve health through improved access to
a mix of uses including shopping, services
and jobs by train, bus, walking and cycling;
StrategicObjective8: Improveaccessibility,
connectivity, sustainability and ease of
movementto,fromandwithintheborough.
Key Issues
11.8Theavailabilityofcarparkingis
a major influence on travel behaviour.
Carparkingalsotakesupalargeamount
of space in development, is costly to
businesses and reduces development
densities.
11.9The Council Parking Strategy is
aimed at improving the quality of
parking in town centres so that it is
convenient, safe and secure, including
appropriate provision of signage formotorists. The Local Plan will set and
apply maximum levels of car parking
andminimumlevelsofcycleparkingfor
broad classes of development in order
to encourage modal shift. This
is subject to highway, user and
residential safety and amenity and
exceptinrespectofparkingfordisabled
people or unless applicants
demonstrate, through a Transport
Statement or Assessment, a higher car
parking need. In such cases, applicants
must show via design, location and
implementation how parking is
minimised.
11.10 Parking charges will need to
ensure that they do not undermine the
vitality of town centres while parking
enforcement should be proportionate.
11.11 In areas highly accessible by
public transport and in certain other
circumstances, the amount of parking
in new developments will be restricted
to levels below the maximum parking
standards (e.g. car free housing if a
demand is demonstrated). Parking
provision in the central area, in
particular,willbelimitedtooperational
purposes and will mean that, for many
developments, private non-residential
parking will not be permitted. Where
car free housing developments are
proposed (or with limited parking), the
use of car clubs should be promoted.
They can help to reduce the need for
car ownership, increase the proportion
of low emission vehicles, help to
improve air quality and reduce CO2
emissions. The Borough Council LAQM
reports (Local Air Quality Monitoring
Reports) written by Environmental
Health for DEFRA, report on the local
air quality situation (see Appendix 10).
Lower car ownership can also help to
reduce the demand for on-street
parking, particularly in or close to the
town centre.
11.12 The Local Plan will consider
Park and Ride facilities at land south of
Stockwood Park adjacent to Junction
10a and at Butterfield to intercept car
journeystoemploymentlocationsinthe
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
95East Luton Corridor area as well as to
the town centre. Further sites around
the periphery of the
Luton/Dunstable/Houghton Regis
conurbation, but outside the borough
boundary, are being considered by
adjoininglocalauthorities.Tomaximise
passenger transfer, significant
investment will be made in bus priority
measures for those corridors served by
Park and Ride sites.
Policy approach
11.13Governmentpolicyrequiresthe
setting of local parking standards for
residential and non-residential
development, taking into account the
accessibility, type, mix and use of
development, opportunities for public
transport,carownership,andanoverall
needtoreducetheuseofhigh-emission
vehicles (NPPF paragraph 40).
Evidence base
LocalTransportPlan2011-2026,section
6, policy 4
Parking and Enforcement Plan 2013
Luton Borough Council
Carplus Annual Survey 2013/14
Policy LLP32 - Parking
Parking provision in Luton will be
managedtoensurethataproportionate
number of spaces are available to
support the growth of the town centre.
A. Proposals for reducing on-street
parking in and around the town
centre and for car free
development may be supported in
areas of high public transport
accessibilityincludingwhenlinked
toparkandridefacilities,provided
that:
i. there is no adverse impact on
occupier amenity in other
areas through displaced on
street parking;ii. they are supported with a
travel plan that promotes car
clubs where feasible; and
iii. the impact on short-term
parking is minimised.
Parking provision will be stringently
controlled at London Luton Airport (in
line with Policy LLP6C). Parking
provision at the Luton & Dunstable
Hospital will be stringently controlled
to ensure that on site provision is
prioritised.
B. Development will be permitted
providing that:
i. car parking provision should
not exceed the maximum
standards set out in Appendix
2 in order to promote modal
shift, however within those
standards, sufficient parking
should be provided to help
ensurethatadverseeffectson
highway safety and the
convenience of nearby
residents and users are
avoided;
ii. minimum cycle parking
standards set out in Appendix
2 is provided for
non-residentialdevelopments;
iii. cycle storage of an
appropriate standard is
provided for residential
developments; and
iv. parking standards shown in
Appendix 2 are minimised in
identifiedareasdemonstrated
to be of high accessibility.
Freight
Strategic Objectives
Strategic Objective 1: Retain and enhance
Luton’s important sub-regional role as a
place for economic growth and opportunity.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
96Strategic Objective 2: To utilise Luton’s
economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
StrategicObjective8: Improveaccessibility,
connectivity, sustainability and ease of
movementto,fromandwithintheborough.
Key Issues
11.14 The Council will seek to
maximise opportunities for rail freight,
particularly those for inter-modal
freight facilities that link safeguarded
rail and aggregates/concrete batching
depots with strategic roads within the
borough. The Council will encourage
proposals for rail freight interchange
thatservestheconurbation,suchasthe
freight consolidation centre proposed
at the former Sundon Quarry. However,
road freight is likely to remain at the
coreofthelocaldistributionsystemfor
the foreseeable future and the Council
will seek to develop and implement a
Freight Quality Partnership. This will
involvelocalpartnerorganisationssuch
asthefreightindustry,businesses,local
economic partnerships, residents,
community and environmental groups.
11.15 The Council will work with
neighbouring authorities and transport
providers to develop strategies for the
provision of viable infrastructure
necessary to support sustainable
development. The relatively high
proportionofLuton’seconomicactivity
involvingmanufacturinganddistribution
means that there is strong demand for
overnight goods vehicle parking in and
around the borough. Additions to the
supply of such parking accommodation
willbepermitted,providedthataneed
for the facility can be demonstrated;
andprovidedthatthesiteisacceptable
in terms of amenity, environmental
impact and highway capacity.11.16 The Council, through
partnership working, will establish
Strategic Lorry Routes and produce a
map of these for freight operators and
businesses. Itwillimproveexisting,and
provide more, signage to guide lorries
todestinationssuchaskeyemployment
sitesandtown/districtcentres. Where,
in the absence of controls, there is
likelytobeharmtoresidentialamenity,
operations or deliveries will be
rationalised to particular times and/or
categories of vehicle.
Policy approach
11.17 Freightperformsavitalrolein
Luton’sstrategicsubregionaleconomy.
This includes large scale facilities such
as rail freight interchanges, roadside
facilities for motorists or transport
investment necessary to support
strategies for the growth of ports,
airports or other major generators of
travel demand in their areas. The
primary function of roadside facilities
for motorists should be to support the
safety and welfare of the road user
(NPPFParagraph31).ThroughtheLocal
Plan, the council will be delivering
warehouse and distribution facilities at
Century Park and airport related
development. It has a responsibility for
ensuring that the routing of freight
traffic to these new and existing sites
as well as the siting of new lorry parks
is controlled in a sustainable and
non-obtrusive way.
11.18 The Bedfordshire authorities
are keen to limit the reliance on road
transport as a method of transporting
mineral and waste materials within the
area.Itis,however,recognisedthatthe
constructionofadditionaltransportlinks
such as rail may only be viable where a
long-term use for the site has been
identified. Additionally, sustainable
transport methods are generally only
economically viable for long distances
anditisunderstoodthatroadtransport
will continue to be relied on for local
waste collection and transport.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
97Evidence base
Network Management and Congestion
Strategy 2008–2012, section 4.6
LocalTransportPlan2011–2026,section
6 policy 5
National Planning Policy Guidance
Consultation document Sept/Oct 2013,
paragraph 31
Policy LLP33 - Freight
TheCouncilwillsupportfreightschemes
that do not cause harm to the
environmentorresidentialamenity,are
served by the strategic network and
involve alternative methods of freight
distribution including inter-modal
facilities.
A. In considering any impacts of
freight proposals on the
environment or residential
amenity, the Council will take into
account the following factors:
strategic routing
strategic signage
delivery and service plans
weight restrictions
delivery restrictions
alternativemethodsoffreight
distribution
B.Proposalswillbepermittedfornew
lorry parks where:
i. it is demonstrated that there
is a need for the facility;
ii. they are located within key
employment areas with good
access to the strategic road
network;
iii. theydonotcauseharmtothe
environment or residential
amenity; and
iv. there is capacity on the local
highway network to
accommodate heavy goods
vehicles.Where practicable, the use of rail,
conveyors, or pipelines should be
preferred over the use of roads for the
bulk transportation of materials.
Relevant proposals must demonstrate
thatalternativetransportmethodshave
been considered.
Public Safety Zones
Strategic Objectives
11.19 Strategic Objective 11: To
safeguard and ensure the prudent use of
naturalresources,increaseenergyandwater
efficiency and encourage and promote the
use of renewable energy sources to help
adapt to climate change, and manage
pollution, natural and operational hazards,
avoidinappropriatedevelopmentinareasat
risk of flooding, secure improvements in air
andwaterqualityandensureeffectivewaste
management.
Key Issues
11.20 London Luton Airport is
situatedclosetoLuton'surbanareaand
the runway runs north east to south
west and potentially introduces a risk
ofaircraftlandingandtakeoffincidents
arising along this axis, typically
bordering the ends of the runway.
11.21 This zone of risk is termed the
'PublicSafetyZone'(PSZ),anestablished
government policy under the
Department for Transport but
administered and reviewed by the Civil
Aviation Authority (CAA). It operates
with the objective of limiting
development close to civil airports by
controllingthenumberofpeopleonthe
ground living working or congregating
inthePSZwhowouldbeatrisk,through
regulating developments and changes
of use over time, reducing the number
present as the opportunity arises.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
9811.22 The PSZ is modelled and
defined using mathematical formulae
looking at statistics of and probability
ofincidentsandmortalityover30years
at airports related to annual and
forecastairtransportmovements.These
are measured as contours of risk and
approximatedastriangles.Thesizeand
shapeofthetrianglemayincreasewith
air transport movements.
Policy approach
11.23 Government guidance is
unclear whether the NPPF replaces
existingnationalguidancesetoutinthe
circular DfT Circular 01/2010 on the
“Control of Development in Airport
Public Safety Zones” or whether
subsequent guidance will emerge. For
the avoidance of doubt, policy LLP 34
is a reintroduction of a previous
'unsaved' policy of the former Luton
Local Plan 2006.
Evidence base
A planning application has been
approved for proposals to expand the
currentcapacityoftheairportupto18
million passengers per annum (mppa)
Policy LLP34 - Public Safety Zones
Within the Public Safety Zones (as
identifiedonthePoliciesMap),planning
permission will not be granted for:
A. any development, including
extensions and changes of use,
which is likely to result in more
people:
i. living in the property, unless
it is for the purpose of
enlarging or improving the
living accommodation for the
benefit of existing residents;
or
ii.workingorcongregatingatthe
property or site.B. short-stay car parking (where the
maximum stay is expected to be
less than six hours);
C. sorting depots or retail
warehouses;
D. children’s playgrounds, playing
fields or sports grounds;
E. sports clubhouses; or
F. any other development likely to
result in significant numbers of
people being present at a site on
a regular basis.
Communications
Strategic Objectives
StrategicObjective8: Improveaccessibility,
connectivity, sustainability and ease of
movementto,fromandwithintheborough.
StrategicObjective11: Toimprovethebuilt
and natural environment to deliver quality
places, through high quality design and
sustainability taking into account the
characterandsettingoftheneighbourhoods,
including historic assets and seeking safe
environments which help to reduce crime
and the fear of crime.
Key Issues
11.24 There is an increased use of
mobile phones and subsequent demand
for telecom masts. Telecom
developmentissubjecttodevelopment
control but many minor schemes, such
as the installation of some residential
satellite dishes, is ‘permitted
development’ under the General
Permitted Development Order 1995 (as
amended) [M1] and hence does not
require planning permission. Telecom
code system operators also enjoy a
generalplanningpermission,subjectto
certain exclusions. In these cases, the
operatorhastomakea‘priorapproval’
application, which allows the authority
to consider, within 56 days, the siting
and appearance of the proposed
development.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
9911.25 There is a need to consider
visual and amenity impact in
determining applications, particularly
in sensitive locations (e.g. schools and
residential areas). Developers should
discuss the proposals affecting schools
with the relevant educational body
before submitting an application.
11.26 Operators should explore the
potential for mast sharing or erecting
newmastsonexistingbuildingsorother
structures. However, sharing can
sometimes look ungainly and actually
increase visual intrusion. Good design,
camouflage, screening and planting
should be used to help blend the
apparatus into the landscape.
11.27 Health considerations can be
amaterialconsiderationindetermining
applications. However, if a proposed
mobile phone base station meets the
International Commission for
Non-ionizing Radiation Protection
guidelines for public exposure, this
would demonstrate that public health
concerns have been addressed.
Policy approach
11.28 Government guidance states
that advanced, high quality
communications infrastructure is
essential for sustainable economic
growth. High speed broadband
technology and other communications
networks also play a vital role in
enhancing community facilities and
services (NPPF paragraph 42).
11.29 Local Plans should support the
expansionofelectroniccommunications
networks but keep the numbers of
telecommunicationsmastsandthesites
to a minimum, consistent with the
efficient operation of the network.
Existing infrastructure should be
preferredunlesstheneedforanewsite
has been justified. Equipment should
be sympathetically designed and
camouflaged where appropriate (NPPF
paragraph 43).11.30 Local Planning Authorities
should not impose a ban on types or
locations of new telecommunications
development (e.g. using Article 4
directions) or insist on minimum
distances between new
telecommunications development and
existing development. However,
evidence will be required to
demonstrate that such infrastructure
will not cause significant and
irremediable interference with other
electricalequipment,airtrafficservices
or instrumentation operated in the
national interest or the possibility of
buildingsorotherstructuresinterfering
withbroadcastandtelecommunications
services (NPPF paragraph 44).
11.31 Applications for
telecommunications(includingforprior
approval under Part 16 of the General
Permitted Development Order, 2015)
should be supported by evidence to
justifytheproposeddevelopment(NPPF
paragraph 45). This should include:
the outcome of consultations with
organisationswith an interest, the
relevantbodye.g.LocalEducation
Authority or within a statutory
safeguarding zone surrounding an
aerodrome or technical site; and
for masts or base station, a
statement that self-certifies that
the cumulative exposure, when
operational, will not exceed the
International Commission on
non-ionising radiation protection
guidelines; or
evidence that the applicant has
explored the possibility of sharing
or using existing structures and a
statement that self-certifies that,
when operational, International
Commissionguidelineswillbemet.
11.32Localplanningauthoritiesmust
determine applications on planning
grounds. They should not seek to
preventcompetitionbetweendifferent
operators, question the need for the
telecommunications system, or
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
100determine health safeguards if the
proposal meets International
Commission guidelines for public
exposure (paragraph 46).
Policy LLP35 - Communications
Infrastructure
The Council will support the expansion
of advanced high quality
communicationsinfrastructureincluding
telecommunications and high speed
broadband/ video conferencing
networks to promote sustainable
economic growth of the borough and
minimising the need for car journeys.
Planningpermissionwillbegrantedand
prior approval proposals supported for
telecommunications development
providing:
A. installations have been designed,
sited, and appropriately
landscaped to minimise their
impact on amenity:
B. the development would not harm
the setting of a listed building, or
the character of a conservation
area,oranyotherareadesignated
for its landscape, historic, or
nature conservation importance;
C. the equipment does not detract
from the appearance of the
building on which it is proposed to
be erected;
D. the developer has demonstrated
thatopportunitiesforsharingsites
accommodating existing
telecommunication equipment
have been fully explored before
proposals for new sites are
submitted;
E. the proposedinstallationcomplies
with the national guidelines in
respectofexposureofmembersof
the public to electromagnetic
fields;
F. the proposal should include the
necessaryductinginfrastructureto
facilitate the implementation of
broadband services.
Flood Risk
Strategic Objectives
11.33 Strategic Objective 2 : To utilise
Luton’s economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
11.34 Strategic Objective 11 : To
safeguard and ensure the prudent use of
naturalresources,increaseenergyandwater
efficiency and encourage and promote the
use of renewable energy sources to help
adapt to climate change, and manage
pollution, natural and land use operational
hazards, avoid inappropriate development
in areas at risk of flooding, secure
improvements in air and water quality and
ensure effective waste management.
Key Issues
11.35TheRiverLeaisakeyassetand
a key piece of infrastructure running
though the town. It is providing a
natural wildlife corridor with habitats
and natural features (associated with
its flood plain) as well as opportunities
for recreation and quiet enjoyment.
11.36 The flood plain risk maps
developed by the Environment Agency
set out the degrees of flooding risk to
land uses and activities. The likelihood
offloodingevents,potentiallyincreased
byclimatechange,presentsconstraints
on development in the town and, in
particular, the town centre. The
predominant risk of flooding in Luton,
however, stems from surface water
sources as a consequence of rapid
increase of impermeable surfaces in
town in the 1960s without concurrent
upgrading of the sewer system. Water
quality may also be an issue because of
the sensitivity of the chalk aquifer
affectingpartsofLuton,thereforethere
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
101is a need for sustainable drainage
systems to address this issue and have
regard also to policy LLP38.
11.37 Much of the River Lea is
culverted, particularly within the town
centre,butthisinfrastructureisageing
and is in need of remediation or
replacement to avoid risk of collapse
and flooding. When undertaking
remediation or replacement works,
opportunities should be sought to
de-culvert or naturalise the channel.
Policy approach
11.38 Local planning authorities
should adopt proactive strategies to
mitigate and adapt to climate change,
taking full account of flood risk and
watersupplyanddemandconsiderations
(NPPF paragraph 94). They should take
account of climate change over the
longer term, including factors such as
flood risk (NPPF paragraph 99).
Inappropriate development in areas at
risk of flooding should be avoided by
directingdevelopmentawayfromareas
at highest risk, but where development
is necessary, it should be made safe
without increasing flood risk elsewhere
(NPPF paragraph 100) and give priority
to the use of sustainable drainage
systems (NPPF paragraph 103).
11.39LocalPlansshouldbesupported
by strategic flood risk assessment and
include policies to manage flood risk
from all sources and ensure that flood
defence contributes towards "good
ecological status" as required by the
WaterFrameworkDirective.LocalPlans
should apply a sequential, risk-based
approach to the location of
development to avoid, where possible,
flood risk to people and property and
manageanyresidualrisk,takingaccount
of the impacts of climate change, by
applying the sequential test (NPPF
paragraph 100). If necessary, the
exception test (NPPF paragraph 100)
should be applied and, should this be
thecase,aLevel2SFRAwillberequired
that should improve the quantity/
quality of data available in those areasrequiring the exception test. This
should ensure that decisions regarding
the safety and impact of the proposed
developments can be made on robust
data.
11.40 Local Plans should safeguard
landfromdevelopmentthatisrequired
for current and future flood
management(NPPFparagraph100)and
use opportunities offered by new
development to reduce the causes and
impacts of flooding.
11.41 Where climate change is
expected to increase flood risk so that
some existing development may not be
sustainable in the long-term,
opportunities should be sought to
relocate vulnerable development
elsewhere.
Evidence base
11.42 The Luton Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment Study 2013 (in partnership with
the Environment Agency) reviews flood risk
from all sources and provides guidance for
sitespecificfloodriskassessments.TheSFRA
anditsrecommendationsshouldbereferred
to by all developers and applicants in
interpreting policy LLP36 requirements,
before submitting development proposals
within or adjacent to Luton. In particular,
thereareareaspecificrecommendationsfor
discharge and surface run off rates for
HoughtonandLewseyBrook.Itrecommends
thatplanningapplicationsfordevelopments
inLewseyFarm,Parkside(uptoMarshFarm)
and Limbury should submit a Flood Risk
Assessmentthatconsidersfloodingfromthe
sewer system and the consequences of a
failure of the drainage system through
blockage due to rapid overloading of sewer
systems in these areas during storms. The
SFRA further requires:
flood risk assessments (FRAs) for all
scenariosidentifiedinTable11.1inthe
SFRA that would not automatically
trigger Environment Agency
consultation;
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
102thatFRAsarepreparedforanyplanning
application for developments of 5
dwellings or more or for areas greater
than 0.5ha;
developers to consult with the
Environment Agency for all planning
applications within 20m of
watercourses;
that FRAs prepared for developments
conform to national policy and the
additional elements identified;
that where new development is
proposed that incorporates riparian
areas, the developer should include,
where necessary, plans for the
improvementofriverchannelsandflood
defences within their ownership and
demonstrate how the channels and/or
flood defence will be maintained over
the lifetime of the proposed
development; and
emergency plans should be formulated
to accompany FRAs for all ‘more and
highlyvulnerable’developmentsaswell
as ‘less vulnerable’ developments with
greater than 10 people working/living
at the site. The emergency plans
should be allied to those developed by
LBC.
11.43 Critical Drainage Areas (CDAs) are
defined in Luton’s Surface Water
Management Plan (SWMP) (2012) and
compriseareasofLutonthatarepotentially
subjecttofloodingfromanyorallofsurface
water, river, brook, sewer overflow or
ground water. The SWMP can be found on
the Council’s website.
11.44 The Luton Local Flood Risk
Management Strategy (LLFRMS) states the
Council’s approach to management of flood
risk from all sources, in its capacity as the
LeadLocalFloodAuthority.TheLLFRMS also
refers to CDAs and contains requirements
related to SuDS. The LLFRMS can be found
on the Council’s website.11.45 The Luton Water Cycle Strategy
Study Update 2015 (prepared in partnership
with the Environment Agency and water
utilities) updates information on water
supply and water treatment capacity.
11.46 The recommendations of the SuDS
Manual (CIRIA C697) should also be referred
to.
11.47 The Thames River Basin
Management Plan provides additional detail
on objectives for the River Lea and its
catchment, including the aims of the Water
Framework Directive and the approach to
de-culverting the river.
Policy LLP36 - Flood Risk
A.Theriskandimpactoffloodingwill
be minimised through:
i.directingnewdevelopmentto
areas with the lowest
probability of flooding;
ii. ensuring that all new
development addresses flood
resilience, the effective
management of flood risk
including opportunities for
appropriate dry access for
emergency vehicles;
iii. ensuring that development
does not increase the risk of
flooding elsewhere, including
cumulative impact on
adjoining and surrounding
land and in the wider
catchment; and
iv.ensuringwiderenvironmental
benefits of development in
relation to flood risk and
contributetowardsdelivering
"good ecological status".
Thesuitabilityofdevelopmentproposed
infloodzoneswillbeassessedusingthe
sequential test and, where necessary,
the exception test which will require a
Level 2 SFRA. A sequential approach
should be used at site level.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
103B.Asitespecificfloodriskassessment
(FRA) is required for the following
developments:
i. proposals of one hectare or
greater in Flood Zone 1;
ii. all new development
(including minor
developments and change of
use) in Flood Zones 2 and 3;
iii. Critical Drainage Areas (as
defined in Luton's Surface
Water Management Plan);
iv. where a proposed
developmentorchangeofuse
to a more vulnerable class
may be subject to other
sources of flooding.
Appropriatemitigationandmanagement
measures must be implemented.
C.Alldevelopmentproposalsmustbe
assessed against the Luton Water
Cycle Strategy (WCS) and consider
recommendations of the Strategic
Flood Risk Assessment and Luton
Local Flood Risk Management
Strategy to address locally
significant flooding including:
i. that FRAs are prepared for
any planning application for
developments of 5 dwellings
or more or for areas greater
than 0.5ha;
ii. developers consult with the
Environment Agency for all
planning applications within
20m of watercourses and
ensure that a 8 m wide
undeveloped buffer is
maintainedalongsidetheriver
channel of main rivers and 5
meter buffer along ordinary
water courses.
D. All new development shall be
required to provide a drainage
strategy and those over 100
dwellings must also provide a site
specific WCS. Developments will
be expected to incorporate
multi-functional sustainabledrainage systems which, where
feasible, should address water
efficiency and rainwater
harvesting. SuDS must ensure that
run-off rates are attenuated to
greenfield run-off rates in
accordance with Luton's
Sustainable Drainage Advice.
Higher run off rates would need to
be justified and the risks
quantified. Where SuDS are
implemented, a plan for their
long-term maintenance will be
required.
TheCouncilwillencouragedevelopment
to reduce the overall flood risk, where
possible, through the design and layout
ofschemesthatreplacefloodplainand
enhancenaturalformsofdrainage(this
could include, but is not limited to,
floodplaincreation,greenroofs,surface
water storage, removing culverts, and
barriers to flow).
The Council will work with the
EnvironmentAgencyinthemanagement
of flood risk to ensure that any risk of
flooding is appropriately mitigated and
thenaturalenvironmentisprotectedin
all new development. All development
within 8 metres of a main river will
require a flood defence consent from
the Environment Agency.
Sustainable Energy
Strategic Objectives:
The Local Plan policy on Climate change,
carbon reduction and sustainable energy
needs to help deliver the following linked
objectives:
Strategic Objective 2: To utilise Luton’s
economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
104Strategic Objective 6: Reduce social,
economic and environmental deprivation,
particularly where it is spatially
concentrated, by taking priority measures
toreduceunemployment,improveskillsand
education and renew housing, community
and environmental conditions.
StrategicObjective8: Improveaccessibility,
connectivity, sustainability and ease of
movementto,fromandwithintheborough.
Strategic Objective 11: To safeguard and
ensuretheprudentuseofnaturalresources,
increase energy and water efficiency and
encourageandpromotetheuseofrenewable
energy sources to help adapt to climate
change, and manage pollution and natural
and land use operational hazards, avoid
inappropriate development in areas at risk
of flooding, secure improvements in air and
water quality and ensure effective waste
management.
Key Issues
11.48 Government policy aims to
stimulatethedevelopmentofrenewable
energy sources wherever they have
prospects of being economically
attractive and environmentally
acceptable. The Climate Change Act
2008 set the country's emission
reduction targets. The "legally binding"
targets are a reduction of least 80% by
2050 (against the 1990 baseline).
11.49Italsomandatesinterim5-year
budgets. The first three are as follows:
Budget 1 (2008–12): Total cap 22%
below 1990 baseline
Budget 2 (2013–17): Total cap 28%
below baseline
Budget 3 (2018–22): Total cap 34%
below baseline
11.50TheEuropeanUnionhasitsown
emissionsreductiontargettowhichthe
UKcontributes.Thiscurrentlystandsat
20% by 2020 though this may be raised
to 30%. This target helps to direct the
European Union Emission Trading
Scheme.11.51 All new non-residential
developmentsover1,000squaremetres
will be required to achieve the 2013
BREEAM“Good”standardorequivalent.
New non-residential developments
below this threshold will also be
encouraged to meet this standard.
Conditions will be attached to planning
permissions, requiring submission of
final code certificates and post
construction BREEAM certificates (as
appropriate), and such conditions will
not be discharged until compliance has
been satisfactorily demonstrated.
11.52 The rationale behind energy
requirements are set out in Building
Regulations(followingtheGovernment's
HousingStandardsReview-andsubject
to the government's review of energy
standards) and BREEAM is to secure
commitments to CO2 reduction in line
with the proposed trajectory of phased
amendmentstotheBuildingRegulations
while ensuring that broader themes,
includingwaterconservation,floodrisk,
air quality, waste management and
biodiversity, are addressed. The most
commonly expected effects of a
changing climate on Luton’s built
environment include:
increased risk of subsidence (e.g.
in Farley Hill and Stopsley);
reduced thermal comfort of
occupants (especially from
overheating in summer); and
increased damage to property and
infrastructure.
Policy approach
11.53 Government policy aims to
increase the use and supply of
renewable and low carbon energy and
theresponsibilityonallcommunitiesto
contribute to renewable energy
generationorlowcarbonsources.There
should be a positive strategy to (1)
design policies and identify locations
that maximise renewable and low
carbon energy development while
ensuringthatadverseimpactsincluding
cumulativelandscapeandvisualimpacts
are mitigated; (2) provide supporting
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
105infrastructure to encourage such
sources; (3) support community-led
initiatives including proposals via
neighbourhoodplanning;and(4)identify
opportunities to connect development
to decentralised, renewable or low
carbon energy supply systems and for
co-locating potential heat customers
and suppliers (NPPF paragraph 97).
11.54 In determining planning
applications, new development will be
encouraged to exceed building
regulations by following guidance in
Policy LLP37C ‘Energy Hierarchy’. It
should also take account of landform,
layout, building orientation, massing
and landscaping to minimise energy
consumption (NPPF paragraph 96).
11.55 Reducing the need for primary
materials, reusing and recycling can
savemoneyandleadtobetterresource
efficiency.Theearlierthisisconsidered
in any planned development, the
greaterandmoreachievabletheoptions
are. In turn, this should lead to more
sustainabledevelopmentbeingdesigned
and built. The detailed benefits of this
approach are described in more detail
in the supplementary planning
document, ‘Managing Waste in New
Developments’.
11.56 Trees, shrubs and woodland
provide a range of ecosystem services,
such as carbon capture and storage,
filtration of airborne pollutants, noise
and vibration. They also play an
important part in temperature
regulationtherebyreducingheatisland
effects.Theirroleinmitigatingclimate
change and pollution is therefore not
insignificant (cumulatively) and should
beanearlyconsiderationinformulating
development proposals.
PolicyLLP37-Climatechange,carbon
and waste reduction and sustainable
energy
The Council will support development
proposals that contribute towards
mitigation, and adaptation to climate
change through energy use reduction,
efficiency, and renewable, and
decentralised energy.
A. New residential development will
be encouraged to exceed the
national standards set out in
BuildingRegulationsoncarbonand
energy performance. The energy
hierarchy set out under LLP37 C
providesprinciplesonhowBuilding
Regulations could be achieved and
exceeded.
B. All new non-residential
developments over 1,000 square
metres will be required to achieve
the 2013 Building Research
Establishment Environmental
Assessment Method (BREEAM)
'Good' status".
C. Energy Hierarchy:
i. consider reducing energy and
water demand;
ii. consider energy generation
from low and zeros carbon
sources on site;
iii.considerdecentralisedenergy
networksandgeneration;and
iv. consider off-site solutions,
retro fitting, and carbon
reduction schemes.
D. All residential developments will
achieveawaterefficiencystandard
of 110 litres per person per day
because Luton is in an area of
water stress.
Waste
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
106The Council encourages an overall
reduction in the amount of waste
generated, treated and disposed of to
reduce the need for land for waste
management. Proposals that are likely
togeneratesignificantvolumesofwaste
through development or operational
phases will be required to include a
waste audit as part of the application.
Pollution and Contamination
Strategic Objectives
11.57 Strategic Objective 2: To utilise
Luton’s economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
11.58 Strategic Objective 11: To
safeguard and ensure the prudent use of
naturalresources,increaseenergyandwater
efficiency and encourage and promote the
use of renewable energy sources to help
adapt to climate change, and manage
pollution and natural and land use
operational hazards, avoid inappropriate
development in areas at risk of flooding,
secureimprovementsinairandwaterquality
and ensure effective waste management.
Key Issues
11.59 The borough is a heavily
developed town with, unavoidably,
some bad neighbour uses giving rise to
dust, vibration, noise smells and litter
from a range of sources (including food
outlets and industrial and construction
activities), and has an industrial legacy
andmanybrownfieldsitescouldharbour
contaminants. In addition, the town
has chalk aquifer ground source
protection zones and the River Lea - all
of which are sensitive to potential
development and building operations
andcommercialandindustrialactivities
and processes that might give rise to
pollution.11.60 There are potential concerns
with the stability of land across Luton.
Ofparticularconcernarechalkhillsand
scarp slopes and areas where clay
overlieschalk.Intheseareas,sink-holes
may appear where the chalk base has
eroded but is concealed by a clay cap.
11.61 The town also has an Air
Quality Management zone adjacent to
the M1 corridor. A further AQMA was
declared in the Town Centre in 2016,
but there are no other AQMAs in the
area.PoorairqualityinLutonislargely
as a result of large volumes of traffic
andassociatedcongestion.Industryisa
secondary source. Nitrogen dioxide is
present in elevated concentrations,
which has led to the declaration of the
AQMA(s).
Policy approach
11.62 Government policy requires
development plans to include policies
to minimise waste and pollution (NPPF
paragraph7,bullet3andparagraph17,
bullet 7).
11.63 The planning authority should
prevent both new and existing
development from contributing to or
being put at unacceptable risk from, or
being adversely affected by
unacceptable levels of soil, air, water
or noise pollution or land instability;
and remediating and mitigating
despoiled, degraded, derelict,
contaminatedandunstableland,where
appropriate (NPPF paragraph 109).
Policy LLP38 - Pollution and
Contamination
Pollution
Evidenceontheimpactsofdevelopment
will need to demonstrate whether the
scheme (individually or cumulatively
with other proposals) will result in any
significantlyadverseeffectswithregard
to air, land or water on neighbouring
development, adjoining land, or the
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
107wider environment. Where adverse
impacts are identified, appropriate
mitigation will be required. This policy
covers chemical, biological, and
radiological contamination and the
effects of noise, vibration, light, heat,
fluid leakage, dust, fumes, smoke,
gaseous emissions, odour, explosion,
litter, and pests.
A. Development should provide for
thesatisfactorydisposalofsurface
water to deliver water quality
improvements to receiving water
coursesandaquiferswherefeasible
and, together with waste water
disposal,shouldnotbedetrimental
tothemanagementandprotection
of water resources. In all cases,
development must be carefully
built,operated,andclosedinsuch
amannersoastoensurethereare
no long-term pollution problems.
B.Duringconstructionandoperation,
appropriate measures will be
required to prevent the deposit of
mud or other debris on or within
public highways and water bodies
from vehicles using the site.
Contaminated land
C. For proposals on or affecting
contaminated land, a site
assessment must be carried out to
establishthefullnatureandextent
of the contamination.
Contaminated land is used to describe
land polluted by:
heavy metals like arsenic,
cadmium, and lead;
oils and tars;
chemical substances and
preparations, e.g. solvents;
gases;
asbestos; and
radioactive substances.
...but may include other hazardous
matter of chemical or biological origin.It is defined as land where substances
could cause:
significant harm to people or
protected species; and/ or
significant pollution of surface
waters or groundwater (including
Source Protection Zones).
D. If contamination is found,
remediation measures are to be
agreed by the Council with
reference to the Contaminated
Land Statutory Guidance (April
2012), that such measures are
carried out on site where this is
viable and that such measures are
completed prior to development.
E.Planningpermissionwillbegranted
for the development or reuse of
landthatisunlikelytobeaffected
by contamination but not for
schemes that could:
i. expose the occupiers of the
development, or users of
domestic gardens, or
neighbouring land to an
unacceptable risk;
ii. threaten the structural
integrity of any existing or
proposed building on, or
adjoining, the site;
iii. lead to the contamination of
anywatercourse,waterbody,
or aquifer; or
iv. cause the contamination of
adjoining land or allow the
contamination of the
developmentsitetocontinue.
Land stability
Development must be sensitive to local
ground conditions and land stability. It
must be appropriate for existing
conditions and ensure that the future
stability of land is protected.
11 . Transport, Communications & Climate Change
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
10812 Infrastructure Delivery,
MonitoringandReviewofthe
Local Plan
Infrastructure and Developer
Contributions
Strategic Objectives:
The Local Plan policy on infrastructure
delivery and developer contributions helps
to deliver the following linked objectives:
Strategic Objective 2: To utilise Luton’s
economic, social and environmental
resources efficiently and sustainably
including appropriate mitigation within the
limitedphysicallandcapacityoftheborough
whilstensuringthepermanenceoftheGreen
Belt.
Strategic Objective 5: To improve the built
and natural environment to deliver quality
places,throughhighqualityandsustainable
design taking into account the landscape,
setting and character of the town and
neighbourhoods within it's national (i.e.
AONB)andlocallandscapesettings,including
heritage assets and providing safe
environments which help to reduce crime
and the fear of crime.
Strategic Objective 7: To safeguard and
enable new community, educational and
cultural facilities to be delivered and
expanded to meet the needs of a growing
and diverse borough.
StrategicObjective8: Improveaccessibility,
connectivity, sustainability and ease of
movementto,fromandwithintheborough.
Strategic Objective 10: Improve, protect
and enhance biodiversity of natural areas
within the town, including the quality,
accessibility, health and recreational value
of green space, the River Lea Corridor, the
ChilternsAreaofOutstandingNaturalBeauty
(AONB),theAreasofGreatLandscapeValue
(AGLV) and Areas of Local Landscape Value
(ALLV ) and their connectivity.
Key Issues
12.1From April 2015, national
regulations will prevent the pooling of
more than 5 separate contributions
through section 106 of the 1990 Town
and Country Planning Act. The
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) is
the new mechanism through which
contributions will be pooled from April
2015.
12.2Recentviabilitytestingsuggests
that CIL is not currently viable in the
borough. CIL will need to be revisited
when viability evidence suggests
that market conditions have improved
enough for implementation.
12.3The borough may have to
implementcompulsorypurchasepowers
for infrastructure provision that can be
resource demanding and lengthy. This
power will be used as a last resort,
because the Council's preferred
approach to any land assembly will be
through negotiation.
12.4Publicsectorassetswillhaveto
berationalised,whichisagainalengthy
process due to political and internal
pressurefromcompetingserviceswithin
the local authority.
12.5Planningconditionswillneedto
be more focused and there could be
morerelianceontheseasthetraditional
s106tariff-basedsystemiswounddown.
Planning conditions are, however,
generally preferred to planning
obligations as they are a simpler
mechanism.
12.6SEMLEPcanprovidesub-regional
funding through a bidding process that
requiresmulti-councilsupport. Central
Government funding, however, through
DfT and CLG, may be reduced and so
moreschemesmightneedtogothrough
approval systems such as the National
InfrastructureSchemeprocess,whichis
resource intensive. The loss of the New
Homes Fund to LEPs is another revenue
stream reduction.
12 . Infrastructure Delivery, Monitoring and Review of the Local Plan
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
10912.7Pressure will arise from
permitted development rights -
includingofficetodwellingconversions
- not contributing to infrastructure
provision.
Policy approach:
12.8The following documents have
been used as sources of evidence in
developing the policy to ensure
robustness:
Paragraph 173 of the NPPF
identifies the need for Local Plans
tobedeliverablepayingparticular
regard to viability. It states
“Pursuingsustainabledevelopment
requires careful attention to
viability and costs in plan-making
and decision-taking. Plans should
bedeliverable.Therefore,thesites
and the scale of development
identifiedintheplanshouldnotbe
subject to such a scale of
obligationsandpolicyburdensthat
theirabilitytobedevelopedviably
is threatened. To ensure viability,
thecostsofanyrequirementslikely
tobeappliedtodevelopment,such
as requirements for affordable
housing, standards, infrastructure
contributions or other
requirements should, when taking
account of the normal cost of
development and mitigation,
provide competitive returns to a
willing land owner and willing
developer to enable the
development to be deliverable”.
The NPPF does not define
'infrastructure' however for the
purposes of CIL. Infrastructure is
defined by the Planning Act 2008
(as amended) as roads and other
transportfacilities,flooddefences,
schools and other educational
facilities, medical facilities,
sportingandrecreationalfacilities
and open spaces. This is broadly
the definition of types of
infrastructuretheLocalPlanmakes
provisionforandissetoutinmore
detail through the Infrastructure
Delivery Plan (IDP).
2010 Community Infrastructure
Levy Regulations as amended.
Community Infrastructure Levy
Guidance.
PAS – A steps approach to
infrastructure planning and
delivery June 2009.
Policy LLP39 - Infrastructure and
Developer Contributions
A. The Local Planning Authority will
support development proposals
that provide or adequately
contribute towards the
infrastructureandservicesneeded
to support them, which will be
delivered using the following
approach:
i. testing the capacity of
existing infrastructure and,
where there is insufficient
capacity, securing the timely
provision of improvements or
additional provision;
ii. infrastructure provision or
improvements should be
providedon-siteasanintegral
part of a development
wherever possible and
appropriate;
iii. where off-site measures are
needed, or on-site provision
is not possible, planning
obligations will be needed to
securethenecessaryprovision
or a financial contribution
towards provision; and
iv. where a contribution towards
other infrastructure
improvements or provision is
needed and viable, this will
be achieved through planning
obligations, planning
conditionsand/orCommunity
Infrastructure Levy.
B. Any on-site provision or financial
contribution should:
12 . Infrastructure Delivery, Monitoring and Review of the Local Plan
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
110meet the reasonable costs of
provision to support thei.
development or offset its
impact;
ii. be related to the size and
typeofeachdevelopmentand
the nature of the
improvements required; and
iii. take account of the
cumulative impact of
requirements on the viability
of development, especially
wherethedevelopmentmeets
a particular local need or
provides particular benefits.
The Local Planning Authority will
support the improvement or
development of locally and regionally
importantinfrastructurewhereneeded
to serve existing or new development
requiredthroughthisPlan,ortosecure
long term supply, provided that the
needforsuchfacilitiesisconsistentwith
other policies within this Plan.
The Monitoring Strategy
12.9The key aim of the monitoring
strategy will be to provide a regular test of
whetherthelocalstrategicobjectivesofthe
Plan are being met or some harm is being
inadvertently caused. This will be achieved
throughtheuseofclustersofindicatorsthat
together provide a full understanding of the
outcomesofthePlan,relativetoeachofthe
strategic objectives.
12.10 The Sustainability Appraisal
supporting the Local Plan has suggested
indicatorsbaseduponthesignificanteffects
that may be related to future development
outcomes.Asfaraspossible,thesewillform
the core of the monitoring indicators to be
considered. These will be added to by the
useofexistingnationallyorlocallyavailable
datasetstoreportdevelopmentoutputsand
outcomesinlinewiththeprincipleof"count
once, use many times".
12.11 The indicator clusters will in turn
bereportedwithintheAuthority'sMonitoring
Report(AMR). Itistheaimofthisdocumentto tell the local story of what is being
provided and where. It will also report on
the local context over a range of topics,
including housing and employment. In
writingtheAMR,particularattentionwillbe
paid to the PAS guidance document,
"Monitoring that matters: towards a better
AMR" and any other such guidance that may
become available.
12.12 The proposed monitoring regime
can be found in Appendix 8.
Managing a Supply of Housing Land
12.13 Appendix 5 of this Plan sets out
furtherdetailsformonitoringdeliveryofthe
housingrequirementof8,500dwellings(425
dwellings per annum). Based on an annual
requirement of 425 dwellings per annum,
there has been a shortfall in completions of
98 dwellings between 2011 and 2016. The
aim is to recover this shortfall over the
period 2016–21– i.e. at 445/year x 5 = 2,223
dwellings.
12.14Table1ofAppendix5indicatesthat
Luton Borough Council does not have a
record of persistent under-delivery at the
pointtheLocalPlanwasadopted.Thebuffer
will be reviewed annually.
12.15 The Housing Land Supply position
of around 5.30 years’ supply at April 2017
(based on the details contained in Appendix
5)iscalculatedasshowninthetablebelow.
Recalculation of the housing requirement
(includingtheneedtoaddressanyremaining
shortfall) and updating of the housing
trajectory will only be undertaken once the
most recent data forhousingcompletionsin
future monitoring years have been formally
reported in the SHLAA or AMR.
12 . Infrastructure Delivery, Monitoring and Review of the Local Plan
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
111Housing Land Supply Calculation
Review of the Local Plan
12.16 During the public examination
hearings into the Local Plan held from 2016
to2017,anumberofissueswerehighlighted
for specific attention in the next review of
theLocalPlan.Severalofthesematterswere
pressing issues tending towards an early
update. Policy LLP40 requires that the next
full review of the Local Plan should be
submitted for public examination by
mid-2021.Thisbalancestheneedforurgency
on some matters, for example a review of
schoolprovision,butalsogivingtimetoallow
the potential for local plans within
neighbouring areas to be progressed
followingthecompletionoftheJointGrowth
Options Study. The Growth Options Study is
particularly important in helping address
Luton’s unmet housing needs across the
widerHousingMarketArea.Thereareseveral
areas where technical studies to inform the
review can progress much earlier; examples
beingthereviewsofschoolprovisionandthe
review of the Town Centre Development
Framework.
Policy LLP40 - Review of the Local
Plan
The Local Planning Authority will bring
forward a full review of the plan. This
will commence before the end of 2019
with submission of the review for
examination by mid-2021. Specific
matters to be addressed by the review
include the following issues:i. To address the outcomes of the
GrowthOptionsStudyanddecisions
in neighbouring local plans about
how and where Luton’s unmet
housing needs will be provided for
includingimplicationsfortransport
infrastructure, as appropriate.
ii. The objective assessment of
housing needs including a
reassessment of migration trends
and projections.
iii. The capacity to accommodate
housing within Luton.
iv. The outcomes of separate Luton
and Central Bedfordshire
Functional Economic Market Area
(FEMA) studies.
v. A full assessment of the need for
school places over the plan period
taking into account planned
housing growth, the availability of
school places to meet that need
and steps to ensure sufficient
school places are made available,
including as appropriate through
the allocation of land to allow the
expansion of existing schools
and/or the provision of new
schools.
vi. Provision for the relocation of
Luton Town Football Club.
vii. Retail needs of the Borough and
how they will be provided for.
viii.Strategy and policies for the town
centre.
12 . Infrastructure Delivery, Monitoring and Review of the Local Plan
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
112ix. Uses and policies relating to the
strategicallocationatPowerCourt
(Policy LLP9).
x. Uses and policies relating to the
strategic allocation at South of
Stockwood Park (Policy LLP5).
xi. The allocation and delivery of a
park and ride facility at the
strategic allocation at South of
Stockwood Park (Policy LLP5).
Thefullreviewoftheplanwilltakeinto
account the outcome of any relevant
planning applications, including in
relation to Power Court (Policy LLP9)
and South of Stockwood Park (Policy
LLP5).
12 . Infrastructure Delivery, Monitoring and Review of the Local Plan
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
113Appendix 1 Glossary
Housingthatisaccessibletohouseholdswhocannotaffordtorent
or buy homes generally available on the open market. It includesAffordable Housing
social rented and intermediate tenures. Intermediate housing is
housing at prices or rents above those of social rent but below
market prices or rents.
A positive element or elements that contribute to the overall
characterorenjoymentofanarea.Forexample,openland,trees,Amenity
historic buildings and the relationship between them, or less
tangible factors such as tranquillity.
A report prepared by councils that can include data reported on
lineasitemergesoverayearaswellasareportassessingprogress
with and the effectiveness of the Local Plan and its documents.Authority Monitoring
Report (AMR)
Thespecialundergroundrocklayersthatholdgroundwater,which
are often an important source of water for public water supply,
agriculture and industry.Aquifer
An area with a statutory national landscape designation, the
primary purpose of which is to conserve and enhance naturalArea of Outstanding
NaturalBeauty(AONB)
beauty. Together with National Parks, AONBs represent the
nation’sfinestlandscapes(Countryside&RightsofWayAct2000).
AONBs are designated by Natural England. Luton lies within the
northernendoftheChilternsAONB,whichwasdesignatedin1965.
Whilst little of the designated area lies within the borough
boundary, it needs to be recognised that development within the
town can have an impact on the AONB beyond.
Thiswasapreviouslocalpolicydesignationtoconservethenatural
beauty of locally recognised landscapes of importance consideredArea of Great
Landscape Value
(AGLV) to be of similar landscape quality (but of less weight to AONBs) or
having a specific local character. However, AGLV policy was
abolished with Structure Plans by the government, and local
authorities must undertake Landscape Character Assessments in
ordertodesignateandprotectareasoflocallandscapeimportance
(seeLLI).FormerAGLVdesignationsexistedonattractiveandrare
chalkdownlandatDallowDownsandtheescarpmentnearBradgers
Hill. Two areas between the borough boundary and the southern
edge of London Luton Airport were similarly designated as part of
a larger locally important landscape area extending south into
Hertfordshire along the Lea Valley.
A ‘use class’ is the grouping together of similar land uses. B1 is
Business, which includes offices, research and development, lightB1 – B8 use classes
industry appropriate in a residential area; B2 is General Industrial
(excludingincineration,chemicaltreatment,landfillorhazardous
waste); B8 is Storage or Distribution, which includes open air
storage.
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
114The variety and range of plant and animal life, encompassing
genetics, species and ecosystems.Biodiversity
An arrangement, usually provided by a commercial organisation,
whereby residents who are Car Club members can hire a vehicle
parked in their area at discounted rates for short or long periods.Car Club
Wherepeoplewhoaretravellingtothesameornearbydestinations
shareavehicle. ThiscanbeeitherthroughinformalarrangementsCar Sharing
between colleagues or through a formal database such as
‘Liftshare’. Some employers offer this.
A term for land that has been previously developed with a
permanent structure.Brownfield land
Commonly abbreviated to BREEAM. A tool to measure the
environmental performance of new and existing non-residentialBuilding Research
Establishment
buildings. It is regarded by the UK’s construction and property Environmental
Assessment Method sectors as the measure of best practice in environmental design
and management and is a voluntary standard.
See AONB. Chilterns AONB
The merging or coming together of separate towns or villages to
form a single entity.Coalescence
A strategy prepared by a local authority to improve local quality
of life and aspirations, required under the Local Government Act
2000.Community Strategy
Public,privateandthirdsectorprovisionfacilities(includingthose
within educational establishments with shared use and publicCommunity Facility
access) that provide for the health and well-being, social,
educational, spiritual, recreational, leisure and cultural needs of
the community. Most D1 (non-residential institutions) and D2
(assembly and leisure) uses fall within this definition. Some uses
may qualify where they function as a community hub, such as a
pub that supports teams in sports leagues. B (employment) and C
(residential) use classes are not considered to be community
facilities.
Anareaofspecialarchitecturalorhistoricinterest,includinggroups
of buildings, and which needs its character or appearance to be
protected, preserved or enhanced.Conservation Area
A large urban sprawl, often densely populated, formed by the
growth and coalescence of individual towns or cities.Conurbation
Areasoflandthatareimportantfortheirwildlife.Theyarelocally
designated, following assessment of the quality and value ofCounty Wildlife Site
(CWS)
potential sites by a panel of specialists according to criteria from
Natural England and DEFRA.
The application of strategies and policies to reduce car travel
demand or to redistribute it.Demand Management
Department of Forestry and Rural Affairs. DEFRA
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
115A measure of the intensity of the use of land. For houses, it is
calculated on the basis of the number of dwellings per hectare.Density
Development includes any new building operation in, on or over
the land including any subsequent redevelopment and any change
of use.Development
The information and data gathered by local authorities to justify
the “soundness” of the policy approach set out in the Local Plan.Evidence Base
It includes studies of the physical, economic and social
characteristics of an area.
An assessment of the likelihood of flooding in a particular area so
thatdevelopmentneedsandmitigationmeasurescanbecarefully
considered.Flood Risk Assessment
(FRA)
Adesignationoflandaroundcertaincitiesandbuiltupareaswhich
aims to keep this land permanently or largely undeveloped. TheGreen Belt
purposesofthegreenbeltistocheckunrestrictedsprawl,prevent
neighbouring towns from merging, safeguard countryside from
encroachment and preserve the setting and special character of
historic towns. Green belts are defined in a local planning
authority’s development plan.
Land or a site, usually farmland, that has not previously been
developed and include allotments.Greenfield Land
This is the surface water runoff rate from a site before
development, or the existing site conditions
for brownfield redevelopment sites.GreenfieldRunoffRate
Accessible Green Space is accessible to the local community (see
Open Spaces Strategy) and Green Infrastructure (See Green
Infrastructure Strategy) can include accessible green space and
private green space. Typologies that come under Green Space can
include:Green Space
•Parksandgardens,providingaccessiblehighqualityopportunities
for informal recreation and community events.
•Naturalandsemi-naturalgreenspaces,includingurbanwoodland
and trees, providing opportunities for wildlife conservation and
biodiversity.
• Green corridors,which can be used for walking, cycling or horse
riding, and giving opportunities for wildlife migration.
•Outdoorsportsfacilities,whichencourageparticipationinsports
such as football, rugby, tennis, bowls, golf and athletics.
•Amenitygreenspace,givingopportunitiesforinformalactivities
closetohomeorworkandenhancingtheappearanceofresidential
areas.
• Provision for children and young people, designed for play and
social interaction.
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
116• Allotments and community gardens that include opportunities
for residents and users who wish to do so to grow their own
produce.
• Cemeteries, giving opportunities for quiet contemplation and
promoting wildlife conservation.
Buses that are steered for part or all of their routes by external
means, usually on a dedicated track.Guided Busway
The Gypsy and Traveller accommodation needs are assessed as
part of housing need and enables sites to be identified in order toGypsies and Travellers
meetthecurrentandfuturehousingneedsforthisspecificgroup,
which includes travelling showpeople.
A unit of land equivalent to 10,000 square metres. One hectare is
approximately equal to 2.47 acres.Hectare
A building, monument, site, place area or landscape identified as
having a degree of significance meriting consideration in planningHeritage asset
decisions. Heritage assets are valued components of the historic
environment. They include designated heritage assets such as
ListedBuildingsandWorldHeritageSitesaswellasassetsidentified
by the local planning authority (including local listing).
A Government company charged with operating England’s
motorways and major A roads. This includes modernising andHighways England
maintaining the highways, manage and help prevent incidents on
England’s motorways through the Traffic Officer service.
A park or garden of special historic interest. Grade I, II* or II as
designated by English Heritage.Historic Parks and
Gardens
This calculates the level of deprivation of a ward using a set of
indicators focussing on income, employment, health & disability,Index of Multiple
Deprivation (IMD)
education, skills & training, barriers to housing & services, living
environment and crime. It is used to help identify areas for
regeneration.
A general term used for the basic facilities, services and
installations needed for the functioning of a community such asInfrastructure
health and recreation facilities, water, sewerage, electricity,
schools, post offices, airports, roads and other utilities.
A diagram illustrating the spatial strategy of a local planning
authority’s Local Plan.Key Diagram
The local planning authority’s programme or timing for the
preparation of Local Development Documents.Local Development
Scheme (LDS)
Former Area of Great Landscape Value (see AGLV) policy was
abolished with Structure Plans by the government, and localLocal Landscape
Importance (LLI)
authorities must undertake Landscape Character Assessments in
order to designate and protect areas of 'local landscape
importance'. Former AGLV designations existed on attractive and
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
117rare chalk downland at Dallow Downs and the escarpment near
Bradgers Hill. Two areas between the borough boundary and the
southern edge of London Luton Airport were similarly designated
aspartofalargerlocallyimportantlandscapeareaextendingsouth
into Hertfordshire along the Lea Valley. Within Luton, these areas
are retained as of 'local landscape importance' (LLI). Additional
LLI are the Hart Hill area part of a steep hillside rising above the
River Lea characterised by mature trees (a significant landscape
feature visible from much of the southern part of the town) and
Stockwood Park, a large area of eighteenth century ‘romantic’
landscaping (prominent from the M1 motorway and providing a
quality southern approach to the town).
Theplanproducedbythelocalplanningauthorityunderthecurrent
Localism Act (and Plan making regulations) which can comprise ofLocal Plan
a document with a key diagram, policies map and a list of policies
with supporting text setting out how much, when and where
development will take place e.g. housing, employment,
infrastructuresuchastransportanddeliveryofstrategicallocations
of land for such purposes.
Locally significant flooding’ is defined in the Luton Local Flood
Risk Management Strategy (LLFRMS) as a set of thresholds that, ifLocally significant
Flooding
reached or exceeded, would trigger the carrying out of a formal
investigationbytheCouncilintoafloodingincident. Thethresholds
are quantified in the LLFRMS in terms of human health, economic
activity and environmental impact.
Non-statutory and multi-agency partnerships brining together at
a local level different parts of the public, private and voluntaryLocal Strategic
Partnership (LSP)
sectors, allowing different initiatives and services to support one
another so that they can work together more effectively with one
key objective to improve the quality of life in that area.
This strategy is prepared under the guidance of the Transport Act
2000, setting out the transport strategy for the district for
improving local transport.Local Transport Plans
(LTPs)
A guided busway operating along a former disused railway line
linkingLutontowncentrewithDunstableandHoughtonRegistown
centres.Luton Dunstable
Busway
Sets out the proposals for space and land-use and matches these
to a framework for investment and implementation.Master Plans
Provision of a mix of complementary uses, such as residential,
community and leisure uses, on a site or within a particular area.Mixed Use
The process of encouraging people to move from one transport
method (e.g. the car) to another (e.g. buses).Modal Shift
Thegovernmenthassetoutitskeyplanningprinciplesandpolicies
in a national framework to guide preparation of Local Plans and
development management decisions.National Planning
Policy Framework
Accommodation serving the needs of people of retirement age. Olderpeople’shousing
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
118This is the principal/main dwelling within a curtilage before any
subsequent alteration or extension which has increased its
size/volume.Original dwelling
Illustrates the spatial extent of policies of a Local Plan. Policies Map
A schedule setting out the consultation responses received during
a statutory consultation period on the Local Plan.Pre-Submission
Consultation
Statement
Land that is or has been occupied by a permanent structure and
associated fixed-surface infrastructure.Previously Developed
Land (PDL)
This is the principal/main dwelling within a curtilage before any
subsequent alteration or extension which has increased its
size/volume.Principal dwelling
Electronicdisplaygivingup-to-the-minuteinformationaboutpublic
transport arrivals and departures.Real Time Information
Theeconomic,socialandenvironmentalrenewalandimprovement
of urban and rural areas.Regeneration
Regional Plans were abolished by the Coalition Government in
2012/13.Regional Spatial
Strategy / East of
England Plan
ThreeareasofRegisteredCommonLandexistwithintheborough.
These are The Moor, which is a relic of the ancient Great Moor,Registered Common
Land and Access Land
whichservedasthesolerecreationalspaceforLutoniansuntilthe
1860s, and Bell's Close and Pope's Meadow, which were granted to
the town as compensation for the loss of part of the Great Moor
followingconstruction of the Midland Railway. These became part
of People's Park, which was the first public park to be created in
Luton. Each of these sites has historic heritage, landscape and
biodiversity value, and is registered as a commons under the
CommonsAct(1965)andasaccesslandundertheCROWAct(2000).
Luton contains two parks that English Heritage has included on its
‘Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest inRegistered Parks and
Gardens
England’.TheyareWardownParktothenorthofthecentralarea,
andPutteridgeBuryonthenortheastedgeofthetown,whichlies
mostly within Hertfordshire. Such parks are considered by English
Heritage to make a significant contribution to the richness of the
local scene in terms of green space and nature conservation.
Inclusion on the list requires Local Authorities to make provision
fortheprotectionofthehistoricenvironmentintheirpoliciesand
their allocation of resources.
Renewable energy is from sources that occur naturally and
repeatedlyin the environment,forexamplefromthe wind, water
flow, tides or the sun.Renewable energy
Legal agreements between a planning authority and a developer,
or undertakings offered unilaterally by a developer, that ensure
thatcertainextraworksrelatedtoadevelopmentareundertaken.Section 106
Agreements
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
119These are statutorily protected sites that comprise the country's
best wildlife and geological sites.Sites of Special
Scientific Interest
(SSSI)
Spatial planning goes beyond traditional land use planning to
integrate policies and programmes that influence the nature ofSpatial Planning
places and how they can function, such as delivering sustainable
development.
The Statement of Community Involvement sets out the processes
tobeusedbythelocalauthorityininvolvingthecommunityintheStatement of
Community
Involvement (SCI) preparation, alteration and continuing review of all local
development documents and development control decisions.
An assessment of land for housing to demonstrate that the local
authority has a continuous 5 year supply of deliverable sites for
housing and a 15-year supply of potential sites for housing.StrategicHousingLand
AvailabilityAssessment
(SHLAA)
Sets out the local authority’s objective housing needs split by
tenure(e.g.socialrentedhousing,intermediatehousingandmarketStrategic Housing
Market Assessment
(SHMA) housing) and is output according to local authority and housing
market areas. It promotes an approach to assessing housing need
and demand.
AsiteoveracertainsizethresholdidentifiedintheLocalPlanand
allocated on the policies map for development of a certain use or
mix of uses.Strategic Allocations
Elaborates on policies or proposals in the Local Plan and gives
additional guidance.Supplementary
Planning Documents
(SPDs)
The SA/SEA is central to the planning system. Its aim is to take
an objective view of sustainable development through the
integrationofsocial,environmentalandeconomicconsiderations.SustainabilityAppraisal
/ Strategic
Environmental
Assessment (SA/SEA)
Adocumentproducedbythelocalauthorityandkeylocalpartners,
which sets out the long-term vision for the town. The Local Plan
isakeyimplementationtoolforsomeoftheobjectivesoftheSCS.SustainableCommunity
Strategy(SCS)
A sustainable community is an organic vibrant environment where
people will want to live and work now and in the future.Sustainable
Communities
The purpose of the planning system is to contribute to the
achievement of sustainable development. There are three
dimensions to sustainable development: economic, social andSustainable
Development
environmental.SustainableDevelopment,accordingtoResolution
42/187 of the UN General Assembly, is meeting the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations to
meet their own needs.
A system for surface water managing run-off with the aim of
reducing flooding, improving water quality and protecting the
environment.Sustainable Drainage
Systems (SuDS)
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
120The formal Government regulations that define how the LDF is
produced.Town and Country
Planning (Local
Development)
(England) Regulations
2012
A location where passengers can change to different modes of
transport.TransportHuborMode
This is a package of information and a statement in support of a
planning application that sets out the detail of traffic impacts on
the road network and any mitigation required.Transport Assessment
and Transport
Statement
Is a package of actions designed by a workplace, school or other
organisation to encourage safe, healthy and sustainable travel
options.Travel Plan
Involvestheplannedexpansionofacityortownandcancontribute
tocreatingmoresustainablepatternsofdevelopmentwhenlocatedUrban Extension
intherightplace,withwell-plannedinfrastructureincludingaccess
to a range of facilities, and when developed at appropriate
densities.
Appendix 1 Glossary
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
121Appendix 2 Parking and Cycling Standards
Maximum Car Parking Standards
Standard (Maxima) Description Use
Class
Standardtobeconsideredonindividualmerits,
subject to Council approvalRetail-Food(over1,000sq.m.) A1
Retail - Non-Food (over
1,000sq.m.)A1
General Retail (under
1,000sq.m.)A1
1 space per 30sq.m. Offices (Business &
Professional)A2
1 space per 30sq.m. Cafes, Restaurants, Public
Houses, Wine Bars etcA3 to A5
1 space per 30sq.m. Business Use B1
1 space per 30sq.m. Industry B2
1 space per 50sq.m. or 1 space for full time
equivalent staff, whichever is lowerWarehousing, Storage &
General DistributionB8
1 space per bedroom + appropriate standards
for ancillary uses + 1 per 2 full time equivalent
staff parkingGuest Houses/Hotels C1
Will need to reflect current hospital provision
- consultation neededHospitals C2
Space as follows: Nursing Homes C2
7 - 10 residents - 4
11 - 15 residents - 5
16 - 20 residents - 6
21 - 25 residents - 8
26 - 30 residents - 10
+ 1 space per bedroom for live-in staff
Dwellings C3
3 spaces per dwelling (or lower depending on
accessibility)4+ bedrooms
2 spaces per dwelling (or lower depending on
accessibility)2/3 bedrooms
Appendix 2 Parking and Cycling Standards
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
122Standard (Maxima) Description Use
Class
1 space per dwelling (or lower depending on
accessibility)1 bedroom
1 space for the house manager Sheltered Housing C3
0.19 for 1 bedroom
0.44 for two bedrooms
0.08 spaces per apartment for visitors
1 space per 2 staff Secondary Higher/Further
Education Establishments and
Adult Training CentresD1
+ 1 space per 15 students (total, not full time
equivalent) on all developments
4 spaces per consulting room + 1 space per 2
staffMedical & other health
practicesD1
1 space per 2 staff Pre-school Play and Nursery
Provision, Primary SchoolsD1
Standardtobeconsideredonindividualmerits,
subject to Council approvalD2 Uses not individually listed
belowD2
Cinemas D2
Conference Facilities D2
Sports Stadia (with over 1,500
seats)D2
1spaceper4roomsand,inanycase,notmore
than existing provision if converted from a
dwellingHostels and HMOs SG
1 space per 30sq.m. Launderettes SG
1 space per 30sq.m. + 1 space per 2 cars based
at premisesPHV Offices SG
1 space per 5 fixed seats; and 3 disabled bays
or 6% of total capacity; adequate turning and
loading facilities; space for 1 coach or a 16.5m
lorry; otherwise standards to be considered on
individual merits subject to Council approval.Theatres SG
General notes
1. For those developments where there is no adopted parking standard, the amount of
parking required will be determined by the Council having regard to the transportation
policies and objectives set out in this Local Plan.
Appendix 2 Parking and Cycling Standards
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
1232. The standards set out above will be the maximum permitted in new developments in
Luton. However, in accordance with Policy LLP32 of this Local Plan, the Council will
limit parking for new development in the central area to that which is essential for
operational purposes, and may seek to reduce the maximum standard in other areas
highly accessible by public transport.
3. The minimum size of a standard parking bay is 2.4m x 4.9m.
4. The floor space in all cases refers to the gross (external) floor area.
5. For mixed-use schemes, the parking requirement will be calculated separately for each
use.
6. Where developments require servicing by goods vehicles, sufficient space for their
standing and manoeuvring should be provided. Schemes should be designed to allow
vehicles to enter and leave the site in forward gear.
7.Inalluseslikelytogeneratecoachtraffic,e.g.hostels,educationestablishments,sports
facilitiesandtheatres,schemesshouldprovideadequateoff-streetfacilitiesforcoaches,
including picking-up and setting-down points, manoeuvring space and parking spaces.
Schemes should be designed to allow vehicles to enter and leave the site in forward
gear.
8.Disabled parking spaces: In all developments providing 5 or more car parking spaces,
aminimumof1bayor5%ofthetotalcapacity(whicheverisgreater)shouldbedesignated
and reserved for disabled users. Spaces should be a minimum of 3.6m x 4.9m and
conveniently located close to the entrance of buildings.
Minimum Cycle Parking Standards
Standard (Minima) Description Use
Class
1 space per 5 staff Retail - Food (up to 250sq.m.) A1
1 space per 10 staff Retail - Food (250 - 500sq.m.) A1
1 space per 10 staff + 1 space per 250sq.m. Retail - Food (500 - 1,000sq.m.) A1
1 space per 10 staff + 1 space per 150sq.m. Retail - Food (over 1,000sq.m.) A1
1 space per 10 staff (on site at one time) Retail - Non-Food (under
1,000sq.m.)A1
1 space per 10 staff (on site at one time) Retail - Non-Food (over
1,000sq.m.)A1
+ 1 space per 350sq.m.
1spaceperunitforthefirst10units;1space
per 5 units for the remainderResidential - blocks of flats C3
1 space per 4 staff (on site at one time) + 1
stand (mix of cycle and scooter parking per
4 pupils/students (on site at one time)Infant/Primary schools D1
Appendix 2 Parking and Cycling Standards
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
124Standard (Minima) Description Use
Class
1 space per 10 staff Secondary Schools/Higher &
Further Education
Establishments/Adult Training
CentresD1
1 stand per 8 staff (on site at one time)
+ 1 space for 4 pupils (on site at one time)
Cycleparkingforthepublictobeagreedwith
the Council, in addition to staff parking in
accordance with the above standardOther non-residential
developments attracting
significant numbers of the public
General notes
1. Thecycling'spaces'tobeprovidedaboverequiressomeformofstandtowhichthecycle
can be securely chained.
2. Cycle parking should be conveniently located for users, offer security and be subject to
surveillance during use. Wherever possible, it should be under cover.
3. In accordance with Policy LLP32 of this Local Plan, consideration should be given to the
provision of storage, which should include showering facilities for employees choosing
to cycle.
4. Developers should take account of the need for cycle storage in the design of new
residential schemes.
Appendix 2 Parking and Cycling Standards
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
125Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
List of Key Employment Areas Category A
Description Name
37.3 ha Strategic scale site part completed (circa 30%) with
remaining greenfield plots ready to develop for high quality usesButterfield Green
Technology Park
in line with Policy LLP7 in a prominent location with frontage onto
(STRATEGIC
ALLOCATION)theA505,goodqualityenvironmentandverymodern,goodquality
buildingswithlowvacancybutrelativelyremotelocationandmuch
land available.
14 ha Strategic scale, undeveloped site (includes north and south
ofNewlandsRoad)neartheairportandaccessedofJ10AtotheM1.
Proposed B1(a) office park and Park and Ride.Junction10aSouthof
Stockwood Park
(STRATEGIC
ALLOCATION)
25 ha Strategic scale development site cleared for mixed use
employment(B1andB2)housingandcommercialaccessedviaLondonNapier Park
(STRATEGIC
ALLOCATION)Luton Parkway station and Kimpton Road and the A1081 dual
carriageway New Airport Way - M1 Junction 10A.
42.6 ha Strategic scale undeveloped site for mixed B1(a), B1(b),
B1(c), B2, B8 adjacent to London Luton Airport - a strategic routeWigmoreEmployment
Area/ Century Park
accesshasbeendesignatedtoservethissitefromtheairportestate
(STRATEGIC
ALLOCATION)via Wigmore Valley Park, which will tie this strategic development
into the A1081 dual carriageway New Airport Way and with access
to services and labour, and London Luton Airport.
7.21 ha Large strategic town centre industrial estate part cleared,
allocatedformixeduseretail,residentialandB1businesstoextendPower Court
(STRATEGIC
ALLOCATION)the town centre shopping area, access off the A505 ring road 4km
from junction 10a (M1) and Luton rail station and guided bus
interchange.
3.7 ha Medium sized site with high profile location next to London
Luton Airport; access off A505 with units in good condition, good
environment and low vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Airport Executive
Park
3.5 ha Well connected site near the airport and on A505 with fairly
modern units, and no obvious vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.BarrattIndustrialPark
9.6 ha Large well established industrial estate, good quality
buildings predominantly B1/B2 and B8 mix of uses - some quasiBilton Way
retail trade and Vauxhall servicing located 2 km from junction 11
(M1) via A505.
2 ha Pleasant industrial park, access directly on the A6, 6km from
junction 11 (M1), modern 1980s/1990s mix of good buildings and
B1/B8 uses with no vacancies.Bramingham Business
Park
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
126Description Name
10.3 ha Very large busy industrial estate on the norther edge of
Luton, 4.6 km from junction 11 (M1) via A5228, buildings generallyCamford Way
ingoodconditionandsomeunitsneedingupgradeinvestmentB1/B2
and B8 mix with some sui generis Cash & Carry.
Large successful premium business park accessed via M1 Junction
10a, high quality B1 (a) accommodation in proximity to London
Luton Airport.Capability Green
0.19 ha Town centre 1980s B1 office and mixed retail building in
good condition, 3.5km from junction 10a (M1), designated withinChapel Street
[CASTLE QUARTER] Luton Town Centre Strategy policy LLP3 (Castle Quarter - mixed
use residential retail and leisure) and conservation area, fully
occupied.
3.6haRelativelyclosetotheM1Junction11withincreasingprofile
and accessibility due to its location beside guided bus route; fairly
modern units with low vacancy B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Commerce Park
10.1 ha Large site with high profile beside the M1 near Junction 11
but limited access via rural roads; large, reasonably modern units
and low vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Cosgrove Way
5.0 ha High profile site near A505 and close to M1 Junction 11 with
larger modern units and low vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Craddock Road
2.1haGoodaccessibilitybyroadandrail,locatednexttotheroute
of the inner ring-road and hosting a rail-served aggregates depotCrescent Road (West)
(safeguardedbythejointMinerals&WasteLocalPlan). Lowdensity
but low vacancy. B2, B8.
5.7 ha Near M1 J11 via A505 with some large, modern units on a
spacious site with low vacancy B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Dalroad Employment
Area
1.8 ha Poorer road links to M1 but in well-established employment
area with well-maintained, if older, units in good environment and
low vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Dencora Way
Employment Area
2.2 ha High quality B1 office and B2 manufacturing premises with
B8, 1.2 km from junction 11 (M1), fully occupied.ElectroluxOaklyRoad
6.8haLargesitenearM1J11viaA505withreasonablymodernunits
in good condition in well-established industrial location and low
vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Finway Industrial
Estate
3.24 ha Existing industrial estate, well established in larger
employment area 2.5 km from junction 11 (M1) via A505, mixedFirbank
B1/B2/B8, quality of buildings mixed with some poor, fully
operational and occupied.
0.15 ha Town Centre mixed use pre-war and post-war refurbished
premises, B1/and non B class D1/residential/retail, 4.5 km fromGuildford Street
(Alexon Building &
junction10a(M1),fullyoccupied,subjecttoCreativeQuarterpolicy Hat
LLP11 regeneration for mixed residential use, adjacent to
conservation area.Factory)[CREATIVE
QUARTER]
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
127Description Name
0.55 ha Town Centre office and industrial block, 4.5km junction 10
a of M1 via the A505, mix of B1/B8 and commercial A1-A5 uses inInkerman Street
modern1980sgoodbuildingsbutwitholder1950sbuildingsneeding
refurbishment, some vacancies.
0.6haLocatedontheA505,thisisareasonablymodernofficeblock
in good condition, with good access to local services. B1(a).Jansel House
3.04 ha Existing industrial site 3.3 km from junction 10a (M1) via
east Luton corridor A505 dual carriageway, B1/B2/B8 uses in
buildings in good condition no obvious vacancies.Kimpton Road A
1.5 ha Prominent visible location adjacent to the airport, Vauxhall
(IBC)andNapierPark,mixedsiteoffices,printworks,distribution,Kimpton Road B
cardealership,3.5kmfromjunction10a(M1)viaeastLutoncorridor
A505 dual carriageway, good quality buildings, site part cleared
included within Napier Park development.
15.71 ha Large bespoke Vauxhall (IBC) manufacturing plant
prominent and visible close to the airport and Napier Park, 3.5 kmKimpton Road C
from junction 10a (M1) via east Luton corridor A505 dual
carriageway, B1/B2/B8 uses in good quality buildings and plant -
fully occupied.
1.11 ha Existing industrial area, linear form, 2.5 km from junction
11 (M1) via A505, mix B1/B2/B8 uses in reasonable buildings,
cramped operation but reasonable parking, some vacant units.Kingsway
7.0 ha Large site on A505 with modern buildings and good
environment occupied by single company with ample parking
provision and adequate public transport access. B1(a).Osbourne Road
Employment Area
13.6 ha Prominent large industrial estate, B1/B2/B8 uses adjacent
to employment cluster, 2.5 km from junction 11 (M1) via A505,
majority of units fairly modern, some vacancies.Laport Way
(Note:includes
Commerce Park)
0.96haTownCentreofficeblocks(2-3storey),4.5kmfromjunction
10a(M1)viaA505,mixed1980sB1officepremisesingoodconditionLiverpool Road
witholder(2storey)infairconditionsomerecentlyrefurbished,no
vacancies.
2.9 ha Developed industrial park, 4.3 km from junction 11 (M1),
north edge of Luton mix of B1/B2 and B8 uses, buildings in good
condition, low vacancy.LutonEnterprisePark
5 ha Well established industrial estate 4km from junction 11 (M1)
north Luton, B1/B2 and B8 mix with new/modern and older mix of
units good/reasonable condition, some vacancies.Park Avenue Trading
Estate
6.3 High profile location on A505 beside London Luton Airport with
good public transport, moderate units and environment but low
vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Percival Way
Industrial Area
0.35 ha 1970s refurbished office block beside A505 and Stopsley
districtcentre.Goodroadaccessandadequateparking.NosensitivePlaza 668
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
128Description Name
adjoining uses and building in good condition with low vacancy. B1
offices.
4.36haMixedB2/B8employmentdepot,includesCouncilrecycling
and industrial uses within a strategic scale employment area, 2.5PortlandRoad(Depot)
kmfromjunction11(M1)viaA505,largeandsmallindustrialunits,
run down appearance but no obvious vacancies.
1.6haVerymodernunitsinwelllandscapedsitewithampleparking
provision, in prominent industrial location. B1(a), B1(c),B8.PremierBusinessPark
1.8 ha Existing site with cleared area for development and mix of
airport related uses adjacent to London Luton Airport, 4km fromProctor Way
junction10a(M1)viaA1081dualcarriageway,buildingspresentare
older but high quality aviation related office and industrial mostly
within airport boundary and cleared site outside boundary.
0.70haWellestablishedindustrialestate,northwestedgeofLuton
4 km from junction 11 (M1) via A5228, mix of B1/B2/B8 uses in
modern and refurbished units, low vacancy.Progress Park
6.2 ha Employment Area High profile location beside London Luton
Airport and on A505 with relatively modern office units and no
obvious vacancy. B1(a), B1(c).Prospect Way
2.6 ha Prominent well established industrial estate, B1/B2 and B8
mix, northedgeofLuton4kmfromjunction11(M1),managedgood
quality 1980s units, only 2 vacancies.Scott Road
13.6 ha Very large site with mix of modern/refurbished units in
prominent industrial location. Limited access to M1 via rural roads
but low vacancy. B1(a),B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8.Sedgwick Road/
Progress Way
8.14 ha Large bespoke SKF plant (UK) on north edge of Luton 4.3
km from junction 11 of M1 via A5228, older 1950s industrial unitSKF
buildings generally in good condition for mix B1/B8 uses no
vacancies.
4.17haExistinglinearB1/B8employmentsiteimmediatelyadjacent
railwayline,withinstrategicemploymentarea,2kmfromjunctionSelbourne Road
Industrial Area
11(M1)butviabusyresidentialroads; somenonBuse,mixedstock
of units, lower quality environment but few obvious vacancies.
2.6haLimitedaccesstoM1J11viaruralroadsbutwellmaintained,
managed site in established industrial location with modern units
and no vacancy. B1(a), B1(c), B8.Sundon Business Park
2.5 ha Limited access to M1 J11 via rural roads and with older
industrial units in good condition but in established industrial
location with low vacancy B1(a), B1(c), B2, B8.Sundon Industrial
Estate
0.81 ha Existing industrial estate, northern edge of Luton 4.3km
fromjunction11(M1)viatheA5228,mixB1/B2/B8inmoderngood
quality units, no vacancies.Urban HIVE, Luton
Enterprise Park
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
129Description Name
11.26 ha Existing B1/B8 vehicle manufacturing plant near Napier
Park and employment cluster close to the airport, 3.8km fromVauxhall North of
Napier Park
junction 10a (M1), direct access off A1081 dual carriageway New
AirportWay,datedbespokeplantpremisesinreasonablecondition,
fully occupied.
14.57 ha Large high profile B1/B8 employment land site
predominantly used for surface parking and opens storage, mixedVauxhall Way Trailer
Park
B1/B2andstorage,betweenkeyemploymentareaandtheairport,
3.5km from junction 10a via A1081 dual carriageway New Airport
Way, no obvious vacancies.
2.61 ha B1/B8 Employment site, 2 km from junction 11 (M1) via
residentialroads,mixnonBuses,BTtelephoneengineeringcentre,Waller Avenue
motor transport, storage, waste transfer operations, reasonable
qualitybuildings,goodqualityofficefrontagebuildings,reasonable,
no vacancies.
1.8haProminentgoodquality1980sB1officeinblock(closetothe
airport)subdividedintosmallerunits,ontheeasternsideofLuton,Wigmore Place
6kmfromjunction10a(M1)viaeastLutoncorridordualcarriageway,
some floorspace being marketed.
1.16 ha Existing cluster of 3 separate industrial B1/B2/B8 uses, in
a strategic employment area 2 km from junction 11 (M1) via localWingate Road
residential roads, cramped operationally or for expansion, mix
reasonable and poor properties, evidence fully occupied.
2.3 ha Medium sized site with M1 access via rural roads and mix of
modern and older units in established industrial location and with
no vacancy. B1(c), B2, B8.Willowgate Trading
Estate
List of Employment Areas Category B
Description Name
0.2haSmallB1industrialsiteonedgeofLutontowncentrewithgood
local road access, 4.5 km from junction 10 (M1), borders anAbbeygateBusiness
Centre
employmentclusterwithsomeresidentialusesnearby,1970sbuildings
in run down state and need refurbishment, many vacancies.
0.2 ha Small edge of centre site with good local road and public
transport and town centre services, 4.1 km from junction 10 (M1),Albion Road
adjoinedbycommercialuseswithresidentialestateacrossroad,older
units in reasonable condition and fully occupied. B1/C3.
0.95 ha Existing employment site within large strategic employment
area, 2 km from junction 11 (M1) via residential roads, mix of B1/B2Arundel Road
uses and vehicle repairs in 1950's and 1970s buildings, in reasonable
condition for B1 retention, fully occupied but non B uses present may
indicate lack of demand.
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
130Description Name
0.32 ha Medium sized site occupied by 1890s office building and
attachedwarehouse/storageshed,allingoodconditionandoccupied.Brunswick Street
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)Good local road access although distant from strategic routes and
accesstotowncentrepublictransportandservices.Withinestablished
industrial area and appears to function adequately. B1/B8.
0.8haMediumsizedindustrialsiteinanestablishedindustriallocation
near Luton rail station and town centre transport and services. GoodBurr Street
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)local road access to site with adequate on-site parking and service
yard areas. Good quality units on site and all occupied.
3.18 ha Employmentsite 1.4 km fromjunction 11 of M1 via A505, mix
predominantly Arriva Bus Depot and car dealership, buildings in
reasonable condition, car dealership showroom vacant.Bus Depot
Dunstable Road
2.8 ha Good accessibility by road, located next to the route of the
inner ring-road. Significant areas of land have been demolished andCrescent Road
(East)
cleared while other parts now support community and leisure uses.
B1(a), B1(b), B1(c), B2, B8.
0.3 ha Small edge of centre site with older buildings and car park.
Poorroadaccessbutclosetopublictransport.AdjoinssomeresidentialDudley Street
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)uses in mixed use area. Low quality buildings only partly occupied.
B1/C3.
2.3haUndevelopedcarparksiteinhighprofilelocationbesideLondon
LutonAirportwithgoodaccesstoA505/M1,withgoodpublictransportEaton Green Road
andclosetolocalservices.Separatedfromresidentialareasbutclose
to airport noise. B1-B8.
0.1 ha Existing small employment site, non B classes (car repairs)
remainingadjacenttoredevelopedindustriallandwithinformingnewEmpress Road
flatted developments, 2 km from junction 11 (M1), constrained site,
poor buildings in disrepair, some vacancies.
1.38 Mixed use B1 office and non B uses site within the town centre
4 km from junction 10a (M1) access of the A505 ring road, designatedCastle Quarter
(CASTLE QUARTER)
in the Local Plan Luton Town Centre Strategy Policy LLP3 (Castle
Quarter - mixed use residential, retail and leisure), vacancies on
eastern section of site part cleared.
0.6 ha Large warehouse unit near M1 and adjoining A505 junction.
LimitedlocalroadaccessanddistantfromservicesbutadjoinsguidedChaul End Lane
(South)
bus way and retail park opposite. Potential constraints from some
adjoining residential uses but unit occupied and in good
condition.B1-B8.
0.58 ha Mixed area B1 office/B8 and student accommodation within
towncentre.4.5 km fromjunction10a (M1) viathe A505towncentreCollingdon &
Liverpool Road
ring road, public transport nearby but only the Liverpool Road site
has adequate on-site parking, mix of 1980s office premises in good
conditionandolderindustrialunitsinneedofrefurbishmentandsome
vacancies.
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
131Description Name
0.1 ha Edge of centre small office site with good local road access,
limited parking on site but good access to public transport. Close toConcorde Street
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)local services and within employment cluster with small amount of
residential development adjoining. Low profile office location but
reasonable quality building and no vacancy. B1.
0.8haEmploymentsitesplitintotwo,closetotowncentre,adjacent
torailwayandCrescentRoadsafeguardedaggregatesdepot/railhead,Crescent Road
(East)
4km from junction 10a (M1) via A505 ring road/dual carriageway,
B1/B8postwarindustrialandpre-fabofficebuildings, nonBusesD1,
sui generis, not fully occupied.
0.29 ha Employment site B1/B2/B8 mix, designated in the Local Plan
Luton Town Centre Strategy policy LLP3 (Castle Quarter - mixed useCumberland Street
(CASTLE QUARTER) residential, retail and leisure), off the A505 ring road 4 km from
junction 10a (M1), mix of poor/rundown and reasonable quality
buildings, but fully occupied.
0.28 ha Industrial estate, close to the edge of the town centre, 3 km
from junction 10a (M1) via A505 ring road, B1/B8 mix of use in 1980s
buildings of reasonable condition but cramped site operationally.Flowers Estate
0.24haOlderindustrialblockB1/B8inresidentialareawithinwalking
to town centre/station, accessed off residential roads 5.5. Km fromFrederick Street
junction 11 of M1, Victorian industrial buildings, some post-war infill
in adequate condition and occupied.
0.1haSmallclearedsiteinexistingemploymentareaneartowncentre
andrailwaystation.Reasonablelocalroadaccessandservices/publicGillam Street
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)transportnearbybutunlikelytoattractnewemploymentdevelopment
in this location. C3.
0.42 ha Small B1(a), B1(c), B8 industrial estate in low profile
residential area, 5.5 km from junction 10 (M1) via A5228 and goodGreenwood Court
Industrial Area
public transport access, tight parking/cramped operation but
reasonably modern small units in good condition, some vacancy.
0.5 ha Small office site on edge of town centre with good local road
access, 4.8 km from junction 10a (M1), public transport accessibilityHigh Town Road
and ample parking on site. Adjoining uses not incompatible with
offices. Offices reasonably modern, in good condition, some units
appear vacant and suitable to meet future needs. B1.
0.04 ha A small site in industrial area used for vehicle repair.
Reasonablelocalroadaccessbutnooffstreetparking.NearnewthreeHitchin Road
storey block of flats but separated by road. Older building in poor
condition but occupied and meets local needs. B1/C3.
0.67 ha Industrial estate, edge of town centre, 3 km from junction
10a (M1) via A505 ring road, mix B1/B8, modern within pre-war brickHolly Street
industrial buildings some in good and some in poor condition needing
refurbishment, many vacant units.
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
132Description Name
0.66 ha Mix of pre and post war buildings in A1-A5 use with B1, active
frontages within the town centre abutting the A505 ring road 3.5 kmKing Street
from junction 10a (M1), conservation area (Policy LLP30) mix of
adequate and older buildings potentially attractive needing
refurbishment, part allocated for housing.
3.34 ha Older 1940s to 1970s mixed cement works/industrial
buildings/site some in poor repair on A579, 2.5 km from junction 11Leagrave Road
(M1), with limited parking on-site and fair public transport. Adjoins
railway line, forms a safeguarded concrete/sand batching facility
(jointMinerals&WasteLocalPlan) inresidentialareanearsomelocal
services. Mainly older units containing vehicle repair uses, some in
poorconditionbutnoapparentvacanciesandfunctioningwell.B1c/B2.
0.72 ha Industrial estate south of town centre A505 ring road, 3 km
from junction 10a (M1), mix B1/B8 split into 3 sites, some pre-warLangley Terrace
but mostly post-war industrial units, poor quality in need of
refurbishment, operationally cramped site, low vacancy.
1.6 ha Existing industrial estate, reasonable location good access 4
km from junction 10 a (M1) via A505/ring road and the town centre.Manor Road
Mix of B1/B8 uses, suffers from a high number of vacancies and some
unitsinpoorcondition.Suitableforemploymentbutneedsinvestment,
flood zone 2 restrictions.
0.08 ha Small B1 office block located within the town centre, 4.5 km
from junction 11 (M1) via A505 ring road, post-war office building,
slightly run down state, non B uses present, partially vacant.Mill Street
0.9 ha Medium sized B1/B2 industrial estate, part vacant, with low
profile in mainly residential area with residential uses on all sides,Moreton Park
5.5 km from junction 10a (M1) via A5228 but site access is off
constrained residential road with parking on both sides. Site slopes
steeply and contains small 1970s industrial units in reasonable
condition with quite high vacancy, no obvious marketing.
0.42 ha Industrial estate, B1/B8 uses in residential setting, access
ontoA6viatowncentreroadsand4.8kmfromjunction11(M1)small141 New Bedford
Road
siteconstrainedoperations,poorqualitybuildingsneedrefurbishment,
no apparent vacancies.
0.43haExistingB/B8industrialestate400msouthofthetowncentre,
3 km from junction 10 a (M1) cramped parking, some 1980s industrialNew Town Trading
Estate
units in adequate condition some poorer older buildings in need of
refurbishment some vacant units and land.
0.15 ha Royal Mail sorting office, B1/B8, 2 km from junction 11 (M1)
viaresidentialroads,olderbuildingsinmoderatecondition,sitevacant
and part cleared.Sarum Road
0.3 ha Small site with older buildings and limited local road access
5.5 km from junction 11 (M1) via A5228 - A505, adequate parking toSunrise Estate
rearbutwithdifficultaccess,adjoiningresidentialusesbutseparated
by car park, most units 1940s-1950s are in fair condition and largely
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
133Description Name
occupied and site meets local needs but some units in poor condition
B1/C3.
0.2haSmallvehiclerepairsiteinclusterofemploymentusesonedge
of town centre. Adequate local road access and proximity to publicTaylor Street (1)
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)transport. 1970s premises in good condition and fully occupied.
Adequate to meet local needs. B1.
0.1haSmallvehiclerepairsiteinemploymentareaneartowncentre.
Reasonableroadaccessbutnoon-siteparking,butnearNCPcarpark.Taylor Street (2)
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)No sensitive uses adjoining but buildings in poor condition and one
out of two vacant. B1/B2.
0.43 ha Small industrial B1/B2 site 400 m south of the town centre
and 3 km from junction 10a (M1) close to the A505 but accessed viaTelmere Estate
constrainedroads;adjoinedbyhousingon3sides;containsreasonably
modernsmallindustrialunitssomeinpoorcondition andseveralunits
vacant.
0.3haSmallvehiclerepairsiteinclusterofemploymentusesonedge
of town centre, 4.8 km from junction 10 (M1) via busy residentialYork Street (1)
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)roads and A505 and proximity to public transport,1970s premises in
reasonable condition and fully occupied suitable for B1 local needs,
within High Town Strategic Allocation (Policy LLP10) involving
sustainable residential -led mixed use including small scale
offices/workshops.
0.1 ha Plant hire site on edge of town centre with limited local road
access as access to Hitchin Road is restricted resulting in circuitousYork Street (2)
(HIGH TOWN
MASTERPLAN)routeviaTaylorStreetandBrunswickStreet.Contains1970sbuildings
in reasonable condition and open storage within employment cluster
and largely occupied. B1-B8.
Appendix 3 Employment Sites: Categories A & B
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
134Appendix 4 Housing Allocations
Potential capacity in dwellings as of April 2016
Potential Capacity
(#dwellings) Site Name
77 Guardian Industrial Estate
48 Oxen Industrial Estate, Oxen Road
181 Land at Caleb Close
41 Car Parks on Dunstable Place
39 Car Park off Telford Way
32 Dalroad Industrial Estate
59 69 Felstead Way
41 The Windsor Castle, 12 Albert Road
0 (site developed
prior to adoption) 14 Cardiff Road
30 27-37 Chapel Street
39 21-25 Chapel Street
124 13-31 Dunstable Road
168Land opposite Whitbread House,
Flowers Way
59Luton Town Football Club,
Kenilworth Road1
0 (site developed
prior to adoption) Midland House, 41 King Street
80 Crescent House, 1-5 Latimer Road
0 (site developed
prior to adoption)Land & buildings at Castle Street/
Oxford Road and Park Viaduct
392 Land to the west of Newlands Road
56 Land at Stockingstone Road2
14 The Laurels, Ely Way
0 (site developed
prior to adoption)Westlea Old Peoples Home, 121
High Street
26 27A Upper George Street
Appendix 4 Housing Allocations
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
13588 40-58 Collingdon Street
49Carparkadjacentto95MapleRoad
East
51 BraminghamCentre,WeltmoreRoad
15 2 to 32 Beechwood Road
24 10 to 12 Caleb Close
0 (site developed
prior to adoption) 146 to 158 Park Street
96 Whitbread House, Flowers Way
27Land at the Orchard Centre,
Strangers Way3
101 Unity House, 111 Stuart Street
15 38a Wingate Road
0 (site developed
prior to adoption) 26-30 Cardiff Road
0 (site developed
prior to adoption) Wesley House, 19 Chapel Street
294 Britannia Estate4
Footnotes:
1. Luton Town Football Club, Kenilworth Road - in addition to the new housing, around
7,500 sq. m. of public open space to help address the shortfall in provision in the locality,
including play facilities, will be provided. Development will not commence until Luton
Town Football Club has relocated to a new site.
2. LandatStockingstoneRoad-Theindoorbowlsfacility,outdoorbowlsfacilityandancillary
parking provision should be retained or replaced within the allocation site with equivalent
or better provision in terms of quantity and quality as part of the redevelopment of the
site. Alternatively, these facilities would need to be replaced off-site with equivalent or
better provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable location capable of serving
existing users. Provision will need to be made for the bowls clubs to be given acceptable
security of use and for any replacement facility to be completed and operational prior to
the development of new housing commencing on the site.
3. Land at the Orchard Centre, Strangers Way - prior to the new housing being developed,
the playing fields must be re-provided (or equivalent enhancements made to existing
facilities) elsewhere in the borough.
4. BritanniaEstate–theallocationallowsforhousingonapartofBritanniaEstateandthe
balance of the site will remain in employment use.
Appendix 4 Housing Allocations
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
136Appendix 5 Housing
Trajectory
Figure 1: Luton Local Plan 2011–2031 Housing Trajectory
Notes:
1: PLAN (red line) – this is the plan requirement of 8,500 divided by the 20 years of the plan
period 2011-31 = 425/year
2: MANAGE (black line) – this shows the annual requirement from 2016-2021 to recover the
shortfall of 98 specifically from the period 2011-2016. This was calculated as follows: the 5
year requirement 2011-16 is 425 x 5 = 2125. In this period there were 2,027 completions
leaving a shortfall of 98. The intention is to recover this in the next 5 years: 2125 plus 98 =
2223 divided by 5 = 445/year
3: For the purposes of calculating housing land supply, the Five-Year Requirement will be
subject to the addition of a buffer for choice and flexibility. Addition of the buffer shown on
the trajectory above is calculated as follows:
- for 2016-21: 2223 plus 5% = 2334 divided by 5 = 467/year
- from then on 425/year plus an assumed buffer of 5% = 446/year
Appendix 5 Housing Trajectory
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
137The application of a 5% buffer within these calculations is based on the position at the time
of the 2016 SHLAA. Table 1 of Appendix 5 (see below) indicates that Luton Borough Council
did not have a record of persistent under-delivery at the point the Local Plan was adopted.
The size of the buffer will be reviewed each year. The buffer is dependent on circumstances
so is not fixed over the plan period.
4: The detailed schedule of sites informing this housing trajectory is provided by the Luton
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment – July 2016. The trajectory will be updated
basedonthelatestmonitoringinformationandreportedinsubsequentversionsoftheStrategic
Housing Land Availability Assessment and the Authorities Monitoring Report (AMR).
Table 1: Record of Historic Dwelling Delivery against Relevant Housing Targets for the
Period 2001 to 2016
Appendix 5 Housing Trajectory
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
138Appendix 6 External Amenity Space Standards
External Amenity Space Standards
Forflatteddevelopmentsaminimumof5sq.m.ofprivateoutdoorspaceshouldbeprovided
for 1-2 person flats and maisonettes and an extra 1sq.m. should be provided for each
additional occupant.
Private outdoor spaces should have level access from the home.
The minimum depth and width of all balconies should be 1500mm.
Where private outdoor space is not achievable due to plot size or character this should be
provided in the form of communal amenity space, grassed or hard surfaced with some
landscaping.
For new dwellinghouses provision of an enclosed rear garden of 90sq.m. should be made
otherthanunitsof1-2bedroomswherealesserareawillbeconsidered.Smallerenclosures
could also be acceptable, having regard to the character of the area and design of the
house, in any event the area shall not be smaller than 45 sqm.
Dividing walls or fences between individual house plots shall be of a solid form of
construction and of a height not less than 1.8m for a distance of not less than 4.6m from
the main rear wall of the dwelling.
NOTE: Flat occupiers generally do not seek or expect the same level of garden amenity
space as house dwellers. Nevertheless, an enclosed area of communal amenity/play space
should normally be provided where feasible.
Appendix 6 External Amenity Space Standards
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
139Appendix 7 Transport
Assessments, Transport
Statements and Travel Plans
1This appendix sets out the thresholds
and information requirements for
developments requiring Transport
Assessments or Transport Statements
together with statements and Travel Plans.
2Developers and applicants will need to
agreeinadvancewiththerelevantHighways
Authorities (including Highways England if
required), the scope, content and standard
of any Transport Statement or Transport
Assessmentthatistobesubmittedinsupport
of any planning application.
Transport Assessments
3Developers will be required to submit
Transport Assessments and identify
mitigation measures relating to new
proposals and re-development schemes if
theproposeddevelopmentmeetsanyofthe
following criteria:-
i. non-residential developments of 500
square meters and above;
ii. residential developments of 50 units
and above;
iii.anydevelopmentlikelytogenerate100
or more vehicle movements per day;
iv. non-residential development likely to
employ 100 or more people;
v. any activity likely to generate 10 or
more deliveries per day;
vi.anydevelopment,irrespectiveofscale,
likelytogeneratetripsatpeaktimesin
congested areas;
vii. any development likely to generate
tripsatnightinresidentialand/orother
sensitive areas;
viii.any development likely to rely on
unsafe access;
ix. any development likely to adversely
affecttheurbanfabric,forexampleby
requiringaccessinaconservationarea;
and
x. any development having an impact on
traffic flows on trunk roads.4Transport Assessments should include
the following information:
a description and analysis of the
existing transport conditions;
details of the expected (economic,
environmentalandsocial)impactofthe
proposed development on the local
transportation system;
a Travel Plan detailing the proposed
approach to mitigate the expected
impact of the proposed development
on the local transportation system;
details of existing and proposed
journeys to and from the proposed
development site by all modes of
transport (both vehicular and
pedestrian);
a construction management plan; and
details of proposed loading areas,
arrangements for manoeuvring,
servicing and parking should cross
referenceanyscaledrawingsandplans.
Transport Statements
5Transport Statements are required for
developments that fall below the criteria
thresholds for Transport Assessments but
whichdohavetransportimplicationsforthe
local or strategic road network. The need
forTransportStatementmaybedetermined
through pre application discussions or
subsequent Development Management
consultations.
6TransportStatementswillcontainsimilar
information to that required for Transport
Assessmentsbut relevant and proportionate
tothenatureandscaleofthedevelopment,
sufficienttoassessitstransportimpacts,any
required mitigation measures and
arrangementstoimplementthatmitigation.
Travel Plans
7Travel Plans contain a package of
measures to encourage the use of
alternatives to single-occupancy car-use. A
Travel Plan can offer real benefits, not only
Appendix 7 Transport Assessments, Transport Statements and Travel
Plans
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
140to the organisation and its employees, but
also the community and environment that
surrounds it. Typically, the plan will include
initiatives such as car sharing, car clubs,
discounted public transport tickets, cycle
parking or a personalised plan for the
journey. Travel Plans will be specific to the
location and should take into account the
nature of the business, existing travel
behaviour and the types of journey that
occupiers make.
8Developers will be required to submit
Travel Plans with planning applications for
development where the proposed
development meets any of the following
criteria:
i. retail, community and leisure facilities
in excess of 1,000sq.m. gross
floorspace;
ii. offices and other B1 uses in excess of
2,500sq.m. gross floorspace;
iii. sports stadia or other facilities with
1,500ormoreseatsorpeoplecapacity;
iv. smaller developments comprising
employment, shopping, leisure,
community and service activities that
would generate significant amounts of
travel in, or near to, locations where
the borough council has adopted
specificlocalinitiativesandtargetsfor
the reduction of road traffic, of the
promotion of public transport, waking
and cycling;
v.newandexpandedschoolfacilitiesthat
would be accompanied by a School
Travel Plan which promotes safe cycle
and walking routes, restricts parking
and car access at and around the
school, and includes on-site changing
and cycle storage facilities; and
vi. where a Travel Plan would help to
address a particular local traffic
problem associated with a planning
application,whichmightotherwisehave
to be refused on local traffic grounds.
9TravelPlansshouldincludethefollowing
information:
Benchmark travel data including trip
generation databases.
Information concerning the nature of
the proposed development and the
forecast level of trips by all modes of
transport likely to be associated with
the development.
Relevant information about existing
travel habits in the surrounding area.
Proposals to reduce the need for travel
to and from the site via all modes of
transport including enhancing the use
of existing, new and improved public
transport services and facilities for
cycling and walking by users of the
development and by the wider
community(includingpossiblefinancial
incentives).
10Travel Plans may also require, where
appropriate,parkingstrategyoptionshaving
regard to parking standards.
11Travel Plans will also specifically
require developers to demonstrate:
i. thatadequatearrangementshavebeen
made for the implementation and
monitoring of the Travel Plan having
regard to the benchmarking data; and
ii. how the occupiers of the development
will comply with these arrangements.
Appendix 7 Transport Assessments, Transport Statements and Travel
Plans
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
141Appendix 8 Monitoring
Framework
Action Reported
withinIndicator/s Target Policy Objectives
Open Space and Natural Environment
Review policy with
interim position of 0%
loss.AMR
Every 2
yearsNet area of land identified as
or potentially of tier 1
importancebyNaturalEngland
lost = <5% from 2011.Prevent change
to nationally
designated sites
of biodiversity orLLP28,
29SA
Objectives
1 and 10
Also Plan
Policies geological
interest LLP1, 3 - 5
and 9
Review policy with
interim position of 0%
loss.AMR
Every 2
yearsNet area of land of national or
local landscape value lost = <
5% from 2011.Prevent change
to the area of
nationalandlocal
landscape areasLLP29 SA
Objectives
2 and 10
Review policy with
interim position of 0%
loss.AMR
Every 2
yearsArea of sites with unique
habitat by type within the
Borough lost = 0%.
No more than 5% of CWS or
DWS land by area to be lost
from 2011.Managechangeto
the total area of
locally
designated sitesLLP28,
29SA
Objectives
1 and 10
Also Plan
Policies
LLP1, 3 - 5
and 9
Revise and strengthen
policy if loss is anything
other than exceptional.AMR
Every 2
yearsNet area of land of open space
or non-designated natural
greenspace lost from existing
sites without replacement =
0%.
A positive net gain on site
within the following
allocations: Napier Park, High
Town (all areas), Creative
Quarter.Manage loss of
open space and
non-designated
natural
greenspaceLLP8,
10,11,
27SA
Objectives
2 and 10
N/A AMR
Every 5
yearsNet reduction in the length of
the River Lea running through
culverts within the Town
Centre.Enhance the
River LeaLLP3 SA
Objective2
and 10
Housing Provision
Develop monitoring of
delivery against the
demand for CouncilAMR
AnnuallyNet additional dwellings
completed between 2011 –
2031 = 8,500Ensuring new
housing meets
the needs of theLLP15 Strategic
Objectives
2 and 3
Housing in Luton, taken Borough in terms
from the waiting list as
at 1st April 2014, is as
follows:of net gain, mix
of type, size and
tenure
1 Bedroom 2387
Appendix 8 Monitoring Framework
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
142Action Reported
withinIndicator/s Target Policy Objectives
2 Bedroom 2791
3 Bedroom 1204
3 + Bedroom 234
In addition, there were
966 families in
temporary
accommodation.
If the mix reported
within the AMRAMR
AnnuallySites to deliver a mix of house
typesandsizesinlinewiththat
recommended by the most
recent housing market
assessment.
The mix to be assessed against
completions and the 5-year
supply (% by type) and plan
period (total number).LLP15 Strategic
Objectives
2 and 3 completions/
projections point
towards an oversupply
of one or more types
then refuse permission
for similar elements
withinneworrefreshed
schemes. Where there
is under supply in any See Appendix 5 for
methodologyforcalculationof
the 5-year supply.type or size we will
work to encourage
developers towards the
required mix.
Refuse permission for
schemes yielding less
than 20% when theAMR
AnnuallyEither 20% on-site provision or
equivalent financial
contribution for off-site
provision for all qualifying
sites.Ensuring new
housing meets
the needs of the
Borough in terms
of net gain, mixLLP16 Strategic
Objectives
2 and 3
number of permitted
schemes within the 5
year supply failing the
target exceeds 10%.of type, size and
tenure
Evidence of improved
viability will trigger a
refresh of housing
policy. An interim
provision of 25% will be
sought pending any
review.
If mix reported within
the AMR completions/
projections pointAffordable element to deliver
a mix of house types and sizes
inlinewiththatrecommendedStrategic
Objectives
2 and 3
towards an oversupply by the current housing market
of one or more types assessment. The mix to be
then refuse permission assessed against the 5-year
supply (% by type) and plan
period (total number).for that element of a
scheme. Wherethereis
undersupplyinanytype
or size we will work to
encourage developers
towards the required
mix.
Appendix 8 Monitoring Framework
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
143Action Reported
withinIndicator/s Target Policy Objectives
Through the Duty to
CooperateAMR
annually(1) Provision made within
neighbouring local plans to
meetLuton’shousingshortfall.9,300 dwellings
2011-31LLP2 Strategic
Objective3
(2)Recordofactivityunderthe
Duty to Co-operate.
Through the Duty to
CooperateAMR
annuallyAnalysis of allocated sites to
measure:9,300 dwellings
2011-31LLP2 Strategic
Objective3
(1) distance to Luton’s
administrative boundary.
(2) whether the site has public
transportaccessibilitytoLuton
by a direct service that has a
frequency of two services per
hour.
Through the Duty to
CooperateAMR RecordNoofaffordablehomes
to meet Luton’s unmet needs5,500 dwellings
2011-31LLP16 Strategic
Objective3
Luton's Economy
N/A AMR
AnnuallyNet land lost from key
employmentareassafeguarded
for B class uses or smallerRetain Luton’s
role as a place
for economicLLP1,
2, 13,
14Strategic
Objectives
1, 2 and 6
unidentifiedBuseemployment
prior to equivalent gain on
allocated sites = 0%.growth and
opportunity;
utilise Luton’s
resources
efficiently and
sustainably; take
prioritymeasures
to reduce
unemployment,
improveskillsand
education.
Net loss of employment
land should trigger a
refreshoftheELRanda
policy review.AMR
AnnuallyNet land lost from key
employmentareassafeguarded
for B class uses or smaller
unidentifiedBuseemployment
will not be greater than net
land gained through
development.
Measure through annualised
targetthegainof8,000B-class
jobs and 10,000 non-B class
jobs.
N/A Amount of land identified for
B class uses lost from strategic
allocations = 0%.
Warehousing floorspace over
500sq.m. delivered away from
the preferred locations and
exception site = 0%.
Appendix 8 Monitoring Framework
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
144Action Reported
withinIndicator/s Target Policy Objectives
Historic Environment
N/A AMR
Every 2
yearsHeritage assets lost through
development = 0%.
Heritage assets at risk = 0.
UptodateschedulesofLuton’s
DesignatedHeritageAssetsand
locally listed heritage assets.To improve the
built and natural
environment to
deliver quality
placesLLP30 Strategic
Objectives
5 and 10
Sustainable Transport
N/A AMR
AnnuallyLand safeguarded for strategic
infrastructure lost to
alternative development = 0%.Ensure an
integrated, safe,
accessible andLLP31 Strategic
Objectives
1, 4 and 8
more sustainable
transportsystem.
Failure to consistently
achieve this should
trigger a review based
on each centre.Density of housing within the
town centre, neighbourhood
and district centre boundaries
to be 75dph or 50% greaterLLP3,
15, 31
than that surrounding the
centre (to 300m or 5 minute
walking distance of the centre
boundary).
If no net gain in cycle
routes results after 5
yearsthenreviewpolicy
to guarantee provision
on safeguarded routes.Length of new cycle routes
adopted.
If the threshold is
exceeded in any year
then review policy with
starting point of total
compliance.AMR
AnnuallyDevelopments complying with
the maximum car parking
standards = 95% of schemes.Ensure a
proportionate
number of car
parkingspacesto
support theLLP32 Strategic
Objectives
3, 4 and 8
growth of the
town
Climate Change
Review policy if target
exceededAMR
AnnuallyNo. of proposals
unaccompanied by greenfield
run-off rate SuDS = <1% per
annum.Minimise the risk
and impact of
floodingLLP36 Strategic
Objectives
2 and 11
Review policy if no. of
dwellings permitted is
above 0.No. Of dwellings permitted in
Flood Zones 2 or 3 = 0%.
Review policy if not
consistently delivered
through planning
conditions.AMR
Every 2
yearsKilowatt-hours of energy
designed for use within
developments.Adaptation to
and mitigation of
climate changeLLP37 Strategic
Objectives
6 and 11
Town Centres
Appendix 8 Monitoring Framework
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
145Action Reported
withinIndicator/s Target Policy Objectives
Strengthen policy. For
local shopping parades
undertake regular
viability and vacancy
surveys.AMR
Every 2
yearsAmount of non-A1 retail
frontage at ground floor level
in primary Town Centre and
District, Neighbourhood and
small shopping parade
frontagestobenogreaterthan
10, 25 and 50% respectively.Establish an
effectivenetwork
of town centres
to serve as the
heart of local
communitiesLLP22 Strategic
Objectives
4, 6 and 8
N/A Retail floorspace developed
outside existing town centres
= 0%.
Health
Action – refer to air
quality monitoring
reports. Review policyAQMAs recording pollution in
excessofairqualityobjectives
= 0.
No. of applications permitted
againstadviceofEnvironmental
Protection Team = 0.Safeguarding and
improving Air
QualityLLP38 Strategic
Objectives
10 and 11
if any application is
permitted against EPT
advice.
Education
If not achieved review
policy; check for
significant effectsAMR
AnnuallyPending the review of all
education facilities a Primary
and Secondary to be built on
and south of the Brache by
2020.Provide for the
capacityrequired
for primary and
secondary
educationLLP24 Strategic
Objectives
6 and 7
against other plan
policies and
borough-wide
strategies.
Appendix 8 Monitoring Framework
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
146Appendix 9 Replaced Minerals and Waste Policies
The following policies from the Bedfordshire and Luton Minerals and Waste Local Plan (2005)
have been replaced by the Luton Local Plan (2011-2031).
Replacement Policy Topic Minerals and
Waste Policy
LLP37 Waste minimisation W4
LLP37 Management of wastes at source: waste audits W5
LLP1 Safeguarding existing sites W22
LLP1, LLP31, LLP33,
LLP37, LLP38Matterstobeaddressedinplanningapplications GE1
LLP4 Protection of green belt land GE5
LLP29 Protection of the Chilterns Area of Outstanding
Natural BeautyGE7
LLP29 Protection of areas of great landscape value GE8
LLP29 Landscape protection and landscaping GE9
LLP28 Protection/enhancementoftreesandwoodland GE10
LLP28 Protection of sites of national nature
conservation importanceGE11
LLP28, LLP29 Protection of sites of nature, geological/
geomorphological and conservation interestGE12
LLP28 Speciesandhabitatprotectionandenhancement GE13
LLP30 Archaeology GE14
LLP30 Statutorilydesignatedhistoricbuildingsandsites GE15
LLP30 Local historic buildings, conservation areas and
historic environment sitesGE16
LLP38 Pollution control GE17
LLP38 Disturbance GE18
LLP36 Flooding GE19
LLP38 Water resources GE20
LLP29 Public rights of way GE21
LLP33 Transport: alternative means GE22
LLP31 Transport: suitability of local road network GE23
Appendix 9 Replaced Minerals and Waste Policies
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
147Replacement Policy Topic Minerals and
Waste Policy
LLP1, LLP38 Buffer zones GE25
The following policies from the Bedfordshire and Luton Minerals and Waste Local Plan (2005)
are not being replaced by the Luton Local Pan (2011-2031) as they are not relevant to the
borough.
Reason Topic Minerals
and Waste
Policy
No new landfill schemes are identified for
Luton during the plan periodLandfill gas W16
Applies to the disposal of waste (landfill) of
which no new schemes are identified for
Luton during the plan periodLand raising* W17
Outside the borough Restoration / improvement of
Marston ValeGE2
Outside the borough Environmental Improvement
of the Greensand Trust areaGE3
Outside the borough Environmental improvement
of Ivel and Ouse Valleys (TheGE4
Ivel and Ouse Countryside
Project)
There are no plans to protect agricultural
land within the borough (other than whereProtection of best and most
versatile agricultural land.GE6
covered by environmental designations or
other policy concerns)
Relates more to environmental impact from
majormineralsandwasteactivities,ofwhichAncillary minerals and waste
developments**GE24
no new or expanded facilities are identified
for Luton during the plan period
No mineral extraction or waste landfill sites
proposed within the boroughRestoration GE26
No mineral extraction or waste landfill sites
proposed within the boroughAftercare GE27
Footnotes:
*Proposals that include land-raising (with or without the use of waste material) will be
determined in-line with the policies of this plan and with consideration to site-specific and
exceptional circumstances.
**Thisensuresthatdevelopmentrequiredinconnectionwithamineralorwastemanagement
site is limited to the duration of the main working and that restoration is carried out. If a
waste site ceases operations in Luton, the site is likely to be redeveloped for other uses and
this policy is considered unnecessary.
Appendix 9 Replaced Minerals and Waste Policies
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
148Appendix 10 Technical
Evidence Studies
List of key technical evidence studies
informing this plan
Airport Surface Access Strategy,
2012-2017, London Luton Airport
Air Quality: LBC maintains a number of
Air Quality Monitoring documents,
monitoring results across the borough
as required by the Environment Act
1995. This evidence base includes the
declaration paperwork of AQMAs.
Archaeological Assessment of Strategic
Housing Land Availability Assessment
(SHLAA) and Potential Employment
Sites,October2013,ArchaeologyTeam,
Central Bedfordshire Council
Bedfordshire and Luton Strategic
Housing Market Assessment, March
2010, Savills
Biodiversity Recording and Monitoring
Centre (BRMC): please visit the BRMC
website for information on biodiversity
in Luton and Bedfordshire
CABE Workshop, 10th May 2012
CentralBedfordshireandLutonHistoric
Environment Record and Archaeology.
Database maintained on behalf of both
authoritiesandaccessiblefromCentral
Bedfordshire Council's website
Chilterns AONB Management Plan
2014-2019,AFrameworkforAction,The
Chilterns Conservation Board
Chilterns Building Design Guide, 2010,
The Chilterns Conservation Board
EastofEnglandForecastingModel'Luton
Run' (June 2012) Oxford Economics
East of England Plan, The Revision to
the Regional Spatial Strategy for the
EastofEngland,May2008,Government
Office for the East of England. NB: The
Regional Spatial Strategy was revoked
in January 2013
Employment Land Review and Town
Centreofficebusinessre-usestudy(May
2013) Peter Brett Associates
Employment Land Review Study, Final
Report,March2013, NathanielLichfield
& Partners
Green Belt Review, Critical Friend
Assessment, POSe, November 2013
A Green Infrastructure Plan for Luton,
March 2015, The Greensand Trust
Greenspace Strategy Review, June
2014, The Greensand Trust
Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling
Showman Accommodation Needs
Assessments, 2013, ORS
Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling
Showman Accommodation Needs
Assessments, 2015, ORS
Gypsy and traveller and Travelling
Showman Accommodation Needs
Assessment – Addendum to 2015 Final
Report – January 2016 - ORS
Gypsy and Travellers Sites, Site
Identification Study, September 2015,
Peter Brett Associates
The Hat industry of Luton and its
Buildings, October 2013, English
Heritage
A Healthier Future, Improving Health
and Wellbeing in Luton 2012 - 2017,
Luton Borough Council and Luton
Clinical Commissioning Group
High Town East Village Design Codes,
2009, Luton Borough Council
Indoor Sports facilities Strategy and
Action Plan 2105-2012, Final Strategy,
January 2015, Knight, Kavanagh and
Page
Infrastructure Delivery Plan, October
2015, Luton Borough Council
LandscapeCharacterAssessments,2014,
Greensand Trust
LBC Affordable Housing on Small Sites:
ViabilityofCommutedSums-May2016,
3 Dragons
Leisure Study, July 2015, White Young
Green
Level1StrategicFloodRiskAssessment,
February 2013, Capita Symonds
London Luton Airport, Revised
Masterplan, September 2012, London
Luton Airport Operations Limited
Luton and Central Bedfordshire
Strategic Housing Market Assessment
Refresh, 2014, ORS
Luton and Central Bedfordshire
Strategic Housing Market Assessment,
2015, ORS
Appendix 10 Technical Evidence Studies
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
149Luton and Central Bedfordshire Sub
Region Strategic Housing Market
Assessment, 2012 Update, Savills
Luton Borough Council Affordable
Housing Viability Study, April 2013,
Three Dragons
LutonBoroughCouncil,Prospectus2013
-2016
Luton Borough Council, Corporate Plan
2014-2017
Luton Development Plan, Junction
Mitigation Assessment, June 2015,
AECOM
Luton ELR - 2015 Employment Site
Assessments (August 2015) Nathaniel
Lichfield & Partners
Luton Green Belt Study, September
2014, David Hares Landscape
Architecture
Luton Habitat Survey and Nature
Conservation Strategy update, March
2014, BMRC /Wildlife Trust
Luton High Town Master Plan,
Supplementary Planning Document
(2016)
Luton Hotel Study (July 2015) White
Young Green
LutonHousingMarketAreaStudy,2015,
ORS
Luton Local Landscape Designation
Appendices 1-3, 2014
Luton Local Plan Junction Assessment,
Technical Note, July 2014, AECOM
Luton Local Plan: Initial Transport
Evidence Base (SATURN Model)
November 2013
Luton Local Plan: Viability Assessment
Update, Executive Summary, October
2013, Nationwide CIL Service
Luton Local Plan - 2015 Pre-submission
transport evidence - April 2016
Luton Local Transport Plan, 2011-2026,
March 2011, Luton Borough Council
LutonPlayingPitchStrategy,2014-2021,
Knight, Kavanagh and Page (including
DeveloperContributionsSupplementary
Report)
LutonRightsofWayImprovementPlan:
Luton's Great Outdoors, July 2008,
Catherine Bickmore Associates
Luton Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Maps Part 1
Luton Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
Maps Part 2
Luton Town Centre Development
Framework, December 2004, Luton
Borough Council
LutonTownCentreSurveys,2012,BMG,
Luton Borough Council
LutonWaterCycleStrategy,September
2015, Capita/AECOM
Luton’s Joint Strategic Needs
Assessment, 2015, Luton Borough
Council and Luton Clinical
Commissioning Group
Luton's Investment Framework.
2015-2035, Live Draft, Luton Borough
Council
Luton Local Flood Risk Management
Strategy, 2015, Luton Borough Council
Luton Local Plan: Viability Assessment
, Executive Summary, November 2013,
Nationwide CIL Service
Managing Waste in New Developments,
Supplementary Planning Document,
Bedfordshire and Luton Waste Local
Plan 2005, April 2006, Luton Borough
CouncilandBedfordshireCountyCouncil
The Milton Keynes and South Midlands
Sub-Regional Strategy, March 2005,
GovernmentOfficesforEastofEngland,
EastMidlandsandSouthEastofEngland
Monitoring Report, December 2012,
Luton Borough Council
NatureConservationStrategyforLuton,
1992
Noise Action Plan, 2013-2018, August
2014, London Luton Airport
Our Vision for Luton in 2026, Luton’s
SustainableCommunitiesStrategy,2008
Parking and Enforcement Plan, 2013,
Luton Borough Council
Plaiters’ Lea Conservation Area, Luton
Historic Area Assessment, June 2011,
English Heritage
ProposedLocalLandscapeDesignations
for Luton, June 2014, The Greensand
Trust
Rebuilding Biodiversity in Bedfordshire
& Luton, Volume II: Biodiversity
Characterisation, January 2007,
Bedfordshire and Luton Biodiversity
Partnership
Rebuilding Biodiversity in Bedfordshire
& Luton, Volume I, October 2006,
Appendix 10 Technical Evidence Studies
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
150Bedfordshire and Luton Biodiversity
Partnership
South East Midlands LEP Transport
Strategy, March 2014, WYG
Strategic Economic Plan 2015-2020,
April 2014, SEMLEP
Strategic Housing Land Availability
Assessment (SHLAA), April 2014, Luton
Borough Council
Strategic Housing Land Availability
Assessment (SHLAA), April 2015, Luton
Borough Council
Strategic Housing Land Availability
Assessment (SHLAA), April 2016, Luton
Borough Council
SurfaceWaterManagementPlan,2012,
Luton Borough Council
Sustainability Appraisal, 2014, Urban
Edge
Sustainability Appraisal of the Luton
LocalPlan,SustainabilityReportonthe
Proposed Submission Local Plan,
September 2015, Urban Edge
Sustainable Travel Plan, 2011-2015,
Luton Borough Council
Thames River Basin Management Plan,
2009, Department for Environment,
Food & Rural Affairs and Environment
Agency
Urban Panel Review Paper, CABE,
October 2009
Appendix 10 Technical Evidence Studies
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
151Appendix 11 Greenspace
Standards
Quantitative
StandardCurrent
Surplus/deficit
(+-) (Ha)Current
Provision
(Ha)Current
Requirement
2011
(Ha)
Population
205,300Typology of
Greenspace
4m2/person -28.04 54.1 82.1 Amenity
Greenspace
8.5m2/person -21.6 152.9 174.5 District Urban
Park & Gardens
7.5m2/person -51.08 102.2 154.0 Neighbourhood
Urban Parks &
Gardens
5.5m2/person -112.9 0 112.9 Strategic Natural
& Semi-Natural
Greenspace
4.5m2/person -41.2 51.2 92.4 DistrictNatural&
Semi-Natural
Greenspace
11.5m2/person -88.6 147.5 236.1 Local Natural &
Semi-Natural
Greenspace
2m2/person -8.4 32.6 41.1 Allotments
- - 8.4 - Green Corridors*
- - 27.4 - Churchyards &
Cemeteries*
- - 6.2 - Small Amenity
Greenspace of
Local Importance
*
Footnote:
*for these typologies the Greenspace Strategy has not set minimum standards, hence
calculations about current and future requirements are not shown. The calculated deficit
or surplus will vary over time depending on growth in housing capacity within the borough
andresultingpopulation,lossesandgainsingreenspacewithenhancementanddevelopments
and soshouldnotbe regardedas fixedbutwill be calculatedaccordingtothe circumstances
that prevail at the time .
Appendix 11 Greenspace Standards
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
152Wherethestandardscannotbeprovidedon-site,anequivalentoff-siteorfinancialcontribution
willbesought.Thesupplementary'DeveloperContributions'reportforoutdoorplayingspace
requirements, should provide guidance on the standards applying to outdoor sport.
Appendix 11 Greenspace Standards
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
153Appendix 12 Luton Green Infrastructure Network
Appendix 12 Luton Green Infrastructure Network
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
154Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
155Appendix 13 Map Showing
Luton Enterprise Zone
Appendix 13 Map Showing Luton Enterprise Zone
Luton Local Plan (2011-2031) November 2017
156