MANSFIELD DISTRICT
LOCAL PLAN
ADOPTED 
September 2020  2013 - 2033
Preface 2
About this document 4
Part A: Introduction and context
1 Introduction 6
2 Vision, issues and objectives 10
Part B: Planning policies
3 The spatial strategy 18
3.1PolicyS1:Presumptioninfavourofsustainable
development 18
3.2 Policy S2: The spatial strategy 20
3.3 Policy S3: Development in the
countryside 25
3.4 Policy S4: Urban regeneration 27
3.5 Policy S5: Delivering key regeneration
sites 29
4 Place making 32
4.1 Policy P1: Achieving high quality design 35
4.2 Policy P2: Safe, healthy and attractive
development 41
4.3 Policy P3: Connected developments 44
4.4 Policy P4: Comprehensive development 46
4.5 Policy P5: Climate change and new
development 47
4.6 Policy P6: Home extensions and
alterations 51
4.7 Policy P7: Amenity 52
4.8 Policy P8: Shop front design and signage 54
5 Housing 56
5.1 Policy H1: Housing allocations 57
5.2 Policy H2: Committed housing sites 67
5.3 Policy H3: Housing density and mix 69
5.4 Policy H4: Affordable housing 71
5.5 Policy H5: Custom and self-build homes 74
5.6 Policy H6: Specialist housing 75
5.7 Policy H7: Houses in multiple occupation and
bedsit accommodation 765.8 Policy H8: Accommodation for Gypsies,
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople 78
6 Employment 80
6.1 Policy E1: Enabling economic
development 82
6.2 Policy E2: Sites allocated as new employment
areas 84
6.3 Policy E3: Retaining land for employment
uses 87
6.4 Policy E4: Other industrial and business
development 91
6.5 Policy E5: Improving skills and economic
inclusion 92
7 Retail 94
7.1 Policy RT1: Main town centre uses 95
7.2 Policy RT2: Mansfield town centre vision and
strategy   99
7.3 Policy RT3: Mansfield town centre primary
shopping area 102
7.4 Policy RT4: Mansfield town centre
improvements 105
7.5 Policy RT5: Accessing Mansfield town
centre 107
7.6 Policy RT6: Retail and leisure allocations 109
7.7 Policy RT7: Retail and leisure
commitments 111
7.8 Policy RT8: District and local centres 114
7.9 Policy RT9: Neighbourhood parades 117
7.10 Policy RT10: Hot food takeaways 119
7.11 Policy RT11: Visitor economy 120
8 Strategic urban extensions 124
8.1 Policy SUE1: Pleasley Hill Farm 125
8.2 Policy SUE2: Land off Jubilee Way 127
8.3 Policy SUE3: Land at Berry Hill 129
9 Infrastructure and facilities 130
9.1 Policy IN1: Infrastructure delivery 131
9.2 Policy IN2: Green infrastructure 133
9.3 Policy IN3: Protection of community open space 
and outdoor  sports provision  138
9.4 Policy IN4: New community open space and
outdoor sports provision 139
9.5 Policy IN5: Allotments 141Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Contents9.6 Policy IN6: Designated local green space 143
9.7 Policy IN7: Local shops,  community and cultural 
facilities 144
9.8 Policy IN8: Protecting and improving the
sustainable transport network 146
9.9 Policy IN9: Impact of development on the
transport network 150
9.10 Policy IN10: Car and cycle parking 151
9.11 Policy IN11: Telecommunications and
broadband 152
10 Natural environment 156
10.1 Policy NE1: Protection and enhancement of
landscape character 157
10.2 Policy NE2: Biodiversity and
geodiversity 161
10.3 Policy NE3: Pollution  and land instability  169 
10.4 Policy NE4: Mineral safeguarding areas 172
11 Historic environment 174
11.1 Policy HE1: Historic environment 175
11.2 Policy HE2: Pleasley Vale area
regeneration 179
12 Climate change 182
12.1 Policy CC1: Renewable and low carbon energy 
generation 183
12.2 Policy CC2: Flood risk 185
12.3 Policy CC3: Sustainable drainage
systems 187
12.4 Policy CC4: River and waterbody
corridors 189
13 Implementation and monitoring 192
13.1 Policy IM1: Monitoring  and Review of the Local 
Plan 193
Appendices
Appendix 1 -  Saved policies of the  Mansfield Local 
Plan 1998 superseded by  the Mansfield Local Plan 
2013 to 2033 196
Appendix 2 - Glossary of terms 202
Appendix 3 - Objective and policy links 210Appendix 4 - Health impact assessment
checklist 212
Appendix 5 - Housing trajectory 216
Appendix 6 - Affordable housing zones 217
Appendix 7 - Plans of employment sites within key 
employment areas 218
Appendix 8 - Masterplanning requirements 224
Appendix 9 - Key infrastructure requirements 238
Appendix 10 - Protected sports pitches (referred  
to in Policy IN3)                                                     242
Appendix 11 - The Mansfield green space
standard 245
Appendix 12 - Local green space
designations 249
Appendix 13 - Monitoring Framework 251Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Mayor’s Foreword
Welcome to the new Mansfield District Local Plan. The Local Plan is the result of a number of years of hard work
bybothcouncillorsandofficersatMansfieldDistrictCouncil.Wearepleasedthatafteralongprocesswhichinvolved
asignificantamountofpublicconsultationandscrutinywehavegainedapprovalafterexaminationbytheIndependent
Planning Inspector. We now have a sound Local Plan in place that will take Mansfield through to 2033.
The Local Plan aims to ensure that the entire Mansfield district including Mansfield Woodhouse and Warsop is a
place where everyone can thrive in a sustainable way - socially, economically and environmentally.
TheLocalPlanprovidesforarangeofqualityhomesensuringthatthereischoiceforeveryonewhowantstomake
MansfieldDistricttheirhomeandseekstoimprovethehealthandwellbeingofresidentsbydeliveringhealthy,safe
and attractive places to live through good design.
Giventheeconomicuncertaintyfacedbythecountry,itisimportantthattheLocalPlanhelpstocreatetheconditions
for sustainable economic growth by looking to retain graduates and making sure that the workforce is as highly
skilled as possible.
A vibrant town centre is at the heart of Mansfield and the Local Plan aims to improve the town centre as a leisure
and cultural destination, whilst also offering the opportunity for town centre living.
The Local Plan protects the environment through stopping the loss of much-needed green spaces such as parks
and allotments, delivering net gains in biodiversity and tackling climate change by setting a framework for the
provision of renewable and low carbon energy.
The hard work does not stop with the adoption of the Local Plan. The council will continue to monitor the delivery
of the Local Plan and carry out reviews to make sure we are on track to achieve our aims.
Kind regards
Executive Mayor Andy Abrahams
2Section
PrefaceAbout this document
This document is the Mansfield District Local
Plan (2013-2033) . It forms part of the statutory
development plan for the district and will be used to
guide development and inform decisions on planning
applications.
This Local Plan has been informed by a number of
consultations:
Local Plan Scoping Report - June 2015;
Local Plan Consultation Draft – February 2016;
Interim Sustainability Appraisal and Draft Habitat
Regulations Screening Report - August 2016;
Local Plan Preferred Options and supporting
documents – October 2017; and
Local Plan Publication Draft and supporting
documents - September 2018.
This document has been prepared in accordance with
the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 2012
unless specifically stated otherwise.
Policies Map
The policies map referred to in specific policies in this
document can be viewed online.
4Section
About this documentThis section explains what a Local Plan is and sets out
the background to its preparation.
What is a Local Plan?
1.1The Mansfield District Local Plan (2013-2033) is
a district wide development plan that replaces in its
entirety the former Mansfield District Local Plan 1998
which was ‘saved’ in part under the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004(1). The National
PlanningPolicyFramework(NPPF)requireseverylocal
planningauthorityinEnglandtohaveaclear,uptodate
Local Plan, which conforms to the framework, meets
local development needs, and reflects local people’s
views of how they wish their community to develop.
1.2We are aware that planning is full of technical
words and jargon. To help you understand this better
we have included a glossary of key terms at Appendix
2 of this document.
1.3The Local Plan:
sets out an ambitious but realistic vision for the
district in 2033 together with objectives which
policiesmustaddresstoensurethatkeyplanning
issues are tackled;
sets out the spatial strategy for the district, which
includes the overall levels of growth and where
developmentsitesfornewhomesandjobswillbe
located;
is a key tool for delivering the long term
regenerationoftheMansfieldandMarketWarsop
urban areas including enhancement of the town
and district centres with new shopping, leisure,
housing and economic development, and
improvements to the area’s physical and social
infrastructure;
contains policies to improve the natural and built
environment,andtomitigateandadapttoclimate
change by, amongst other things, protecting and
enhancing the area's network of strategic green
infrastructure;
provides positive policies to make for more
sustainable patterns and forms of development
acrossthedistrictwhichaimtoimprovetheoverall
quality of life for residents, workers and visitors
throughourdevelopmentmanagementdecisions;
and
consistsofawrittenstatementwhichsetsoutand
explains the council's planning policies, and the
policies map which shows where they apply.
Together they identify land to be developed or
protected during the lifetime of the plan.
The Local Plan covers the period 2013 up to 2033 and
forms part of the overall 'development plan' for the
district together with:
Nottinghamshire Waste Core Strategy;
Nottinghamshire Minerals Local Plan (or any
replacement); and
any'made'/adoptedNeighbourhoodDevelopment
Plans.
1.4Decisionsonplanningapplicationsmustbetaken
inaccordancewiththedevelopmentplanunlessmaterial
considerations indicate otherwise.
1.5The Local Plan covers a range of issues and it is
often the case that several policies are relevant to a
proposeddevelopment.Therefore, itisimportantthat
the plan is read as a whole rather than considering
policiesinisolation. Somecrossreferencinghasbeen
used but this does not mean that other policies of the
plan do not apply.
What area does the Local Plan cover?
1.6The plan covers the whole of Mansfield district
as shown on the map at the end of this section (Figure
1.1)
How was the plan prepared?
1.7The plan was prepared taking account of:
national planning policy as set out in the NPPF
and related guidance;
a range of evidence base studies; and
the views of our strategic partners (gathered as
part of our duty to cooperate responsibilities) and
relevant comments made on previous
consultations by a variety of bodies and the local
community.
1 Appendix 1 sets out which saved policies from the Mansfield District Local Plan 1998 have been replaced by policies in this document,
and which policies have lapsed.
6Section One
Introduction1.8We gathered evidence on a range of issues, and
lookedatalternativestoinformtheplanmakingprocess.
This information can be viewed online.
1.9In addition to its evidence base, the Local Plan
was also supported by a number of technical
assessments as follows:
Sustainability Appraisal
1.10ASustainabilityAppraisal(SA)isanintegralpart
of the plan making process and the council undertook
an SA for each iteration of the Local Plan including the
Main Modifications. The SA was framed around a
numberofobjectivescoveringthedifferentelementsof
sustainability. It was used to guide the Local Plan and
ensure that it successfully balances; particularly the
economic, social and environmental considerations of
the plan's content and policy direction.
1.11In developing the plan's content and policy
direction, the council considered a number of options
that have not been taken forward. Nevertheless, these
optionswereappraisedbytheSustainabilityAppraisal.
Habitats Regulation Assessment
1.12A Habitats Regulation Assessment (HRA)
Screening and an Appropriate Assessment have been
carried out as part of the Local Plan process which
assessed the potential effects of the plan on European
Uniondesignatedsitesandwhetheranyofitsproposals
would have an adverse impact on the integrity of any
existingorpotentialsites(SpecialProtectionAreasand
Special Areas of Conservation).
Health Impact Assessment
1.13A Health Impact Assessment of the Local Plan
wasundertakentohelpensuretheplanacknowledged
the potential health impacts resulting from its
implementationandidentifiedanymitigationmeasures
which may be required.
Equalities Impact Assessment
1.14An Equalities Impact Assessment of the Local
Plan was undertaken to ensure that it meets the needs
of all members of the community. Carrying out the
assessment allowed us to identify any potential
discrimination caused by its policies or its overall
implementationandtakestepstomakesurethatissues
were positively addressed.Duty to Cooperate
1.15TheLocalismAct2011introducedarequirement
on local planning authorities to cooperate with
neighbouring local authorities and other bodies with a
regulatoryofstrategicinterestintheLocalPlanissues.
ThisisreferredtoastheDutytoCooperateandincludes
the need to consider the impact of the strategy as a
wholeanditsproposalsformajordevelopmentonother
places close to Mansfield district.
1.16The district of Mansfield lies within the county
of Nottinghamshire and together with Ashfield district
and Newark and Sherwood district forms the Outer
NottinghamHousingMarketArea (HMA). Thedistrict
also forms part of the Derby, Derbyshire, Nottingham
and Nottinghamshire D2N2 Local Enterprise
Partnership. Outside of the HMA we adjoin both the
districts of Bassetlaw and Bolsover. We have regular
dialogue with all of these authorities and have signed
a Statement of Common Ground to state that all of the
districts can meet their own housing needs.
1.17AspartofitsDutytoCooperate,thecouncilhas
actively engaged with its strategic partners on a range
of strategic matters throughout the preparation of the
plan (see paragraphs 2.3 and 2.4). Details of how the
councilhasundertakenandmettheDutytoCooperate
requirements are set out in a separate Duty to
Cooperate Statement.
Neighbourhood planning
1.18The Government has given local communities
new rights to shape their neighbourhoods through the
preparation of neighbourhood plans. Once made,
neighbourhoodplansformpartoftheDevelopmentPlan
and have the same status as this Local Plan in making
decisions on planning applications.
1.19The council is committed to working positively
with local communities where they wish to develop a
neighbourhood plan and to supporting them through
the statutory processes. This includes ensuring that
neighbourhood plans are in general conformity with
strategic policies, as set out in this Mansfield District
Local Plan, and helping to avoid duplication of local
policies.
7Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
One: Introduction1.20The Warsop Parish Council area is the only
designated neighbourhood plan area in the district to
date. It covers the town and villages of:
Market Warsop;
Church Warsop;
Meden Vale;
Warsop Vale; and
Spion Kop
1.21The current status of the Market Warsop
Neighbourhood Plan can be viewed here
www.mansfield.gov .uk/neighbourhoodplanning
1.22Neighbourhood plans should be in general
conformity with national and strategic policies in this
Local Plan. These are all the policies within the Local
Plan apart from IN6 Designated local green spaces.
Structure of the document
1.23The Local Plan is divided into a number of
themed chapters which then contain a number policies
andsupportingtext.TheLocalPlanisalsoaccompanied
byaPoliciesMapwhichshowsthelocationofproposed
allocationsanddesignationsofland,areasofprotection
and safeguarding areas suitable for wind energy. This
Policies Map can also be viewed online.
8Aspirations for growth for 2033
Our Vision for Mansfield in 2033 is:
By2033thedistrictofMansfieldwillhavecontinueditstransformationtoahealthier,greenerandmorevibrant
placetolive,workandenjoy.Thedistrictwillbeaplaceofchoicewherepeopleaspiretolivewithwelldesigned,
resilient neighbourhoods. A range of good quality housing will have been provided that meets the needs of all
our growing communities.
Centres and neighbourhoods will be well connected to places of work, education and recreation, supporting
active and healthy lifestyles and help to reduce the impact of new development on the highway network. Bus,
cycleandpedestrianrouteswillhavebeenimprovedprovidingattractivegreeninfrastructurethroughtheurban
areas connecting to the wider countryside. New development will have been designed to minimise impacts
and improve resilience to climate change.
Businesses will have expanded and diversified using the connections with further education to become
innovative, with value added jobs which are suited to the changed economy of the district. A broad range of
employmentsitesandsupportinginfrastructurewillhavebeendelivered,includinglocalincubationandstarter
units that will have enabled local businesses to grow.
The town centre will have continued to build on its role as a cultural and leisure destination that is suited to
the district’s residents, businesses and visitors supporting increased footfall and vibrancy as a place to work,
live, shop and play.
MarketWarsopwillhavestrengtheneditsroleasthemaintownforWarsopParish.Itwillhaveadiverserange
of shopping and associated uses within a vibrant, attractive, and safe environment that serves the town and
its surrounding communities well. The rural villages will remain attractive places to live and will have had their
distinctive character protected.
The natural assets in the district will have been protected and enhanced to help shape new places to live,
increase biodiversity, and improve connectivity to benefit wildlife and the health and wellbeing of the district’s
residents. Our heritage assets and their settings will have been conserved and enhanced to maintain their
important contributions to creating a sense of place and also delivering regeneration.
Key issues and opportunities
2.1ThevisionaddressesthekeyissuesandopportunitiesthathaveemergedfromtheLocalPlanevidencebase,
the SA and consultations which are summarised in Table 2.1:
10Section Two
Vision, issues and objectivesTable 2.1 Key issues and opportunities
Opportunity/ Requirement Key Issue Theme
Place
the Local Plan has an important role to play in improving the
imageandattractivenessofthedistrictbypromotinghighquality
design in new development; and
there is a need to raise design quality of new development in
order to assist successful regeneration and development, and
to promote a positive image of the area; and
thereisaneedtoprotectimportantstrategicareasofopenland
which serve to maintain the separate identities of our
settlements,inparticularbetweentheLindhursturbanextension
and Rainworth, and between Mansfield West and Ashfield
District.the Local Plan policies should protect important areas of
separation and prevent coalescence.
Health
the Local Plan will need to ensure that new developments are
designed to allow and encourage residents to live healthier
lifestyles by facilitating access to open spaces and green
corridors throughout the district.within the district, the average life expectancy is relatively low,
alongwiththenumberofadultsparticipatinginphysicalactivity.
The number of obese adults is relatively high. Men from the
most deprived areas have 9 years shorter life expectancy than
those from the least deprived areas.
Ageing
population
the Local Plan will need to ensure that housing is delivered to
meet the needs of the whole community.the older population (65+) continues to increase across the
district.
Housing
ensure housing and employment growth and development is
achieved to meet our objectively assessed needs and to
ensure that there is a five year supply of housing land;the Local Plan will need to:
promotenecessarygrowthbutensurethatdevelopment
takes fully into account sustainability issues relating to
landuse,climatechange,airpollution,waterqualityetc;
 Mansfieldhasagenerallyweakhousingmarketwithhistorically
low levels of delivery including affordable housing, pockets of
low demand, and poorer quality housing. Residential
 respond to local viability issues with a balanced spatial
strategy which identifies locations which offer scope to
produce higher value and improved viability to ensure
improved range of infrastructure, lower cost sites;development values are generally low in Mansfield, reflecting
the generally low wage local economy. These are currently
setting a ceiling on affordability; and
thereisaneedtoprovidehousingforthewholecommunity,this
needs to include affordable and aspirational family housing,
accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and travelling
showpeople as well as housing suitable for the ageing
population and people living with a disability.
ensure all sites are viable and can provide appropriate
infrastructure; and
promote high quality of design of new housing with
linkages to an enhanced green infrastructure network
wherever feasible.
Economic
growth
requirement to ensure employment and retailing growth and
development is achieved to meet the district's needs ;the Local Plan has an important role to play in promoting
economic growth by:
attracting investment into the district by allocating a
range of employment sites for development in different
locations;
the Mansfield and Ashfield Regeneration Route is identified as
a broad location to assist with the economic regeneration
initiatives;
protectingexistingemploymentareaswhereappropriate;
and
unemployment in parts of the district is significantly higher than
the national average;
ensuring that local businesses have the opportunity to
expand and modernise.
there is a need to address the low pay –skill equilibrium and to
develop a knowledge intensive economy to address the
productivity gap;
the percentage of people of working age qualified to NVQ level
4 or above is relatively low; and
the Ashfield and Mansfield Plan for Growth Strategy identifies
the following key growth sectors based on previous Experian
research:
business services;
construction;
11Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Two: Vision, issues and objectivesOpportunity/ Requirement Key Issue Theme
transport and logistics;
manufacturing;
wholesale; and
health services.
TheLocalPlanhasaroletoplayinensuringthatMansfieldtowncentre
and district centres remains vibrant and vital by:
Town and
district
centres
thecumulativeimpactofcompetitionfromNottingham,Sheffield,
Derby, Meadowhall and the East Midlands Designer Outletand
recent improvements to these shopping destinations, together
 settingoutaclearvisionfortheregenerationofthetowncentre
asamultifunctionalshopping,leisure,businessandlivingarea; with the rapid growth of web based shopping makes Mansfield
town centre vulnerable and at risk of decline should
improvements not be made to the retail and wider offer; and
allocate a range of sites for commercial and or mixed use
development to meet the needs of the town centre and which
assist in introducing new vibrancy and footfall into the town
centre, or allow for suitable alternative provision;
theroleofretailintowncentresischanging,andMansfieldtown
centre is facing specific challenges, including: retail vacancies,
and generally lower retail and commercial demand.
promoting the development of key regeneration sites;
encouragingappropriatenewusesinthetowncentreanddistrict
centres; and
promoting environmental and public realm improvements to
improve the attractiveness of these centres as destinations.
Increasing
pressure on
green
infrastructure
the Local Plan should aim to protect existing and create a
well-designed and integrated networks of green infrastructure
that delivers economic, social and environmental benefits.Mansfield district's green infrastructure provides access to a
range of historical and recreational resources.
Increasing
pressure on
biodiversity
the Local Plan will need to play a role of both protecting and
enhancing biodiversity.Mansfield has a wide range of important habitats and a rich
diversity of plant and animal species.
Flood risk
the Local Plan should: the Rivers Maun and Meden are the main sources of fluvial
flooding. The main high flood risk areas in the district are
localised along these main rivers, especially around culverts.
 ensure growth and development mitigates rather than
exacerbateslocalisedfloodingproblemscausedbyriver
flooding and/or surface water run-off; and
set out policies which address flood risk and promote
flood risk mitigation including adoption of Sustainable
Urban Drainage (SuDS) systems.
Climate
change
support the provision of renewal energy; and
 contribute to addressing climate change.
locatedevelopmentinthemostsustainablelocationswithinthe
district to help to reduced CO2 emissions.
Air quality
the Local Plan needs to ensure that new development is not
detrimentally affected by air quality issues.there are currently no Air Quality Management Areas in the
district, however there are areas of concern.
Transport
seek contributions towards highway, pedestrian and cycle
improvements;
trafficcongestionisanissueatspecificlocationsinthedistrict;
there is high demand for public transport in those parts of the
district with low income households. The provision of public
transport, particularly by bus, is therefore a key issue affecting
quality of life for many existing residents, in the context of
accessibility to jobs, shops and other services; and
protect the sustainable transport network; and
locatedevelopmentinthemostsustainablelocationstoreduce
the need to travel.
12Opportunity/ Requirement Key Issue Theme
there is a need to work with partners to provide integrated and
efficienttransportsystemincludingpublictransport,walkingand
cycling network.
Heritage
the Local Plan policies will need to protect existing heritage
assets; and
Mansfielddistricthasawealthofheritageassetsthatareinneed
of protection and management to ensure that they continue to
contributetoourbuiltandculturalidentity,oureconomyandare
available to future generations; and
the impact of proposed development on the setting of heritage
assets will need to be considered.
the provision of new development needs to be achieved whilst
also paying due regard to the protection and enhancement of
heritage assets.
Market
Warsop
the Local Plan has an important role in creating a more
sustainable and vital Market Warsop by:
to maintain Market Warsop’s character as a small rural town
whilst ensuring that it can accommodate appropriate housing
and economic growth to meet its needs and contribute to the
creation of a more sustainable and vital community .
 allocatingappropriatehousingandemploymentsitesto
meet the town’s needs including affordable housing;
encouragingappropriatedevelopmentandenvironmental
improvements within the district centre;
facilitatingthepotentialre-openingoftheMarketWarsop
railway station by safeguarding land for necessary rail
infrastructure; and
ensuring that any new development is served by
appropriate social infrastructure.
2.2It should be noted that not all of the issues
identifiedareoneswhichcannecessarilybeaddressed
bytheplanningsystem,whichislargelyconcernedwith
new development. For example, low educational
attainment cannot be dealt with directly through the
planning system; however, the planning system can
protect educational establishments and new
development can help to upskill the local residents as
part of the construction.
Duty to Cooperate
2.3We have worked jointly with our neighbours and
other strategic partners across the North
Nottinghamshire area on a range of evidence base
studiesdealingwithstrategicmatterswhichhavecross
boundary impacts. We have also worked with our
partnersonarangeofstrategicmattesorissuesasset
out below:
1. identifytheappropriateHousingMarketAreaand
distribution of housing;
2. identify the appropriate Functional Economic
Market Area;3.allocatesitestomeetobjectivelyassessedhousing
needsduringtheplanperiodincludingSustainable
Urban Extensions and other allocations;
4. workwithpartnerstoidentifyGypsyandTraveller
sites to meet identified need;
5. identify sufficient land to meet employment land
needs during the plan period, including allocating
land for employment uses and working with
partners to identify any unmet need;
6.delivertheappropriateamountofretailfloorspace
to meet identified needs;
7.identifythesocialinfrastructurerequiredtosupport
the proposed levels of growth – including health
and education provision;
8. identify the transport infrastructure required in
order to support the proposed levels of growth,
encourage modal shift and secure mitigation to
avoid severe adverse impacts;
9. protect important heritage assets; and
10. protect important landscape and natural
environment features.
13Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Two: Vision, issues and objectives2.4ThecouncilhaveagreedStatementsofCommon
Groundwithrelevantpartnersdealingwithanumberof
matters. FulldetailsoftheseandtheDutytoCooperate
process is set out in a separate Duty to Cooperate
Statement.Strategic priorities
2.5ThestrategicprioritieswhichthisLocalPlanseeks
to address are set out in Table 2.2. These were
identified having regard to the requirements of the
NPPF, Duty to Cooperate discussions and evidence.
Table 2.2 Local Plan strategic priorities
Meeting housing needs, for market and affordable housing SP1
Meeting accommodation needs of Gypsies, Travellers and travelling showpeople SP2
Meeting employment land needs to stimulate economic growth and provide jobs SP3
Meeting retail and leisure needs and maintaining Mansfield's role as a centre of sub-regional significance. Promoting the
regeneration of Mansfield Town Centre and other key brownfield sitesSP4
Managing the impact of planned growth and development on transport infrastructure SP5
Managing the impact of planned growth and development on the water supply, waste water infrastructure, and water quality SP6
Addressing flood risk and climate change SP7
The provision of social infrastructure to support planned growth and development SP8
Managing the impact of planned growth and development on heritage assets SP9
Managing the impact of planned growth and development on European Habitat Sites SP10
Managing the impact of planned growth and development on landscape character SP11
Managing the impact of planned growth and development on the strategic green infrastructure network SP12
Meeting the need for outdoor sports and recreation SP13
Managing the impact of planned growth and development on waste infrastructure, and minerals SP14
Creating high quality places and improving the image of Mansfield as a place to live, visit, invest and work. SP15
Delivering the vision - the Local Plan objectives
2.6We have set out the 14 objectives which take
forwardourplanningvision.Theseobjectiveshavebeen
identified as central to the delivery of the vision for the
districtandaretheguidingprinciplesforthepoliciesset
out in the Local Plan. The objectives are intended to
address the strategic priorities, deliver the Local Plan
visionanddealwiththekeyissuessetoutinTable2.1.2.7Appendix 3 gives detail regarding which Local
Plan policies address the objectives and the links to
relevantkeyissuesandstrategicpriorities.Itshouldbe
noted that in relation to certain cross-cutting issues
(such as climate change and wider sustainability
matters), there may be policies which work towards a
number of the plan's objectives.
14Objective 1
Support economic growth and prosperity by promoting the regeneration of previously developed land and
existing buildings, as well as identifying other sustainable areas, for job growth, services and new homes. In
doingso,directmostdevelopmenttotheMansfieldurbanarea,includingMansfieldWoodhouse,ForestTown
and Rainworth, followed by Market Warsop, whilst seeking to mitigate against any significant adverse social,
environmental and infrastructure impacts of development.
Objective 2
Contribute to creating a stronger, more resilient local economy by bringing forward a diverse range of
employment sites to reflect the changing economy and ensuring that residential areas are accessible to
employment, education and training opportunities.
Objective 3
Increase the range and choice of housing throughout the urban areas and villages to better meet the needs
of the whole community, through the provision of more diverse market, affordable, and specialist housing so
creating inclusive, mixed neighbourhoods.
Objective 4
Conserveandenhancetheidentity,characteranddiversityofthedistrict’shistoricandculturalheritageassets
and their settings.
Objective 5
Ensurethatallnewdevelopmentachievesahighstandardofdesignandamenitywhichreflectslocalcontext,
circumstances and opportunities to create healthy, safe and attractive neighbourhoods.
Objective 6
Safeguard and enhance the vitality and viability of the district’s town, district and local centres particularly
through regeneration opportunities, in ways that help meet the consumers’ needs. Attracting new and varied
uses to bring increased activity, footfall and vibrancy into these locations, with a focus on cultural, residential
and leisure activities to complement the retail and service role of these centres.
15Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Two: Vision, issues and objectivesObjective 7
Improvethehealthandwellbeingofthedistrict’spopulationandreducehealthinequalitiesbyensuringresidents
and visitors have better opportunities to take exercise through convenient access to a range of good quality
greenspace,greencorridors,trails,leisureandcommunityfacilitiesandthecountrysidethroughappropriately
designed places and well planned green infrastructure.
Objective 8
Ensure new development minimises, and is resilient to, the adverse impacts of climate change by adopting
measures to appropriately address renewable and low carbon energy generation, flood mitigation, green
infrastructure, resource and waste management.
Objective 9
Reducetheneedtotravelandsupportimprovementstotransportaccessibilitysothatpeoplecanmovearound,
acrossandbeyondthedistricteasilyandsustainably,includingbypublictransport,walkingandcycling.Locating
new development taking account of those areas of the highway network that are identified as being very
congestedwithlittlecapacityforexpansionandmanagingimpactsonairquality.Providingparkingforvehicles
to meet appropriate local needs and avoiding impacts on local highway safety.
Objective 10
Deliver the infrastructure requirements of the districts future population including access to high speed
broadband.
Objective 11
Protectthevitality,identityandsettingofthevillagesbysafeguardingimportantareasofopenlandandenabling
access to key community facilities and services.
Objective 12
Protect, enhance, restore and maintain important natural resources, in and adjoining the district including
wildlife, soil, air quality and geological resources, and the network of habitats and designated sites.
16Objective 13
Encourage new development to be water sensitive by addressing water efficiency, protecting and enhancing
the natural environment and reducing flood risk and pollution, whilst at the same time ensuring the effective
design and location of sustainable urban drainage systems (SuDS) and naturalising the river environment to
create a more attractive healthy environment for residents.
Objective 14
Conserveandenhancethequalityofthedistrict’slandscapecharacterandkeylandscapefeaturesbypositively
addressingNationalCharacterAreaprofilesandlandscapepolicyactionswithintheSherwoodandMagnesian
Limestone landscape areas through the design and location of new developments.
17Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Two: Vision, issues and objectives3.1ThespatialstrategyseekstodelivertheLocalPlan’svisionandobjectives,addressingthekeyissuesidentified
in the previous chapter and meeting the wider needs of the district. The strategy aims to meet identified needs in a
manner compatible with the characteristics of the area and having regard to infrastructure requirements and
deliverability.Thisapproachfulfilstherequirementsfors ustainabledevelopmentassetoutintheNationalPlanning
Policy Framework (NPPF). (see also Figure 3.2: Key Diagram).
3.1 Policy S1: Presumption in favour of
sustainable development
Policy S1
Presumption in favour of sustainable development
1. The c ouncil will work proactively with applicants and other stakeholders to seek solutions to ensure that
proposals contribute to sustainable development and can be approved wherever possible, and will
contribute towards improvements to the economic, social and environmental conditions in Mansfield
district.
2.PlanningapplicationsthataccordwiththepoliciesinthisLocalPlanwillbeapprovedwithoutdelay,unless
material considerations indicate otherwise.
3. Iftherearenopoliciesrelevanttotheapplicationorthepolicieswhicharemostimportantfordetermining
theapplicationareoutofdateatthetimeofmakingthedecision,thenplanningpermissionwillbegranted
unless material considerations indicate otherwise – taking into account whether:
a. any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as
a whole; or
b.theapplicationofpolicieswithintheNationalPlanningPolicyFrameworkthatprotectareasorassets
of particular importance provides a clear reason for refusing the development proposed.
Explanation
3.2The key aim of the planning system is delivering
sustainable development. However, what constitutes
sustainable development will vary depending on the
specific circumstances of the site, its context and the
proposal.ThepoliciesintheLocalPlanarethestarting
point as to what is, and is not, considered sustainable
inMansfielddistrict.Applicationsshouldbedetermined
inaccordancewiththedevelopmentplanunlessmaterial
considerations indicate otherwise.
3.3The Local Plan is not intended to cover every
eventuality; there are always some schemes which do
not fall neatly within policies. One of the aims of Policy
S1 is to set out the approach where the Local Plan is
silent and does not provide relevant policies. Policy S1alsosetsouttheapproachtobetakenwheretheLocal
Plan, or the evidence supporting the relevant policy, is
out of date or superseded by more up to date
information.
3.4The policy also acts to guide the approach of the
local planning authority to working with applicants. As
setoutinthepolicy,wewillworkwiththeapplicantand
other stakeholders, such as Nottinghamshire County
Council,thelocalClinicalCommissioningGroup(CCG),
neighbouring residents/occupiers, or others with an
interest in the application to seek solutions that would
allowanapplicationtobeapproved.Whilethismaynot
always be possible, the council will always work
proactively to seek these solutions.
18Section Three
The spatial strategyTable 3.1 Policy S1 - Supporting information
Policy S1: Presumption in favour of sustainable development
Yes - principally, NPPF Paragraphs 14 and 15 but also in accordance with the whole of the NPPF. Does it meet national planning policy?
The NPPF What evidence has informed this policy?
Thispolicywillbedeliveredbythedeterminationofplanningapplicationsthroughthedevelopmentmanagement
system.How will it be delivered?
All Which local plan objectives will it meet?
19Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Three: The spatial strategy3.2 Policy S2: The spatial strategy
Policy S2
The spatial strategy
The spatial strategy for Mansfield district to 2033 is to:
1.manageplannedgrowthbydirectingdevelopmenttoappropriatelocations,inaccordancewiththefollowing
settlement hierarchy:
a.Mansfield urban area. Most new housing, employment and retail and other community facilities
will be concentrated within the Mansfield urban area (including Rainworth, Pleasley and Clipstone)
on previously developed or other surplus or derelict land and sustainable greenfield sites on the
edge of the town. Development opportunities in the Mansfield urban area are focused, as far as
possible, on locations which have good access to the Mansfield Ashfield Regeneration Route
(MARR) to improve connections with Greater Nottingham and the M1 and on locations which are
wellservedbypublictransport.ParticularregenerationopportunitieswithinandadjacenttoMansfield
town centre will be priorities for delivery. Development at Rainworth should reflect its identity as a
separate settlement and be more limited in scale.
b.Market Warsop. As the second largest settlement new development appropriate to its scale and
regeneration needs will be directed to Market Warsop.
c.Warsop Parish Villages. Limited growth is directed to the settlements of Church Warsop, Meden
Vale, Warsop Vale and Spion Kop to ensure the continued vitality of these rural communities whilst
maintaining their distinctive character.
d.Countryside .OnlydevelopmentappropriatetoruralareasassetoutinPolicyS3willbesupported
within the countryside in order to recognise the intrinsic value character and wider benefits of the
countryside.
2. enable housing, commercial and retail development, during the period 2013 to 2033, including:
a.Housing: at least 6500 new homes between 2013 and 2033. This will be distributed as follows:
i. Mansfield urban area - 90% or at least 5850 new homes; and
ii. Warsop Parish - 10% or at least 650 new homes.
b.Employment: safeguardimportantexistingemploymentareas,identifysitestomeetfutureeconomic
development needs for employment land for at least 41ha of employment land between 2013 to
2033.
c.Retail:At least 17,240 sqm of retail and leisure floorspace between 2017 and 2033 distributed as
identified in table 3.2.
20Figure 3.1 Settlement hierarchy
Explanation
3.5Thispolicysetstheoverallframeworkfortherest
of the Local Plan, setting out the proposed scale and
strategic distribution of new development by reference
to the hierarchy of settlements within the district.
Scale of development
3.6Paragraph 14 of the National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF 2012) requires local planning
authorities to positively seek opportunities to meet the
developmentneedsoftheirarea.TheNPPF(paragraph
14) also states that local plans should meet objectively
assessed needs unless there would be significant
adverse impacts, or where the NPPF indicates
development should be restricted. Key evidence to
assesshousingandeconomicdevelopmentneedshas
come from the:
Nottingham Outer Strategic Housing Market
Assessment, 2015;
Nottingham Outer Demographic Update Paper,
2017;
Housing Technical Paper, 2018;
Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer
HMAEmploymentLandForecastingStudy,2015;
Mansfield District Retail and Commercial Leisure
Study Update, 2017;
MansfieldHousingandEconomicLandAvailability
Assessment, 2018; and
Mansfield Employment Land Review, 2017.
3.7The evidence base has identified the need for
new housing, employment, retail and leisure
developments over the period up to 2033. Policy S2
sets out the scale of new development required to
achieve the Local Plan vision. The plan is positively
prepared and flexible as it contains no phasing
restrictions to limit the scale of development coming
forward within allocated sites, providing the
infrastructure provision, building and marketing rates
and environmental mitigation allow this. Similarly,
deliveryofitsemploymentdevelopmentwillbedictated
by the market and the provision of infrastructure.
Housing
3.8Paragraph 47 of the National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF 2012) requires local planning
authorities to ensure sufficient housing is provided to
meet identified needs.
3.9Application of the standardised housing
methodology results in a local housing need of 279
homes per year or 5,580 over the whole plan period.
However, due to the growth aspirations of the district
council and national government, it is proposed to set
the housing target at 325 homes per year or 6,500
homes over the plan period. This provides an 5%
increase over the average number of homes built per
year since 2001 and also broadly matchesthehousing
21Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Three: The spatial strategyneeds that result from the Local Economic Partnership
Growth Strategy. Further information is set out in the
Housing Technical Paper 2018.
3.10As set out in Policy S2, the housing need of
6,500dwellingsisalsothebasisforcalculatingthefive
year supply of deliverable housing land and whether
the Local Plan is enabling delivery of the number of
homes required. Policy H1 will help ensure that the
councilisabletodemonstratethenationalrequirement
to maintain, at all times, at least a five year supply of
deliverable housing land, in accordance with NPPF
(2012), paragraph 49.
Employment needs
3.11The future ‘B' class employment land
requirements of the district are based on the findings
of the Joint Core Nottingham HMA and Outer HMA
Employment Land Forecasting Study, 2015. The study
setsthefinalrequirementsinfloorspace(squaremetres)
forB1a/bofficeuse,andland(hectares)forB1c/B2/B8
uses and provides the basis for the employment
provisionmadeinthisplan.ForthepurposeoftheLocal
Plan, the final floorspace requirements have been
convertedtoofficelandrequirements,identifyingatotal
employment land requirement of a minimum of 41
hectares (ha) for the plan period.
3.12The evidence base does not split the
employment land requirements between the Mansfield
urbanareaandWarsopParishandsetsanemployment
land requirement for the whole district. Policy E2
allocates future employment sites across the whole
district, although the majority of employment space
requirementshave been allocatedwithintheMansfield
urban area as this is the most sustainable location.
Retail and leisure needs
3.13Paragraph23oftheNPPF(2012)requireslocal
planning authorities to identify a range of suitable sites
tomeettheneedsoftowncentresovertheplanperiod.
The retail and leisure floorspace requirements of the
district between 2017 and 2033 (uses falling within the
A1, A3, A4 and A5 use classes) are set out in the
MansfieldDistrictRetailandCommercialLeisureStudy
Update, 2017.
3.14The study splits the requirement between
Mansfield town centre, Mansfield Woodhouse district
centre, Market Warsop district centre and new housing
growthareas.Table3.2belowsetsoutthesplitbetween
the different locations. It is expected that the Mansfield
urbanarea(particularlythetowncentre)willbethemainfocusforanynewfacilitieswhichwillserveawiderarea;
this may include new retail development, restaurants,
leisurecentresoruseswhichwillattractalargenumber
of visitors.
3.15Table 3.2 Retail floorspace distribution
Housing
growth
areasMarket
Warsop
district
centreMansfield
Woodhouse
districtcentreMansfield
town centre
700 sqm 700 sqm 700 sqm 11,100 sqm Comparison
(A1)
540 sqm 0 sqm 0 sqm 0 sqm Convenience
(A1)
. 350 sqm 350 sqm 2,800 sqm Food and
drink, leisure
(A3, A4, A5)
Settlement hierarchy
3.16A core principle of the NPPF is to focus
“significantdevelopmentsinlocationswhichareorcan
be made sustainable” (paragraph 17, bullet point 11).
3.17The settlement hierarchy set out in Policy S2
defines Mansfield urban area (including
Mansfield, Mansfield Woodhouse and parts of
Rainworth, Pleasley and Clipstone) as the most
sustainable location for the development needed to
deliverthelocalplanvision. Ithasamuchwiderrange
ofemployment,retailandleisurefacilitiesandtransport
options than the other settlements. This is the most
sustainable location for development and growth so
shouldbethefocusforhousing(includingspecialistand
affordable housing) and economic development.
Mansfield town centre is located at the heart of this
settlement, which also includes a number of other
employment areas, retailing and leisure facilitieswhich
are well connected by the existing transport
infrastructure.
3.18Development is to be focused on the route of
the MARR to reduce the impact on the overall highway
network across the district and take advantage of
existing road capacity. These sites have good access
to both Greater Nottingham and the M1.
3.19TwostrategicsitesareproposedintheMansfield
urbanarea.Thesearelarge,greenfieldmixedusesites
which have long lead in times and significant up front
infrastructure and initial ground works. The two sites,
Land off Jubilee Way and Pleasley Hill Farm, are
currently unviable but are included to increase their
profileandgivesufficienttimetoundertakebackground
work to enable them to be developed in the future. It
22is considered that without these sites there is still a
sufficientsupplyofsitestoenablethehousingtargetto
be met with a good buffer. Section 8 provides further
details about these sites.
3.20Whilst the village of Rainworth has a more rural
character, compared to Clipstone and Pleasley, it is
located in close proximity to the urban area and relies
on a number of services there. Any development that
forms part of Rainworth should reflect this more rural
characterintermsoftheoverallscaleandnatureofthe
development.
23Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Three: The spatial strategy3.22Church Warsop, Meden Vale, Warsop Vale and
Spion Kop are small rural villages which surround
Market Warsop. There are limited jobs and services
providedintheseareas;theresidentsofwhichgenerally
look to Market Warsop for every day needs. Particular
issues relate to levels of public transport, accessibility
to job opportunities, the retention of local services and
facilities, and the quality and affordability of housing.
3.21Market Warsop, is a small town in the north of
thedistrictandisthemaincentrewithinWarsopParish.
Ithasitsowndistrictcentrewhichservesthedailyneeds
of the town and the neighbouring villages. Main road
access is via the A60 which runs through the town and
there are also links into Shirebrook and surrounding
areas and north towards Sheffield. Bus services run
between Mansfield and Market Warsop, providing
accesstothelargerrangeofjobs,servicesandfacilities
within Mansfield.
Table 3.2 Policy S2 - Supporting information
Policy S2: The spatial strategy
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 14, 17, 23 and 37, 156, 159, and 161. Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Mansfield Housing Technical Paper, 2018;
Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment Land Forecasting Study, 2015;
Mansfield District Retail and Commercial Leisure Study Update, 2017:
Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018:
Mansfield Employment Land Review, 2017; and
Mansfield Annual Monitoring Reports
Thispolicywillbedeliveredbythedeterminationofplanningapplicationsthroughthedevelopmentmanagement
system.How will it be delivered?
All Which local plan objectives will it meet?24Figure 3.2 Key diagram
25Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Three: The spatial strategy3.3 Policy S3: Development in the
countryside
Policy S3
Development in the countryside
1.LandoutsidetheMansfieldurbanarea,theMarketWarsopurbanareaandtheothersettlementboundaries
(as shown on the Policies Map) is identified as countryside. Proposals for development where listed in
(a) to (o) below will be supported, subject to those considerations set out in criterion 2 below:
a. agricultural, including agricultural workers’ dwellings;
b. the re-use and adaptation of buildings for appropriate uses;
c. the redevelopment of previously developed land;
d. flood protection;
e. the limited extension and replacement of dwellings;
f. expansion of all types of business and enterprise in rural areas, through conversion and extension
of existing buildings and well-designed new buildings;
g. sites for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople in accordance with Policy H8;
h. small-scale employment generating development or farm diversification;
i. development by statutory undertakers or public utility providers;
j. recreation and tourism;
k. individual dwellings of innovative or exceptional design;
l. community services and facilities meeting a proven local need;
m. renewable and low carbon energy in accordance with Policy CC1;
n. transport infrastructure; and
o. employment land in accordance with the provisions of Policy E4.
2. Development falling within categories (a) to (o) above will only be supported where:
i. the appearance and character of the landscape, including its historic character and features such
as views, settlement pattern, rivers, watercourses, field patterns and local distinctiveness is
safeguarded or enhanced;
Continued overleaf26Policy S3 continued
ii. itdoesnotleadto,eitherindividuallyorcumulativelywithexistingorproposeddevelopment,thephysical
and perceived coalescence of settlements;
iii. it does not create or exacerbate ribbon development;
iv.anynewdevelopmentiswellintegratedwithexistingandthereuseofexistingbuildingshasbeenexplored
where appropriate;
v. itisappropriatelyaccessibleforthetypeofdevelopmentproposedor,inthecaseofmajordevelopment,
will be made accessible by sustainable modes of transport; and
vi.takesaccountofagriculturallandclassificationsavoidingthebestandmostversatilelandwherepossible.
Explanation
3.23TheNPPFrecognisestheneedto“takeaccount
of the different roles and character of different areas” ,
and that planning should recognise “the intrinsic
character and beauty of the countryside” (Para 17, 5th
bullet point).
3.24TheusessetoutinPolicyS3(1)arethosewhich
are considered to be potentially appropriate in the
countryside.However,itwillbenecessarythatproposed
developmentdoesnotundulyimpactuponthecharacter
and appearance of the countryside. Extensions should
not exceed 50% of the footprint of the building as
originally built or as it existed in June 1947.
3.25The landscape of the countryside varies in
character and appearance across the district. It is
important that account is taken of these differences in
considering development proposals in the countryside
in accordance NE1 Protection and enhancement of
landscape character.
3.26Whilst Policy S3 seeks to facilitate the
diversification of the rural economy, there are also
benefitstotheprotectionofthebestandmostversatile
land.Whereappropriate,weshallseektheuseofareas
ofpoorerqualitylandinpreferencetothatofagricultural
land of a high quality.
3.27In respect of transport infrastructure, it is
recognised that sometimes these will either pass
through the countryside (for example roads) or may belocatedwithinacountrysidesetting(forexamplearoad
side service facility adjoining a main road and which
cannot be accommodated in a built up area).
3.28New isolated homes in the countryside will not
be supported unless there are special circumstances
such as:
The essential need for a rural worker to live
permanently at or near their place of work in the
countryside
Where such development would represent the
optimalviableuseofaheritageassetorwouldbe
appropriateenablingdevelopmenttosecurefuture
heritage assets
Where the development would re-use redundant
ordisusedbuildingsandleadtoanenhancement
to the immediate setting
Theexceptionalqualityorinnovativenatureofthe
design of the dwelling. Such a design should:
Be truly outstanding or innovative, helping
to raise standards of design more generally
in rural areas
Reflectthehigheststandardsinarchitecture
Significantly enhance its immediate setting
Be sensitive to the defining characteristics
of the local area27Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Three: The spatial strategy3.29 An ‘appropriate  accessibility’  for new developments  will be assessed  according  to the scale  of the 
development and the number of trips generated.
T
able 3.3 Policy S3  - Supporting information
Policy S3: Development in the countryside
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 28, 55, 109, 110, 112, and 143. Does it meet national planning policy?
The NPPF. What evidence has informed this policy?
Thispolicywillbedeliveredbythedeterminationofplanningapplicationsthroughthedevelopmentmanagement
system.How will it be delivered?
1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9, 11, 14 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
3.4 Policy S4: Urban regeneration
Policy S4
Urban regeneration
1. Development proposals which help reuse previously developed or other surplus or derelict land within
the Mansfield and Market Warsop urban areas will be supported, particularly where they:
a. bring forward high quality housing and mixed use development;
b. facilitate the upgrading of older/less popular areas of housing through selective refurbishment,
demolition and replacement of properties;
c. provide economic development that diversifies the local economy;
d. enhance townscape, civic spaces and heritage assets and their setting*;
e. improve the appearance of key gateways and other prominent
sitesbyprovidingwelldesignedlandmarkbuildingswhichhelpcreateapositiveimageofthedistrict
and give it a sense of identity;
f. improve resilience to flooding and climate change, taking opportunities to restore the river ecology
of the River Maun;
g. improve traffic arrangements, including the reduction of vehicle/pedestrian conflict and the barrier
effect of the Mansfield town centre ring road;
h. create stronger walking and cycling links including within the central residential and commercial
areasofthetowncentresandwhererelevanttothegreeninfrastructure,footpathandcyclenetworks;
or
i. create green infrastructure, including open space and wildlife corridors.
* Enhancements to heritage assets include bringing them back into use, enabling development, repairing or
restoring them, particularly if they are at risk283.31 This policy  supports proposals  which  help 
regenerate  the area. It gives emphasis  to proposals  
which  provide  new homes and jobs and make good  use 
of previously  developed  land.
3.32 Where development  is proposed  on ‘other 
surplus  or derelict  land’,  will need  to be read as a whole  
and subject to policies  such as open  space (IN3) and 
employment  (E3), in order to determine  if they are 
surplus  to requirements.  The green  infrastructure and 
ecological  importance  of a site will need  to be protected 
and/or enhanced in accordance with policies IN2 (Green  
infrastructure) and NE2 (Biodiversity  and geodiversity).Explanation
3.30 The district was once reliant  on mining,  textiles 
and brewing,  however  the town has undergone  a major 
shift away from its traditional  industries  to a more 
diverse  economic  base. This has resulted  in a legacy  
of left over buildings  and land with opportunities  for 
redevelopment,  such as the former Mansfield  Brewery 
site. Some of these sites are highly  visible  and 
significantly  detract from the overall  image  of the area. 
Within certain communities,  housing  which  is in need  
of improvement,  coupled  with poor access to jobs and 
facilities, results in a poor quality  environment  with a 
range of problems for local residents. It is important that 
he plan supports the redevelopment of such areas to 
achieve a high quality well designed environment that 
is appropriate for its location.
Table
 3.4 Policy  S3 - Supporting information
Policy S3: Urban regeneration
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 21, 58, and 111. Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Mansfield Today, 2018; and
Creating a ‘City Centre’ for Mansfield, 2009-19.
Through a combination of public and private investment and actions. How will it be delivered?
1, and 2. Which local plan objectives will it meet?29Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Three: The spatial strategy3.5 Policy S5: Delivering key regeneration
sites
Policy S5
Delivering key regeneration sites
1. The following sites are key regeneration
opportunities. Development proposals that
would appropriately re-use these sites,
including for the uses identified in the table
below, will be supported.
Hectares Hectares Location Site
Ref
Retail,office,residential,hotel
and leisure uses3.5 White Hart
StreetS4a
Industrial, office, residential,
and small scale retail uses,
and improvements to
Mansfield Town Football
Club’s stadium28.9 Portland
GatewayS4b
Industrial, office, residential,
and small scale retail uses,
and improvements to
Mansfield Town Football
Club’s stadium3.9 Riverside S4c
Explanation
3.33There are a number of key strategic brownfield
siteslocatedwithinthecentralareaofMansfieldwhich,
ifdeveloped,wouldhaveasignificantpositiveeconomic,
social and environmental impact on the district. A
numberofthesesitesliewithinthetowncentreitselfor
at key gateways.
3.34ThecentralareaofMansfieldisakeyeconomic
driver for the district. Outside of Nottingham, Mansfield
isthelargestandmostimportanttowncentrewithinthe
county. The sites are well located in terms of access to
retail and cultural facilities offered in and around the
town centre and to the rail and strategic highway
network. The inability of the market to bring forward
thesesitesfordevelopmentisasignificantimpediment
to economic growth in the district and the wellbeing of
the town centre in particular.
3.35The sites are suitable for development for a
range of uses including retail, residential, office and
employment uses.3.36It is recognised that whilst the White Hart and
Riverside regeneration sites are within flood zones 2
and/ or 3, there is also potential to positively address
flood risk whilst providing wider sustainability benefits,
including enhancements to the River Maun for the
enjoyment of people and wildlife. Recommendations
areaddressedintheMansfieldCentralAreaFloodRisk
Review (2018).
3.37Manyofthesesiteshavebeenvacantforseveral
years. The council understands that the key reasons
whythesesiteshavenotcomeforwardrelatetolackof
demand and financial viability.
3.38The sites are not deemed deliverable at this
time. For this reason they have not been allocated for
developmentanddonotcontributetomeetinghousing,
retail, or employment needs up to 2033.
3.39The council has concluded that without public
sector financial assistance, appropriate high quality
development on these important sites may not occur.303.40The council will continue to encourage and
promotetheregenerationofthesesitesandwillplayits
part by:
developingacomprehensiveplanning/investment
frameworkapproachthroughthepreparationofa
masterplan to be embodied in a supplementary
planning document or Area Action Plan. The
council will consider the benefits to preparing a
comprehensivemasterplan/investmentframework
encompassingthesesitesandtheadjoiningTown
Centre. For each site, the masterplan would
identify constraints and opportunities, establish
potential uses, and key design requirements as
well as establishing strategic requirements such
aspedestrianandcycleroutes,carparking,public
transport, and open space;exploring possible simplified planning tools such
aslocaldevelopmentorderstoenableandsupport
appropriate development;
exploringthepotentialuseofthecouncil'spowers
toimplementcompulsorypurchasepowers(CPOs)
to assist in site assembly;
engaging with public sector partners through
Mansfield Developer Forum and Growth Delivery
Grouptoseekappropriateinvestmenttofacilitate
comprehensive regeneration of these sites; and
working with owners and developers to develop
high quality and viable schemes.
Table 3.5 Policy S4 - Supporting information
Policy S4: Delivering key regeneration sites
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 21, 23, 58, 99 and 111. Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? The Brewery Interim Planning Guidance;
Creating a ‘City Centre' for Mansfield, 2009-19;
White Hart Supplementary Planning Document;
Portland Gateway Regeneration Framework;
Riverside Masterplan;
Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018; and
Urban Design Compendium: Mansfield Town Centre.
Mansfield Central Area Flood Risk Review 2018
Mansfield Central Area Hydraulic Modelling Report 2018
Through the preparation of a comprehensive masterplan SPD or AAP/ Investment Framework by the council
and through a combination of public and private investment and actions.How will it be delivered?
1, 2, and 6. Which local plan objectives will it meet?31Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Three: The spatial strategyFigure 3.3 Key regeneration areas
4.1The council and the government both great
importance to the creation of well-designed buildings
andspaces.Gooddesignisakeyaspectofsustainable
development,createsbetterplacesforresidentstolive
andworkandhelpsmakedevelopmentmoreacceptable
to communities. The purpose of policies in this chapter
is to offer applicants clarity about our expectations for
well-designed buildings and spaces.
Figure 4.1 Forest inspired landscaping
4.2As with other places across the country, the
district has buildings and spaces that vary in terms of
their design quality and their human scale: from our
higherqualityandmoredistinctiveandmemorable,tight
knit and walkable historic urban fabric, that
accommodates a vibrant mix of uses, to our lower
quality and more generic, dispersed, single use, car
dominated and less-walkable retail-led developments
that have failed to create meaningful places.
4.3We need to ensure that we replicate the
characteristicsofthesehigherqualityplacesratherthan
the lower quality places.Figure 4.2 Highways dominated design
4.4As the district continues to emerge from the
economicchallengesassociatedwiththedeclineincoal
miningandmanufacturingindustrieswhichhasshaped
how the district looks and feels, we are becoming
increasinglyconfidentandaspirational.Newinvestment
isrespondingtoemergingopportunitiesandweseethe
future of Mansfield in the knowledge rich, added value
servicesandatownthatoffersagoodstandardofliving,
providesbetteremploymentopportunitiesandprosperity
for the people who live and work here. The Mansfield
placemakingprinciplesatparagraph4.14willpromote
well-designed,modernneighbourhoodswhichconnect
communities with each other, the environment and
surrounding areas. These living spaces will set them
apartfromotherdestinationsandprovideopportunities
for residents to really enjoy their environment and lead
healthier lifestyles.
4.5In the first decades following the closure of coal
minesandlong-establishedmanufacturers,development
andinwardinvestmentwithinthedistrictwaswelcomed
– even if this compromised design quality
considerations. Whilst we do not want to forget
Mansfield'sstrongminingandindustrialheritage,today
our district is more aspirational and selective. We are
moremindfuloftheenvironmental,economicandsocial
costs associated with poorly designed buildings and
spaces.Equally,wearemoremindfuloftheaddedvalue
associated with well-designed buildings and spaces,
particularly the more public benefits, such as those
associated with improved public health and wellbeing,
engendering a greater sense of local pride and place
attachment,enhancedexternalperceptionsofthedistrict
in addition to wider sustainability concerns.
32Section Four
Place making4.6The council will expect all new developments to
achieveagoodstandardofdesignasaminimum,based
on the Mansfield Place Making Principles and the
Building for Life 12 design assessment tool. These
reflectthecouncil’svisionforthedistrictthatisfocused
on: growth, place, aspiration and wellbeing. The
MansfieldPlaceMakingPrinciplesandBuildingforLife
12 consider more than the external appearance of
buildings as they consider:
the relationship between buildings, streets and
other public spaces;
the relationship between proposed new
developments,theirimmediateandwidercontext;
the integration and creation of green and blue
infrastructure; and
the relationship between the design of our built
environment,physicalactivityandthevibrancyof
native species.
Figure 4.3 Unwelcoming footpath
4.7The Mansfield Place Making Principles and
Building for Life 12 guard against poor quality design
that is typically characterised by:
buildings, streets and spaces that are not well
connected or related to each other;
disconnected street and route networks;Figure 4.4 Disconnected street
alackofalocallyinspiredorotherwisedistinctive
landscape or architectural character; recognising
thatdistinctivelocalcharacteristicsareexpressed
through features that go beyond architectural
details. Instead local character is expressed
through: street character and variation, building
typologies and forms, plot character, building to
street relationships, building to building
relationships (for example, the spaces around
buildings), hard and soft landscaping;
Figure 4.5 Integration of landscape features
failure to integrate existing site assets including
but not limited to views into, out of and through
development sites;
33Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place makingbroken and/or fragmented perimeter blocks;
highways and/or car dominated environments;
left over spaces with no clear public or private
ownership and/or function;
Figure 4.6 Left over spaces
streets and spaces with inactive frontages; and
Figure 4.7 Poor relationship between building and
street
lackofconvenient,discreetandsufficientstorage
provision for waste and recycling containers.Figure 4.8 Disconnected street
4.8Creating well-designed buildings and places
through good design is reliant on competent skills and
methods.Whereresourcespermit,wewillseektoinvest
inimprovingthedesignskills,knowledgeandconfidence
of our planning officers and Planning Applications
Committee; supplementing this, where necessary,
through the use of external design review, specialist
designsupportandtheproductionofadditionalplanning
guidance,suchassupplementaryplanningdocuments.
Figure 4.9 Built for life
344.1PolicyP1:Achievinghighqualitydesign
Policy P1
Achieving high quality design
1.Allnewmajordevelopmentproposals(includingnewbuild,conversionsandextensions)willbesupported
where they contribute positively to the creation of inclusive and accessible well-designed buildings and
places.This will be achieved by developers demonstrating that they have:
a. undertaken a thorough and robust site and contextual analysis, identifying and responding to
opportunities and constraints;
b. involved local communities and key stakeholders, including the local planning authority, at an early
stage in the development of design solutions;
c. responded positively to the Mansfield’s Place Making Principles and or Building for Life 12; and
d. where appropriate, engaged with and responded to the recommendations of design review.
2. Where schemes are assessed as having performed well against Buildings for Life 12 or successor
scheme, they will be deemed also to have accorded with Policies P2* and P3.
*with the exception of requirement for health impact assessment checklist for major schemes (Policy
P2 (2) refers)
Figure 4.10 West Nottinghamshire College
 Explanation
4.9PolicyP1setsthestrategicapproachforthework
that the council will undertake to deliver well-designed
buildings and spaces and reflects the government’s
expectations of local planning authorities in setting out
a local design vision and aspirations.
4.10Delivering good design and quality places
requires the involvement of a wide range of different
stakeholders such as, but not limited to, local
communities and businesses, the council as local
planningauthorityandNottinghamshireCountyCouncil.
The council will take a custodian and leading role in
protecting, enhancing and improving the quality of the
built environment working with partner organisations
such as the Mansfield Business Improvement District
and applicants seeking to develop within the district.
Early identification and engagement of appropriate
stakeholders by applicants is strongly encouraged and
can help inform the design process; this will help to
avoid the risk of modifying proposals at a later stage.
35Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place makingFigure 4.11 Understanding a site
4.11Design and Access Statements for major
developments should, proportionate to the scale and
complexity of the proposal, provide an explanation of
the design process and include:
athoroughandrobustsiteandcontextualanalysis.
A robust analysis will involve identifying and
agreeing with the council site and contextual
opportunities and constraints. To ensure the
robustnessofthisprocess,thecouncilwillexpect
applicants to actively engage other stakeholders
as necessary;
for non-residential development a Design and
Access Statement will be expected to include a
concise statement of how the design
has considered and responded to the Mansfield
Place Making Principles; and
forresidentialdevelopmentsoftenhomesormore
Design and Access Statements will be expected
to be structured against the Building for Life 12
questions.
4.12In addition they should explain:
how the proposal responds to relevant policies in
the local plan including heritage, climate change
and the natural environment; and
any consultation that has been undertaken
regarding the proposal and how they have been
taken into account in the submitted design.
Delivering high quality design
4.13The design quality of proposed major
developments will be measured by reference to how
theyaddresstheMansfieldplacemakingprinciples(for
all types of developments), and Building for Life 12 (for
residential-led developments).
The Mansfield place making principles
4.14Our place making principles are:
Forest inspired: A locally inspired or forest inspired
identity, drawing greater and more creative inspiration
fromtheDukeriesandworldfamousSherwoodForest.
Figure 4.12 Forest inspired identity
Healthier: Creatingmore green,walkableandinclusive
places to live, work and visit balancing the needs of:
car drivers with the needs of pedestrians, and
cyclists;
36Figure 4.13 Traffic calming
children and the growing elderly population,
helping to encourage greater uptake of physical
activity through, for example, designing in
accessible spaces and integrating open space
with walking routes; and
naturalenvironment,includingencouragingviews
of and access to nature and supporting cleaner
air.
Figure 4.14 Influencing healthier lifestyles
Connected: Well-connected streets and spaces that
encourage people to walk and cycle, particularly for
shorter journeys.
Figure 4.15 Connected street
Flexibleandfutureproofed: Developmentsshouldbe
mindful of the longevity of the buildings, streets and
spaces; with the original occupiers or commissioners
beingoutlivedbythestreets,buildingsandspacesthey
leave behind.
Vibrant and welcoming: Good places need to
accommodate a compatible mix of uses whilst also
encouragingsocialinteraction,contributingtowardsthe
rebalancingofourtowncentresasmorewelcomingand
inclusive environments. They need to positively create
a sense of place and community. New residential
developments will be expected to respond to local
housingneedbymeetinglocalneedsandalsoattracting
families and professionals from outside of the district
whilst meeting the needs of an ageing population.
37Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place makingFigure 4.16 Unwelcoming footpath
Neighbourlyandconsiderate: Sensitiveandrespectful
to a site and its wider context, with new developments
identifying and responding to considerations such as:
character and setting, views in, views out and views
through proposed development sites, existing site
features and the relationship between existing and
proposed new development.
Safe and attractive spaces: New or improved public
spaces must be inspirational, safe, attractive and well
overlooked;avoidingbuildingsthatignorethesemiand
public spaces around them. Where possible particular
attention should be afforded to the creative integration
of water management; ensuring that surface water
features enhance the appearance and function of the
public realm and support biodiversity.
Figure 4.17 Poor relationship between building
and street
Responsible: New developments will safeguard our
heritage and natural assets. Development should
respect and respond to our heritage assets and their
setting. The creation of new habitat areas will be
complemented by connecting with nearby existing
habitats,therebyenablingspeciestomoveacrosswider
areas reflecting natural behaviour. Specialist advice
may result in a development focusing on a particular
habitat,forinstancebycreatingspeciesrichgrasslands.
Other measures may include supporting threatened
species, for instance by creating hedgehog corridors
allowing them to move more easily between back
gardens,encouragingthemawayfromcarsandstreets.
Figure 4.18 Integration of biodiversity
Building for Life (BfL)
4.15BfLisagovernment-endorsedindustrystandard
for well-designed homes and neighbourhoods. All
planningapplicationsformajorresidentialdevelopment
are required to be supported by a BfL assessment
prepared by the applicant in consultation with the local
community, key stakeholders and the council. The BfL
isdesignedaroundaseriesof12questionswhichhelp
structurediscussionsbetweenlocalplanningauthorities
and developers. These questions cover the following
issues:
connections;
facilities and services;
public transport;
meeting local housing requirements;
character;
38working with the site and its context;
creating well defined streets and spaces;
easy to find your way around;
streets for all;
parking;
public and private spaces; and
external storage and amenity space.
Figure4.19Demarcationofpublicandprivatespace
4.16Each issue is graded on a traffic light system:
greenshows the design of the scheme has
responded positively to the question;
amberis used where there is clear evidence of
localconstraintsontheschemebeyondthecontrol
of the design team that prevent it from achieving
a green;
redelements identify aspects of proposals that
needtobechangedandwheretheschemedesign
at the time of assessment fails to respond to the
question positively.
4.17A well-designed scheme should perform well
againstall12questions.Thebestperformingschemes
will achieve 12 greens.4.18Applicants should show evidence of how their
developmentperformsagainsteachquestion,justifying
either agreenoramberoutcome. Any amberscores
should only be where solutions to obtain greenscores
are unachievable because of the particular
circumstancesoftheschemebeyondthecontrolofthe
applicant and where there is evidence to support this.
4.19The council will review BfL assessments
submitted and it is important that applicants score and
evidence their schemes robustly.
4.20MoredetailsabouttheBfLschemecanbefound
at:http://www .builtforlifehomes.org/ .
Figure 4.20 Connected streets
Design review
4.21Applicants submitting proposals for major
developments and / or developments in sensitive
locationsshouldexpecttheirproposalstobesubjectto
an independent design review. The council will attach
considerableweighttotherecommendationsofdesign
reviewinassessingthemeritsofaplanningapplication.
The design review process plays a positive role in
shapingschemesandcanleadtoabetterdevelopment
overall. It is a process whereby a qualified and
experienced panel of professionals from a range of
differentdisciplinesindependentlyreviewadevelopment
proposal. It aims to provide transparent and objective
advice that can be used to improve the development.
39Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place makingIt is expected that the larger schemes will be most
suitable for design review. This will be assessed on a
case-by-case basis.4.22ThecouncilwillprepareaDesignSupplementary
Planning Document (SPD) to provide further guidance
onachievinghighqualitydesigninthedistrictincluding
meeting the needs of different age groups.
Table 4.1 Policy P1 - Supporting information
Policy P1: Achieving high quality design
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 28, 55, 56 - 68, 69 and 171. Does it meet national planning policy?
Building for Life (3rd Edition) and any suitable equivalent or successor scheme. What evidence has informed this policy?
Through the development management process and the submission of design and access statements and
through the submission of supporting Building for Life Assessments . It will apply to all new major development
across the district by both the public and private sectors. The council will prepare a Design Supplementary
Planning Document to provide further guidance on achieving high quality design in the district.How will it be delivered?
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Which local plan objectives will it meet?
404.2 Policy P2: Safe, healthy and attractive
development
Policy P2
Safe, healthy and attractive development
1.Developmentwillbesupportedprovideditcreatesastrongsenseofplaceandisinclusiveandaccessible
and appropriate to its context in terms of layout, scale, density, detailing and materials through:
a. respecting, where appropriate, existing patterns of development which contribute to the character
of the area;
b. retaining, integrating and enhancing existing built and natural features which contribute to creating
a distinctive identity;
c. taking opportunities to create new public open spaces, landmark buildings, landscape features
(including street trees), views and public art as an integral part of the design;
d. taking opportunities to promote physical activity;
e. providing variety, on larger developments, with different character areas and a hierarchy of
street types;
f. creating attractive streetscapes and spaces which are defined and brought to life by the layout,
scale and appearance of the buildings;
g. minimising the opportunities for crime by designing in high levels of security which meets 'secure
by design' principles (or equivalent) including the use of natural surveillance and ensuring public
spaces are clearly distinguished from private spaces and are well lit;
h. providing adequate and accessible external storage space for waste, recycling and bicycles;
i. avoiding obtrusive skyline views; and
j. ensuring that any tall buildings are appropriate to their location, are of high quality design and do
not detract from key views or heritage assets and their settings, nor create unacceptable local
environmental conditions.
Continued overleaf
41Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place makingPolicy P2 continued
2. A health impact assessment checklist, as set out in Appendix 4, will be required for applications for:
a. residential development of 50 dwellings or more;
b. non-residential developments of 5,000 square metres or more; and
c. other developments which are likely to have a significant impact on health and wellbeing.
Where a significant adverse impact is identified through a Health Impact Assessment, measures to
substantially mitigate the impact will be required.
Figure 4.21 Cycle networks
Explanation
4.23Akeypartofdeliveringgooddesignisensuring
that a new development helps create a sense of place
and fits into the surrounding context as far as possible.
Policy P2 seeks to identify the key factors that will be
taken into account when considering whether or not a
development does this successfully.
4.24Existing features such as street patterns,
materials, plot sizes, the orientation of buildings and
architectural details can all contribute to creating adistinctive local character. Reflecting these as part of
new developments helps reinforce existing character
andintegratesthenewintotheexistingmoreeffectively.
Designandaccessstatementsshouldexplainhowthey
have addressed Policy P2 including responding to
advice set out in the appropriate Secured by Design
design guides: see,
http://www .securedbydesign.com/industry-advice-and-guides/ .
4.25Additionally, Sport England provides guidance
on how new development can support active, healthy
lifestylesinoureverydaylivesthroughkeyactivedesign
principles.
4.26ThecouncilwillprepareaDesignSupplementary
Planning Document to provide further guidance
on achieving high quality design in the district.
4.27The Health Impact Assessment in Appendix 4,
that is referred to in the policy, was produced by
Nottinghamshire County Council, in consultation with
partnerauthoritiesandorganisations,andwaspublished
in ‘Spatial Planning for the Health and Wellbeing of
Nottinghamshire, Nottingham City & Erewash’ (2016).
Itsuse will help toensure thatthehealthand wellbeing
of residents is given appropriate weight when
applications are prepared and considered.
4.28Not all of the points in the Health Impact
Assessment will be relevant to all applications; equally
there may be additional health-related issues that are
relevant to particular applications.
42Table 4.2 Policy P2 - Supporting information
Policy P2: Safe, healthy and attractive development
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17, 28. 55, 56 - 68, and 69. Does it meet national planning policy?
Secured by design: http://www.securedbydesign.com/industry-advice-and-guides/ What evidence has informed this policy?
‘Spatial Planning for the Health and Well-Being of Nottinghamshire, Nottingham City & Erewash’ (2016):
http://www.nottinghamshireinsight.org.uk/f/63761/Library/Environment/General/
Sport England, Active Design: Planning for health and wellbeing through sport and physical activity (October
2015) - https://www.sportengland.org/facilities-planning/active-design/
The policy will be delivered through the development management process and the submission of design and
access statementsand healthimpactassessments. Part1 will apply toall new developmentrequiring planning
permission across the district by both the public and private sectors and individual members of the public. Part
2 will apply to all development proposals over 50 dwellings or 5,000 sqm. The council will prepare a Design
Supplementary Planning Document to provide further guidance on achieving high quality design in the district.How will it be delivered?
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
43Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place making4.3 Policy P3: Connected developments
Policy P3
Connected developments
1. Development will be supported provided it takes opportunities to encourage people to walk, cycle and
use public transport through:
a. creating a network of routes and spaces which are safe, attractive, convenient and easy for all
people to understand and use;
b. connecting to existing and proposed street and path networks, public transport and places
wherepeoplewanttogoinobviousanddirectways,andwherenecessaryimprovingexistingroutes
and public transport facilities;
c. highway design which respects the overall character of the place and which encourages people to
use primary routes as social spaces rather than just as routes for traffic movement; and
d.providingsufficientoff-streetcarparkinginaccordancewithPolicyIN10thatcomplementsthestreet
scene and pedestrian environment whilst also being convenient and secure.
Explanation
4.29PolicyP3seekstoensurethatnewdevelopment,
especially new residential developments, connect well
with the surrounding areas, and are easily navigated
by users. Routes need to encourage walking and
cycling and easy access to bus routes. This is likely to
involve layouts that connect with and enhance nearby
walking and cycling routes such that these provide
linkages through and to new and nearby open space
and green infrastructure networks, and promote safe,
connected and intuitive access to local centres,
businesses, schools, shops and other community
facilities.Figure 4.22 Highways dominated design
4.30Improving existing routes includes ensuring
routes are, for example: safe for pedestrians and
cyclists,wellsigned,betterconnectedtopublicspaces
andplacesandotherroutes,accessibleforpeoplewith
disabilities, well managed, and minimise the need for
unnecessary repairs.
44Figure 4.23 Poor street environment
 4.31Many ofthemostliveable citiesin theworld are
also those that score well for walkability. Connected
neighbourhoods are more sustainable and attractive,
and lead to a number of benefits including:
health benefits resulting from increased walking;
community benefits from increased opportunities
for interaction; and
environmental benefits from reduced vehicle
emissions.
4.32Oftenwell-connected,walkableplacesconnect
to community focal points within the layout, such as a
community parade, open space or other civic space.
Thiscanencouragepositiveplaceshapingopportunities
and greater community cohesion.
4.33Design and access statements should explain
how they have addressed Policy P3.
4.34ThecouncilwillprepareaDesignSupplementary
Planning Document (SPD) to provide further guidance
on achieving high quality design in the district.
Table 4.3 Policy P3 - Supporting information
Policy P3: Connected development
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 35, 56 - 68 Does it meet national planning policy?
Building for Life (3rd Edition); and What evidence has informed this policy?
Manual for Streets, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/manual-for-streets.
The policy will be delivered through the development management process and the submission of design and
accessstatements. Itwillapplytoallnewdevelopmentrequiringplanningpermissionacrossthedistrictbyboth
the public and private sectors and individual members of the public. The council will prepare a Design
Supplementary Planning Document to provide further guidance on achieving high quality design in the district.How will it be delivered?
5, 7, and 9 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
45Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place making4.4PolicyP4:Comprehensivedevelopment
Policy P4
Comprehensive development
1. Development proposals will be supported provided they do not jeopardise the comprehensive delivery
of allocated sites or sites with existing planning permission or their associated infrastructure, and in all
cases must not:
a. prejudice the development of adjoining land with longer term potential; or
b. lead to piecemeal forms of development.
2. On large sites (of five hectares or more or 150 dwellings or more) a masterplan for the whole site will be
required to be submitted as part of any planning application, in accordance with the Masterplanning
requirementswithinAppendix8.Forlargeallocatedsiteswhichmaybedevelopedinphases,itisimportant
thatweareabletoassesshowthewholeschemeworksasone.Thisincludesensuringthatopenspace
contributes to the wider green infrastructure network, any cumulative infrastructure requirements can be
delivered and access arrangements are suitable for the total scale of development.
4.36 This policy will apply to sites which straddle local 
authority boundaries.
4.37
 The masterplan  principles  are set out in 
Appendix  8.Explanation
4.35 In order  to protect the potential  of a site to be 
developed  for its intended  use, the council  needs  to 
ensure  that any proposal  will not prejudice  the 
development  of the remainder  of a site. A small area of 
an allocated  site could  be developed  for the purpose  
for which it has been allocated, but in a manner which 
does not restrict or prejudice the development of the 
remainder of the site.
Table 4.4 Policy  P4 - Supporting information
Policy P4: Comprehensive development
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17, 56, 57, 58, 63, 64, 66, 178 and 179, Does it meet national planning policy?
Local and professional best practice. What evidence has informed this policy?
The policy will be delivered through the development management process and the submission of masterplans
for large sites. It will apply to all new development requiring planning permission across the district by both the
public and private sectors and individual members of the public.How will it be delivered?
1, 2, 5 and 9 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
464.5 Policy P5: Climate change and new
development
Policy P5
Climate change and new development
1. Developmentproposalswillbesupportedwhereitcanbesatisfactorilydemonstratedthatitincorporates
highstandardsofdesignandconstructiontoreduce,mitigateandadapttotheimpactsofclimatechange
by incorporating the following measures, where practical and viable, having regard to the type, location
and size of the proposal:
a. sustainable design and layout that maximises energy efficiency;
b. green infrastructure and landscaping;
c. sustainable drainage and water management measures;
d. appropriate flexibility to allow for future adaptation;
e. sustainable waste management facilities;
f. renewable and/or low carbon energy technologies or scope for their future provision; and
g. sustainable transport and travel facilities.
Explanation
4.38Mitigation and adapting to climate change is an
international and national priority. The Climate Change
Act 2008 commits the UK to cut greenhouse gas
emissionsagainst1990levelsbyatleast80%by2050
(and by at least 35% by 2020). According to the latest
UK,localauthorityandregionalCO2emissionestimates
(2016)producedbyNationalStatistics,thetopsources
of carbon dioxide in the district are from domestic gas
and industrial and commercial electricity consumption.
ThisissimilartoestimatesforNottinghamshire.Overall
trendsinemissionsinMansfielddistricthavedecreased
between2005and2016:theoverallpercentagechange
forCO2emissionsbetweenthisperiodwas-25.5%(from
589.4 to 439.2 kilotonnes CO2). This is slightly less of
areductioninCO2whencomparedtotheEastMidlands
region (-27%) and the UK (-32%). Emissions have
decreased in all regions since 2005.4.39Paragraph 96 of the National Planning Policy
Framework(NPPF2012)setsoutthatnewdevelopment
isexpectedtotakeaccountoflandform,layout,building
orientation, massing and landscaping to minimise
energy consumption. Paragraph 97 sets out that local
planpoliciesshouldbedesignedtomaximiserenewable
and low carbon energy development. Therefore,
improvingtheefficiencyintheseareasandseekinglow
carbon, renewable sources are key to reducing the
district's impact on climate change.
4.40Policy P5 sets out the council's commitment to
improve the sustainability and environmental
performance of all new development by measures that
reducetheimpactonclimatechange,andmitigateand
adapt to its effects. Much of the control over energy,
water, and other sustainability aspects are matters for
building regulations which are outside the scope of
planning.Nevertheless,thelocalplanningpolicieshave
the scope to influence the design, layout of new
development along with a number of other matters.
47Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place making4.41The policy emphasis is on how the design and
layout can provide mitigation and adaptation to the
impacts of climate change. Development that
incorporates renewable and zero to low carbon design
and technologies, and improves energy efficiency will
be supported. These should also include identifying no
or low cost solutions to climate risks that also deliver
other benefits, such as integrating in areas of green
infrastructure and green design principles. In addition
to addressing climate change adaptation, green
infrastructureprovidesotherbenefitssuchasproviding
net increases in biodiversity and amenity spaces and
increasing attractiveness of new development by
improving place shaping characteristics.
Figure 4.24 Integration of landscape features
4.42 The sustainability  of new development  needs  to 
be fully considered as part its overall design. The council 
will therefore expect applicants to consider, at the outset 
of the development  process, what measures  could  be 
incorporated  into development  proposals  to reduce, 
mitigate and/or adapt to climate change.  Where 
required  through  Policy P1, design  and access 
statements or planning  or sustainability  statements 
submitted in support of applications  should  explain  how 
they have addressed  Policy P5.or near to heritage assets (e.g. within conservation
areasorlistedbuildings)maybemorerestrictedinwhat
measures the development can achieve.
4.44The council will consider the need to prepare
supplementary planning document (SPD) advice to
provide further guidance on achieving high quality
design and mitigating climate change in the district.
Table 4.5 sets out some examples of the types of
measures which could be incorporated into proposals
in order to positively reduce CO2emissions and energy
costs, reduce reliance on fossil fuels and improve
resilience to the impacts from climate change. Many of
these measures not only help plan for the present but
also help future-proof development by improving
resilience to impacts from climate change and
associated costs and looking to future demands in
technology, such an increased uptake of electric cars.
484.43 It is important to note that major developments  
are likely  to have the ability  to achieve  more of these 
aspects given  the scale of development  and greater 
opportunities  to implement  long term sustainable  
measures  in their design  than smaller  scale 
developments.  Smaller  developments  or those withinTable 4.5 Sustainability measures and the design of new developments
Why? How? What?
Passive solar design refers to the use of the sun’s energy for the heating and cooling of living spaces. In
this approach, the building itself or some element of it takes advantage of natural energy characteristics in
materials and air created by exposure to the sun.Passive solar gain and
maximising natural daylightEnergy
efficiency and
consumption
Development that maximises passive solar gain and natural daylight through the siting, orientation and
layout of a development can reduce energy bills. The proposed layout can also increase the opportunities
for solar panels (e.g. south facing roofs). Internal layouts can be designed so as to maximise solar gain to
the most used rooms (this is shown in Figure 4.25).
These can help to regulate the temperature of a building, remove CO2and other pollutants from the
atmosphere, reduce any heat island effect and provide biodiversity benefits. These also improve the
attractiveness of the area and can improve economic uptake.Green and brown roofs
These can include solar power, solar water heating, wind turbines, biomass, combined heat and power,
ground/air source heat pumps and electric charging points. These can be applied in varying degrees
dependent upon the scale and nature of the development proposed and site characteristics. This alsoRenewable and low carbon
technologies
includesfutureproofingtoallowfordemandsforfutureadvancementsintechnologies,forexample:ensuring
appropriatewiringareinplacetosupporttheintegrationofelectricchargingpointsforhomeuse,employment
and retail areas and district and local centres.
Thiscani ncludegreywaterrecyclingsystemssuchassupplyingtoiletsandoutsidetaps,anduseofwater
butts to store water for use outdoors in gardens etc.Rain water harvesting Water
efficiency
Careful thought should be given to maximising the potential for surrounding green infrastructure and
landscapingtosupportnotolowcostsandpassiveenergygainswithrespecttocoolingandreducingheat
loss. For smaller developments, features such as the position of gardens and trees may be usefulGreen infrastructure and
landscapingUrban cooling
considerations.Formajordevelopment,theincorporationofopenspacesandgreencorridors,inandaround
the development, should be considered alongside other needs,such as urban cooling and sustainable
drainage systems, and also recreational/sustainable transport and biodiversity enhancements.
Where possible, the inclusion of trees,hedgerows and woodland within the design of open space and
streetscapes should be prioritised over intensely managed amenity grassland. This will help to maximise
CO2mitigation, provide wind blocks and improve urban cooling. Native woodland and broad-leaved trees
should be prioritised over conifers. Species mixes may also need to consider future resilience to
climate change, but native species should be prioritised.
Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) can reduce the risks of flooding and can be used in all types and
scalesofdevelopment.Providingmorepermeablesurfacesindevelopmentcanalsoreducesurfacewater
run-off or the need for drainage works to carry water off site. Trees, woodland and hedgerows play an
important role in mitigating flooding, if planted in the right locations.Sustainable drainage systems Drainage
This can include the use of composting bins and convenient storage for recycling bins. Waste storage facilities Waste re-use
and recycling
Theincorporationofelectricchargingpointsandconvenientcyclestorageatnewdevelopmentscanassist
with the shift to the use of more sustainable travel modes which cut down on CO2, NO2and particulate
matter emissions [note: NO2- nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter being the main pollutants of concern
for motor vehicles which impact on human health].Electric charging points and
cycle storageTransport and
travel
Usingresponsiblysourcedandrecycledmaterialscanmakeamajorcontributiontosustainabledevelopment
by slowing down the demand for non-renewable resources.Locally sourced and recycled
materialsMaterials
The materials used also need to take account of climate change, including extreme weather conditions
such that buildings last longer and repair and maintenance costs are minimised.Materials that can respond a
changing climate and weather
conditions
49Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place makingFigure 4.25 Maximising solar gain through internal layout
Table 4.6 Policy P5 - Supporting information
Policy P5: Climate change and new development
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 56, 63, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, and 99. Does it meet national planning policy?
National Statistics UK local authority and regional carbon dioxide emissions national statistics: 2005 to 2016
(https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/uk-local-authority-and-regional-carbon-dioxide-emissions-national-statistics-2005-2016);What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Low Carbon Energy Opportunities and Heat Mapping for Local Planning Areas across the East
Midlands, 2011;
Mansfield Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2008 and Addendum, 2018;
Mansfield Green Infrastructure Study, 2018; and
Climate Local UK Climate Projections (UKCP09).
The policy will be delivered through the development management process and the submission of design and
access statements, planning or other sustainability statements. It will apply to all new development requiring
planning permission across the district by both the public and private sectors and individual members of the
public.How will it be delivered?
The council will consider the need for additional detailed advice through a supplementary planning document
based on monitoring outcomes.
5, 7, 8, 9, and 10 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
504.6 Policy P6: Home extensions and
alterations
Policy P6
Home extensions and alterations
1. Development proposals to extend and/or alter an existing dwelling, including the provision of separate
buildings within the curtilage for habitable or other purposes related to the domestic use of the property
will be supported, provided that there is:
a. no significant adverse impact on the character and appearance of the dwelling or street scene, or
the wider surrounding area;
b. no significantly reduced residential amenity of nearby existing occupiers or future occupiers of the
property itself; and
c. sufficient parking and outdoor amenity space.
Explanation
4.45Applications for residential extensions and
alterations are some of the most common applications
thatlocalplanningauthoritiesdealwith.Theyalsohave
thepotentialtodirectlyimpactonthecharacterofareas
and the amenity of neighbouring residents. Planning
applicationsforhomeextensionsandalterationsshould
demonstrate that they meet the requirements of Policy
P6.4.46Not all extensions require planning permission,
as certain alterations are covered by permitted
development rights. Applicants are advised to check
with the council for information regarding extensions
prior to undertaking work.
4.47Listedbuildingsandbuildingswithinconservation
areas area also subject to relevant policies and
legislation. Where a protected species might be
impacted, extensions and alterations are also subject
to Policy NE2 and protected species legislation.
Table 4.7 Policy P6 - Supporting information
Policy P6: Home extensions and alterations
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17, 56 - 68 Does it meet national planning policy?
local experience and professional best practice. What evidence has informed this policy?
The policy will be delivered through the development management process and the submission of design and
accessstatements. Itwillapplytoallnewdevelopmentrequiringplanningpermissionacrossthedistrictbyboth
the public and private sectors and individual members of the public.How will it be delivered?
5 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
51Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place making4.7 Policy P7: Amenity
Policy P7
Amenity
1.Proposalsfordevelopmentwillbedesignedandconstructedtoavoidandminimiseimpactsontheamenity
of both existing and future users, alone and in combination, within the development and close to it. As
such, development proposals will be expected to:
a.nothaveasignificantadverseeffectonthelivingconditionsofexistingandnewresidentsandfuture
occupiers of the proposed development through loss of privacy, excessive overshadowing or
overbearing impact; and
b. not generate a level of activity, noise, light, air quality, odour, vibration or other pollution which
cannot be mitigated to an appropriate standard.
Explanation
4.48Inthemajorityofcases,theimpactofschemes,
especiallysmallschemessuchasresidentialextensions
or changes of use, falls mostly on those residents and
occupiers immediately adjacent to the proposed
development. Avoiding and minimising impacts is all
aboutensuringthedesignandtypeofdevelopmentare
sensitive to the surroundings and is located in the right
place. Oneofthekeyelementsoftheplanningsystem
is to ensure a good standard of amenity for all existing
and future residents (NPPF paragraph 17, fourth bullet
point). PolicyP7appliestothedesignandlayoutstage
of the development and also the considerations that
need planning for during the construction period.
4.49The relationship between the impact and those
affected will depend on a number of factors including
but not limited to: the nature, amount or magnitude of
the impact, exposure time, additional impacts nearby
(cumulative elements) and the sensitivity of the group
affected. Neighbouring uses need to be taken into
consideration. For example, some commercial
developments including sports pitches, fast food
restaurants, night clubs and public houses can have
particularimpacts,notleastbecauseactivitiesareoften
attheirpeakintheeveningandlateatnight. Inaddition
to this policy, applicable legislation, standards and
licensingrequirementsalsoneedtobeconsideredand
addressed.4.50Impacts should firstly be avoided, where
possible, followed by mitigation. Avoiding and
minimising impacts may be addressed, for example,
through:
designing in amenity and landscaped buffers and
screening;
fabric of buildings (e.g. insulation);
limiting activities at certain times of the day;
type of and positioning of lighting; or
sensitivepositioningofneighbouringbuildingsand
amenity spaces.
4.51While Policy P7 seeks to ensure good living
standards,thisdoesnotmeanthattherewillnotbeany
impacts; the extent of the impacts and whether they
amount to the ‘significant adverse effect’ required by
the policy will be a matter of professional judgement
informed by consultations with experts from different
disciplinesandorganisations,aswellasthoseresidents
and occupiers affected. Where there will be an impact
on amenity, different scheme designs, conditions or
otherappropriateformsofmitigationwillbeconsidered
toreducetheimpactespeciallywherethiswillbringthe
impact on amenity to a level which is considered
acceptable to the decision maker.
524.52Planning applications should demonstrate that they meet the requirements of Policy P7 through relevant
andappropriateassessmentscarriedoutbyaqualifiedassessor. Whilstthispolicymainlyaddresseslocalimpacts
onresidentialareas,PolicyNE3(Pollutionandlandinstability)mayalsoapplywhichlooksatwiderimpacts,including
on the natural environment. An Air Quality and Emissions Mitigation Guidance for Developers Supplementary
Planning Document (SPD) will provide further guidance for policy implementation.
Table 4.8 Policy P7 - Supporting information
Policy P7: Amenity
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 56 - 68, 120, 124, and 125. Does it meet national planning policy?
Land-Use Planning & Development Control: Planning for Air Quality, 2015, EPUK & IAQM What evidence has informed this policy?
Thepolicywillbedeliveredthroughthedevelopmentmanagementprocess,thesubmissionofdesignandaccess
statements and the submission of specialist reports relating to potential noise, light, air quality, odour, vibration
or other pollution impacts and appropriate mitigation. It will apply to all new development requiring planning
permission across the district by both the public and private sectors and individual members of the public.How will it be delivered?
5, 7 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
53Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place making4.8 Policy P8: Shop front design and
signage
Policy P8
Shop front design and signage
1. New and alterations to existing shop fronts will be supported where they:
a.respectthescale,proportions,characterandmaterialsofthewholebuildingandwhereappropriate,
adjoining buildings and the wider street scene;
b.retainanyexistingindependentaccesstoupperfloorsandtakeopportunitiestoprovidesuchaccess
from the street where none currently exists;
c. provide fully accessible entrances for all users where appropriate to do so;
d. respect the design of individual units when combining two or more units; and
e. avoid the provision of external shutters and the use of external roller shutter boxes unless this can
be fully justified in appropriate circumstances.
2. Where proposals affect heritage assets, changes to shop fronts and signage will not be permitted if they
fail to preserve or enhance the area’s character, appearance and setting. The following considerations
will also apply to advertisement proposals:
a. they should be appropriate in size and scale to the building on which they are to be attached
especially those associated with listed buildings and conservation areas;
b. anyilluminatedadvertisementsshouldconserveandenhancetheappearanceoftheheritageasset
and surrounding area.
Explanation
4.53 A shop  front  serves a number  of purposes  to 
provide  an attractive frame for goods  displayed,  to 
advertise  the presence  of the shop, and to project an 
image  for the business  inside.  Shop  fronts also have 
an important role in creating  places  with local 
distinctiveness.  This distinctiveness  can be lost where  
businesses  adopt a standardised  national  shop front 
and signage  scheme or fail to reflect the building's  
character and setting. New shop fronts in existing  
buildings  should  respect the character of the building  
and
 the traditional  pattern of shop fronts in the locality  
in terms  of materials, style and scale.
544.54 Businesses  operating  out of two or  more 
adjoining  buildings  should  have separate  shop fronts 
and signage  for each building,  particularly  where  each 
building, particularly where each retains a traditional 
shop front. This will help to retain and enhance 
traditional building patterns and conserve the 
character and appearance of our retail centres, some 
of which are designated as conservation areas.Mansfield town centre, Mansfield Woodhouse and
Market Warsop district centres, it is important to
conserve, protect and enhance where appropriate the
historic shop fronts.
4.58The council will consider producing further
detailedguidanceonshopfrontandsignagedesignas
part of a Design Supplementary Planning Document
(SPD).
4.59In some circumstances, grant funding may be
available. Support is offered by the council and the
MansfieldBusinessImprovementDistrict (BID)bothof
whichrun/provideinformationaboutfundingschemes
to help new businesses start up. For example, the
AshfieldandMansfieldBusinessStartUpGrantScheme
is for up to £1,000 and can be spent on items such as:
shop fittings and refurbishment
security equipment and installation
business stationery, advertising and other
marketing costs including web design.4.55 In order to ensure the vitality of our retail  centres, 
it is important that any changes  to shop fronts retain 
any existing  independent  access to upper  floors and 
take opportunities to provide such access from the  street 
where  none  currently
 exists. This will enable  other 
appropriate  and compatible  uses, including  residential,  
to utilise  upper  floor space.
4.56 Improved security can be provided  through  the 
use of laminated  glazing  systems  that can eliminate  the 
need  for additional  security barriers. Where security 
shutters are required, they  should be internally mounted 
mesh shutters to allow  window  displays  to remain  
visible,  retaining  the vitality of our retail centres and 
providing  interest to the street scene. Externally  
mounted  roller  shutters and solid shutter systems can 
have an adverse  impact on the character and 
appearance  of town centres, eroding  vitality, creating  a 
heavily  defensive  feel and projecting  a “fear of crime”.
Table 4.9 Policy P8  - Supporting information
Policy P8: Historic shop fronts
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 56, 57, 64, 67, 68, 126, 128 - 141. Does it meet national planning policy?
Conservation area character appraisals and management plans. What evidence has informed this policy?
Throughthedevelopmentmanagementprocessandtheworkofthecouncil'sconservationofficerincommenting
on planning applications. Detailed design guidance may be prepared as part of a Design SPD.How will it be delivered?
4 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
55Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Four: Place making4.57 The district has some very good  examples  of 
historic shop fronts. Due to the overall  character and 
historic interest within  the conservation  areas covering5.1Nationalplanningpolicyguidancerequiresthecounciltoseektomeetthefullobjectivelyassessedneedsfor
market and affordable housing through the Local Plan. It also requires that the council plans to deliver a mix of
housing to meet the needs of current and future generations based on demographic trends and the special needs
ofspecificpartsofthecommunity.Indoingso,developmentshouldofferawidechoiceofhighqualityhomeswhilst
broadening opportunities for home ownership, and creating sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities.
5.2Thissectionidentifiesandallocatesanumberofhousingsitesthatwillbedevelopedtoensurethatthehousing
target of 6,500 homes is met during the plan period (2013 to 2033). As set out below, an additional allowance is
being provided to ensure that there is flexibility in case any of the sites expected to come forward do not for any
reason. Section 8 allocates two mixed use strategic sites which will deliver an additional 1,725 homes.
5.3This section also sets out policies on the type of homes that should be built. This includes:
the number of affordable homes required and when this will be required;
the density and mix of house size required in Mansfield district;
how the number of custom and self build homes will be increased; and
the approach to specialist housing and homes in multiple occupation.
5.4The section also provides a policy related to the provision of Gypsy and Traveller pitches. A separate Gypsy
and Traveller Site Allocations Development Plan Document is also being prepared to help identify and allocate
appropriate sites to meet the need for this type of accommodation.
56Section Five
Housing5.1 Policy H1: Housing allocations
Policy H1
Housing allocations
1. The following sites, as shown on the Policies Map, are allocated for housing development:
Site H1a
Clipstone Road East
This site is allocated for approximately 511 new
homes subject to:
provision of onsite open space as part of
green corridors through the development to
enable access to the Timberland Trail;
provision of features to protect and, if
possible, enhance water quality and flow of
Vicar Water; and
contributionstowardtheimprovementofbus
stops within the vicinity of the site; and.
anapplicationspecificassessmenttoidentify
and address impacts on nightjar and
woodlark and their habitats.
Masterplans submitted in support of this development
(in accordance with Policy P4) should have regard to
the indicative masterplan set out in Appendix 8.
Site H1b
Land off Skegby Lane
This site is allocated for approximately 215 new
homes subject to:
provision of a landscape buffer along the
western boundary of the site to avoid
coalescence with Sutton in Ashfield;
Continued opposite
Site H1b continued
addressing low soil permeability through
appropriate measures;
enhanced cycle provision along or parallel
to Skegby Lane;
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvementsatMillenniumGreen(Skegby
Lane); and
provision of walking and cycling
improvements to existing pathways leading
to nearby open space, hospitals, shops and
the Timberland Trail.
Contributionswillberequiredtomitigatetheimpact
of development on the following junctions:
Kings Mill Road/ Beck Lane/ B6014 Skegby
Lane/ Mansfield Road;
Sutton Road / Skegby Lane/ Sheepbridge
Lane; and
anyfurtherjunctionsthatareidentifiedbythe
TransportAssessmentrequiredtosupporta
future planning application for the site.
5.5Masterplans submitted in support of this
development (in accordance with Policy P4) should
have regard to the indicative masterplan set out in
Appendix 8.
57Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: HousingSite H1c
Fields Farm, Abbott Road
This site is allocated for approximately 200 new
homes subject to:
retention and enhancement of the existing
public rights of way;
enhancementofhabitatconnectionsbetween
existing woodland on-site and nearby,
through the retention and creation of habitat
areas on-site;
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvementsonAbbottRoadPlayingField;
any development proposals would need to
be supported by detailed desk based
assessment and the results of a staged
pre-determination programme of
archaeological investigation on the basis of
anapprovedWrittenSchemeofInvestigation;
protectionofthebuildingsandotherfeatures
that make up the non-designated local
heritage asset at Ashland Farm; and
addressing low soil permeability through
appropriate measures.
Contributionswillberequiredtomitigatetheimpact
of development on the following junctions:
Kings Mill Road/ Beck Lane/ B6014 Skegby
Lane/ Mansfield Road;
Sutton Road / Skegby Lane/ Sheepbridge
Lane; and
anyfurtherjunctionsthatareidentifiedbythe
TransportAssessmentrequiredtosupporta
future planning application for the site.
5.6Masterplans submitted in support of this
development (in accordance with Policy P4) should
have regard to the indicative masterplan set out in
Appendix 8.
Site H1d
Three Thorn Hollows Farm
This site is allocated for approximately 200 new
homes subject to:
the provision of enhanced walking and
cycling links to the Mansfield Way;
the creation and maintenance of an
appropriate ecological buffers to Rainworth
LakesSSSI,FoulEvilBrookandlocalwildlife
site located to the south;
provision of onsite open space including
play/formal recreational provision;
provision of features to protect and, if
possible, enhance water quality and flow of
Foul Evil Brook and Rainworth Water;
adesign,layoutanddensitythatisreflective
of the rural character of Rainworth;
any development proposals would need to
be supported by detailed desk based
assessment and the results of a staged
pre-determination programme of
archaeological investigation on the basis of
anapprovedWrittenSchemeofInvestigation;
protectionofthebuildingsandotherfeatures
that make up the non-designated local
heritageassetatThreeThornHollowsFarm;
and
provision of sympathetic field boundaries
alongBlidworthLaneandthesouthernedge
of site boundary which complement the
Sherwood landscape character.
Contributionswillberequiredtomitigatetheimpact
of development on the following junctions:
A6176 MARR/ A6191 Southwell Road, and
anyfurtherjunctionsthatareidentifiedbythe
TransportAssessmentrequiredtosupporta
future planning application for the site.
585.7Masterplans submitted in support of this
development (in accordance with Policy P4) should
have regard to the indicative masterplan set out in
Appendix 8.
Site H1e
Land at Redruth Drive
This site is allocated for approximately 178 new
homes subject to:
the provision of enhanced walking and
cycling links to Old Newark Road and
Sherwood Avenue to facilitate improved
access to the Mansfield Way; and
provision of onsite open space including
play/formal recreational provision.
Contributionswillberequiredtomitigatetheimpact
of development on the following junctions:
A6191 Southwell Road / Oaktree Lane/
Adams Way;
A6191 Southwell Road/ Berryhill Lane;
A6191 / Bellamy Road; and
anyfurtherjunctionsthatareidentifiedbythe
TransportAssessmentrequiredtosupporta
future planning application for the site.
Site H1f
Former Rosebrook Primary School
This site is allocated for approximately 134 new
homes subject to:
the provision cycling and walking routes
connecting with and along Hall Barn Lane
and Hall Barn Lane open space;
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvementsatAbbottRoadPlayingField;
and
any development proposals would need to
be supported by detailed desk based
assessment and the results of a staged
pre-determination programme of
archaeological investigation on the basis of
anapprovedWrittenSchemeofInvestigation;
and
the positioning of the site access off Abbott
Road (A6075).
Contributionswillberequiredtomitigatetheimpact
of development on the following junctions:
Chesterfield Road/ Debdale Lane; and
anyfurtherjunctionsthatareidentifiedbythe
TransportAssessmentrequiredtosupporta
future planning application for the site.
59Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: HousingSite H1g
Abbott Road
This site is allocated for approximately 102 new
homes subject to:
the on-site provision of open space with
play/formal provision enhancements and to
maintain access for local residents;
any development proposals would need to
be supported by detailed desk based
assessment and the results of a staged
pre-determination programme of
archaeological investigation on the basis of
anapprovedWrittenSchemeofInvestigation;
addressing low soil permeability through
appropriate measures; and
theretentionandenhancementoftheon-site
football pitches and associated facilities.
Contributionswillberequiredtomitigatetheimpact
of development on the following junctions:
Kings Mill Road/ Beck Lane/ B6014 Skegby
Lane / Mansfield Road;
Sutton Road / Skegby Lane/ Sheepbridge
Lane; and
Any further junctions that are identified by
the Transport Assessment required to
support a future planning application for the
site.
Masterplans submitted in support of this development
(in accordance with Policy P4) should have regard to
the indicative masterplan set out in Appendix 8.
5.8The site includes existing playing pitches and a
former cycle proficiency site which has been used as
open space. The playing pitches should retained on
site. Open space of enhanced value should also be
provided on site. This could take the form of a more
intensive use which takes up a smaller area with
improved access for residents, including those withdisabilities. A nearby site (H1f - Former Rosebrook
Primary School) will also contribute towards this
provision.
Site H1h
Centenary Road
This site is allocated for approximately 95 new
homes subject to:
the improvement of access to open space
and strategic green infrastructure networks
through the integration and enhancement of
the adjacent footpath connecting Broomhill
Lane and Albion Street; and
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Chesterfield Road Park.
Site H1i
Former Mansfield Brewery (part a)
This site is allocated for approximately 70 new
homes subject to:
the creation of new habitats alongside
sustainable drainage systems (SuDS)
provided on-site;
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Titchfield Park;
protectionofthebuildingsandotherfeatures
that make up the nearby heritage asset
includingconservationareas,listedbuildings
and non-designated heritage assets; and
any development proposals would need to
be supported by detailed desk based
archaeology assessment and the results of
a staged pre-determination programme of
archaeological investigation on the basis of
anapprovedWrittenSchemeofInvestigation.
60Site H1j
Bellamy Road
This site is allocated for approximately 40 new
homes subject to:
improved road crossings on Adams Way to
facilitateaccesstoKingGeorgeVPark;and
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements to King George V Park.
5.9This site is currently used as open space. The
nearbyKingGeorgeVParkcanbeimprovedtoaddress
the loss of the open space. This should include the
improvementofpedestriancrossingsoverAdamsWay
to facilitate access.
Site H1k
High Oakham Farm (east)
This site is allocated for approximately 40 new
homes subject to:
thedevelopmentreflectingthelowerdensity
character of the area;
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Oakham LNR and Quarry
Lane LNR;
improvement of access to Shining Cliff
Plantation;
protectionofthebuildingsandotherfeatures
that make up the non-designated local
heritage asset at High Oakham Central
School,HighOakhamHouse,HighOakham
Farm, Inglebrook High Oakham Road) ; and
enhanced habitat connections between
on-site woodland / open parkland habitats
and adjacent woodland.
Site H1l
Land off Balmoral Drive
This site is allocated for approximately 35 new
homes subject to:
integration and enhancement of pathways
leading to Oxclose Wood; and
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Burlington Drive and
Shaftsbury Avenue Allotments.
Site H1m
Sherwood Close
This site is allocated for approximately 33 new
homes subject to:
the creation of an east-west green corridor
to facilitate improved walking and cycling
connections to the Timberland Trail and
Maun Valley Trail;
an appropriate archaeological assessment
by a suitably qualified person and any
recommended actions being followed; and
anoff-sitecontributiontowardsimprovements
at Sandy Lane allotments.
Site H1n
Ladybrook Lane / Tuckers Lane
This site is allocated for approximately 33 new
homes subject to:
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Chesterfield Road Park.
61Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: HousingSite H1o
Hermitage Mill
This site is allocated for approximately 32 new
homes and a care home subject to:
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Hermitage LNR and
Oakham LNR;
theprotectionoftheGradeIIlistedbuildings
on and adjacent to the site; and
an appropriate archaeological assessment
by a suitably qualified person and any
recommended actions being followed.
Site H1p
South of Debdale Lane
This site is allocated for approximately 32 new
homes subject to:
anoff-sitecontributiontowardsimprovements
at Burlington Drive open space;
protection and enhancement of the existing
public right of way;
creation and maintenance of an appropriate
habitat buffer adjacent to the local wildlife
site;
provisionofappropriateaccessmanagement
measures to avoid or minimise impacts on
designated sites; and
any development proposals would need to
be supported by detailed desk based
archaeology assessment and the results of
a staged pre-determination programme of
archaeological investigation on the basis of
anapprovedWrittenSchemeofInvestigation.
Site H1q
Land off Holly Road
This site is allocated for approximately 16 new
homes subject to:
creation of north-south linkages to nearby
open space at Flint Avenue and Lark Hills;
and
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Lark Hills open space.
Site H1r
Land at Cox's Lane
This site is allocated for approximately 14 new
homes subject to:
anoff-sitecontributiontowardsimprovements
atLongyardsAllotments/TheLordsGround;
protectionofthebuildingsandotherfeatures
that make up the nearby non-designated
local heritage asset; and
protection of public rights of way to improve
access along Northfield Lane.
62Site H1s
Land off Ley Lane
This site is allocated for approximately 14 new
homes subject to:
anoff-sitecontributiontowardsimprovements
at Warsop Road open space and Leeming
Lane open space;
any development proposals would need to
be supported by detailed desk based
archaeology assessment and the results of
a staged pre-determination programme of
archaeological investigation on the basis of
anapprovedWrittenSchemeofInvestigation;
and
thepatternofdevelopmentshouldpositively
respectthehistoriccharacteralongLeyLane.
Site H1t
Land off Rosemary Street
This site is allocated for approximately 10 new
homes subject to:
an off-site open space contribution towards
improvements at Chesterfield Road Park.
Site H1u
Stonebridge Lane / Sookholme Lane, Market
Warsop
This site is allocated for approximately 400 new
homes subject to:
provision of open space with play/formal
provision as part of north-south green
corridorswhichhelpdirectpeopleawayfrom
theSSSIandanoff-sitecontributiontowards
improvements at Carr Lane Park;
protection of public rights of way as part of
the development to improve access to the
strategic green infrastructure network;
creation and maintenance of appropriate
habitatbufferstotheadjacentHillsandHoles
SSSI,RiverMedencorridorandrailwaylines;
appropriate access arrangements to
avoid/minimiseimpactsondesignatedsites;
and
retention of hedgerows on-site, especially
along Sookholme Lane.
Contributionswillberequiredtomitigatetheimpact
of development on the following junctions:
A60 Mansfield Road/Vale Avenue/Askew
Lane;
A60 Church Street/ Wood Street Junction,
Warsop;
A60 / Eastlands Lane;
A60 /B6407 Sooholme Road;
A60 Leeming Lane North / A6075 Peafield
Lane/ Sandgate Road;
A60 Leeming Lane South / A6075 Warsop
Road; and
A60 Leeming Lane South / A6117 Old Mill
Lane / Butt Lane.
63Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: HousingSite H1v
Sherwood Street / Oakfield Lane, Market
Warsop
This site is allocated for approximately 36 new
homes subject to:
anoff-sitecontributiontowardsimprovements
at Cottage Lane open space.
Site H1w
Former Warsop Vale School, Warsop Vale
This site is allocated for approximately 10 new
homes subject to:
anoff-sitecontributiontowardsimprovements
at Warsop Vale open space.
64Explanation
5.10Policy H1 sets out criteria for each of the 24
housingallocations(H1athroughH1x),asabove.These
criteria address specific needs as identified in the local
plan evidence base. It is important that Policy H1 is
read along-side the entire suite of policies in the Local
Plan, as there are likely to be other issues which will
need to be considered and addressed, as appropriate
(e.g. flood risk , landscape character). Additionally,
PolicyP4(Comprehensivedevelopment)andAppendix
8 set out requirements for master plans for large
development sites (5 hectares and above or 150
dwellings). Appendix8providesillustrativemasterplans
forlargehousingallocationslocatedontheurbanedge,
including the strategic sites at Pleasely Hill Farm and
Land off Jubilee Way.
5.11Paragraph 61 of the NPPF (2018) sets out that
the determination of the number of homes required
should be based on the standardised housing
methodology set out in national planning guidance.
This methodology uses household projections and
information about the affordability of properties to
establish the number of homes needed in the local
area. Applying this methodology results in a local
housingneedfor5,580homesovertheplanperiod(an
average of 279 homes per year). However, due to the
growth aspirations of the council and the government
itisproposedtosetthehousingtargetforthelocalplan
as 6,500 homes (325 homes per year).
5.126,500 homes / 325 homes per year will be
the basis for calculating the five year supply of
deliverable housing land and whethertheLocal Planis
deliveringthenumberofhomesrequired.PolicyH1will
help ensure that the council is able to demonstrate thenationalrequirementtobemaintainedatalltimes,ofat
least a five year supply of deliverable housing land in
accordance with NPPF (2018), paragraph 74.
5.13In order to ensure the delivery of sufficient
houses to meet the plan requirement of 6,500 homes,
Policy H1 provides for the housing target plus an
additionalallowanceinthesupplyofhousingland.This
flexibility allowance provides sufficient land and
developmentopportunitiestoenablethemarkettomeet
the district's housing requirement over the plan period
allowing for:
a slower delivery than expected on housing
allocations;
housing sites with planning permission which are
not developed; and
changing economic circumstances affecting the
take-up of housing.
5.14More details on the Housing Target and how it
has been established can be found in the Housing
Technical Paper, 2018.
5.15The Housing Target will be met from a variety
of sources including completions, extant planning
permission, windfall and proposed new housing
allocations. Table 5.1 below sets out the contribution
from various sources. More details can be found in the
SiteSelectionTechnicalPaper,2018. Overall,theLocal
Plan delivers the housing target of 6,500 plus an
additionalbufferof13%; thisincreasesto28%withthe
twonewSustainableUrbanExtensionsatPleasleyHill
Farm and Jubilee Way. In addition, the committed site
under construction at Berry Hill is expected to deliver
over 400 homes outside the plan period.
Table 5.1 Sources of housing land supply during the plan period (as at 1st April 2018)
1935 Completions (already built)
3941 Commitments (with planning permission - including those listed in H2 and SU3)
1169 Sustainable Urban Extensions (those listed in SUE 1-2)
1763 On Allocated Housing Sites (those listed in H1)
380 Windfall Allowance
* This table shows only the homes expected to be delivered during the plan period. The total number of homes to
be built on site, including those expected to be delivered after the plan period, are identified in Policies H1, H2 and
SUE1-3.
65Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: Housing5.16Policy H1 allocates land for housing in
accordancewiththesettlementhierarchyandstrategic
aimsofPolicyS2.Theoverarchingapproachisfor90%
of homes to be provided within or adjacent to the
Mansfield urban area (including Rainworth) and 10%
within or adjacent to the settlements within Warsop
Parish.
5.17An important consideration in choosing to
allocate parcels of land for housing is identifying those
which are deliverable . Being considered deliverable
meansthattheyareavailableandinasuitablelocation
fordevelopmentnow,aswellasbeingfinanciallyviable
tobedeveloped,witharealisticprospectofaresidential
scheme coming forward in the short term. Each
allocated site has been assessed through the Housing
and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA)
and identified as either deliverable within the first five
yearsoftheplanperiod,ordevelopablelaterwithinthe
plan period.
5.18Delivery of the sites will not be phased by the
Local Plan. An envisaged start date and duration of
constructing for each scheme has been established
based on a number of factors. In some instances,
significant site preparation or the provision of
infrastructuremayberequiredbeforedevelopmentcan
commence. The rate at which sites will be developedonce construction has started will also vary depending
on such influences such as, the size of the site and the
number of developers that are active on it. However,
thereisnothingtostopsitescomingforwardearlierthan
envisaged if matters are addressed earlier than
expected.
5.19Alloftheseconsiderationshavebeentakeninto
account in providing a balanced provision of allocated
landsufficienttomaintainacontinuousfiveyearsupply
of available land, and at least meet the overall housing
requirement by 2033. The complete trajectory of how
manydwellingsperyearareenvisagedtobedeveloped
for housing over the plan period is set out in Appendix
5.
5.20Planning applications should be supported by
sufficient information such as a transport statement or
transport assessment setting out the transport impacts
of the proposal to help the council make an informed
assessment of the potential impact and to help secure
the necessary supporting transport infrastructure. As
part of submitting any future planning application
consultation should be held with the Local Education
Authoritytoestablishthelevelofeducationcontribution
required to support development. Reference can also
be had to the Education Technical Paper 2018 which
iscorrectattimeofpublicationbutissubjecttochange.
Table 5.2 Policy H1 - Supporting information
Policy H1: Housing allocations
Yes – NPPF (2012) paragraphs 17, 47, 48 and 50. NPPF (2018) paragraphs 61 and 74. Does it meet national planning policy?
Nottingham Outer Strategic Housing Market Assessment, 2015; What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018;
Mansfield Transport Study, 2018; and
Whole Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment, 2018.
This policy will be delivered through the development management process. How will it be delivered?
1, and 3 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
665.2 Policy H2: Committed housing sites
Policy H2
Committed housing sites
1. The following sites have planning permission and are allocated for new homes:
Mansfield urban area
No. of homes Site
23 Former Mansfield Brewery (part B)
54 Former Mansfield General Hospital
64 Allotment site at Pump Hollow Road
63 Sandy Lane
23 Land at Windmill Lane (former nursery)
46 Land off Sherwood Oaks Close
66 Former Evans Halshaw site
39 Land to the rear of 28 High Oakham Hill
49 Kirkland Avenue Industrial Park
28 Land at High Oakham House
150 Land North of Skegby Lane
430 Penniment Farm
21 Land at the corner of Quarry Lane
152 Pleasley Hill Regeneration Area
21 Bath Mill
25 Land at Hermitage Lane
12 Land to the rear of 183 Clipstone Road West
14 Land to the rear of 66-70 Clipstone Road West
21 18 Burns Street
140 Park Hall Farm (SIte A)
10 Park Hall Farm (Site B)
17 Land at 7 Oxclose Lane
107 Former Mansfield Sand Co
8 20 Abbott Road
Continued  overleaf
67Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: Housing
5 284 Berry Hill Lane
18 Former Miners OfficesPolicy H2 continued
Mansfield urban area
No. of homes Site
43 The Ridge
9 Birchlands/Old Mill Lane
7 Former garage site Alexandra Avenue
8 Ashmead Chambers
31 Land off Portland Street (West)
8 10A Montague Street
7 Land adj 27, Redgate Street
7 Adj 188, Southwell Road East
9 52 Ratcliffe Gate
10 Yasmee
6 Land at Northfield House
Warsop Parish
No. of homes Site
31 Wood Lane, Church Warsop
32 Welbeck Farm
25 Moorfield Farm
9 Oak Garage
10 Elksley House
Explanation
5.21As at April 2018, some 3,092 dwellings had the
benefit of planning permission for housing and were
considered deliverable during the plan period. This
includesthesiteatBerryHillwhichiscoveredbyPolicy
SUE3.5.22Theprincipleofdevelopmentonthesesiteshas
already been established and it is not possible for the
council to reverse these decisions unless the
permissions were to lapse. However, if this did happen
the council would need to have robust reasons for not
renewing permission. Generally speaking, the council
would wish to support renewals on these sites and
Policy H2 allows for this.
Table 5.3 Policy H2 - Supporting information
Policy H2: Committed housing sites - Mansfield urban area
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 47, and 49. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018. What evidence has informed this policy?
Through the development management process.Masterplans How will it be delivered?
1 and 3 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
685.3 Policy H3: Housing density and mix
Policy H3
Housing density and mix
1. Development proposals of ten or more dwellings will be expected to:
a. be built at a density that makes efficient use of the site with layouts that respect the character and
appearance of the local area; and
b. provide a range of dwelling sizes and types reflective of housing needs and the achievement of
mixed and balanced communities.
Explanation
5.23The density of residential development is one
ofthekeycomponentsforensuringthatnewhomesare
in keeping with the existing character of an area. The
NPPF,atparagraph47(fifthbulletpoint),requireslocal
planning authorities to set out their own approach to
housing density to reflect local circumstances.
5.24The density of residential development needs
to deliver efficient use of land, whilst respecting the
character of the area around the site. This can only be
assessedonasitebysitebasis,butadensitybetween
30 and 35 dwellings per hectare is likely to prove
acceptableinalargenumberofcircumstances,although
lowerorhigherdensitiescouldbeacceptabledepending
on site specific issues. These include, for example, the
proximityofheritageassets,theaccessibilityofthesiteto public transport and the size and type of adjacent
properties. Developers are advised to contact the
council to discuss their schemes at an early stage.
5.25The second part of the policy requires sites of
more than ten dwellings to provide a range of different
types of housing reflecting those needed in the area.
Thisaccordswithparagraph50(firstbulletpoint)ofthe
NPPF which requires that the council should “plan for
a mix of housing based on current and future
demographic trends, market trends and the needs of
different groups in the community”.
5.26Information on the need for different sizes and
types of properties in Mansfield district is contained in
both the SHMA at page 197 and a specific study
(Housing Needs of Particular Groups) at pages 84 and
88.Thesesetoutrequirementsforthemixofproperties
over the plan period as set out in Table 5.4:
Table 5.4 Housing mix
4 bed 3 bed 2 bed 1 bed
20% 45% 30% 5% Market
5% 40% 40% 15% Low-cost home ownership
5% 20% 35% 40% Affordable housing (rented)
5.27Thispolicydoesnotsetspecificrequirementsthatmustbemetbyanindividualsiteorphaseofadevelopment,
but is intended to act as a guide. Account will also be taken of the character and scale of the site and the wider
area. It will be easier for larger sites to deliver a mix while a town centre site is unlikely to deliver 4+bed properties.
The provision of bungalows will be supported on sites as these may be particularly attractive to older people which
may assist in encouraging households to downsize, as set out in the Housing Needs of Particular Groups Report
page 89. Development proposals will not be supported where the mix varies substantially from the mix identified
above, unless there are specific benefits associated with the mix of homes proposed.
69Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: Housing5.28Theoverallhousingmixdeliveredwillbemonitoredaspartoftheannualmonitoringprocess.Thiswillindicate
whether Policy H3 is effective in delivering the types of properties needed or whether a different approach may be
required as part of reviewing the Local Plan.
5.29To enable this policy to be effectively applied and monitored, planning applications and design and access
statements must contain the following information:
gross site area;
net developable area;
number of dwellings per hectare; and
housing mix (for full applications and reserved matters).
5.30The council will produce a Design Supplementary Planning Document which will give further guidance on
density.
Table 5.5 Policy H3 - Supporting information
Policy H3: Housing density and mix
Yes, NPPF paragraphs 47 and 50. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Housing Needs of Particular Groups, 2018. What evidence has informed this policy?
Through the development management process and the determination of planning applications. How will it be delivered?
3, 5, 7 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
705.4 Policy H4: Affordable housing
Policy H4
Affordable housing
1. The proportions of affordable housing required on market housing sites are:
a. within Zone1(asshowninAppendix 6):
i. 10% on greenfield land; or
ii. 5% on brownfield land.
b. within Zone2(asshowninAppendix 6):
i. 20% on greenfield land; or
ii. 10% on brownfield land.
2. These proportions apply to sites of:
a. 10 or more dwellings; or,
b. where the site area is 0.5 hectares or more.
3. The council will consider the type of property and tenure in relation to identified needs.
4. Off-site commuted sums of an equivalent value may be made in lieu of on-site provision (in total or in
part) where on-site provision is satisfactorily demonstrated not to be justified or where such off-site
contributions can be shown to contribute to the successful development of other affordable housing and
or regeneration schemes within the district.
5.Proposalswhichdonotmeettheabovepolicyrequirementswillonlybeacceptable,whereitissatisfactorily
demonstrated, that a different level or mix of affordable housing is required to make the development
viable and the approach contributes towards creating mixed and balanced communities.
71
Five: HousingMansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Explanation
5.31The NPPF 2018 (Annex 2: Glossary) defines
affordablehousingasaffordablehousingforrent,starter
homes, discounted market sales housing and other
affordable routes to home ownership. Eligibility is
determinedwithregardtolocalincomesandlocalhouse
prices.
Affordablehousingforrent: meetsallofthefollowing
conditions:
a. the rent is set in accordance with the
Government’s rent policy for Social Rent or
Affordable Rent, or is at least 20% below local
market rents (including service charges where
applicable);
b.thelandlordisaregisteredprovider,exceptwhere
itisincludedaspartofaBuildtoRentscheme(in
which case the landlord need not be a registered
provider); and
c. it includes provisions to remain at an affordable
price for future eligible households, or for the
subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable
housing provision.
For Build to Rent schemes, affordable housing for rent
(i.e. Affordable Private Rent) is expected to be the
normal form of affordable housing provision.
Starterhomes: ishousingasdefinedinSections2and
3 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016 and any
subsequent secondary legislation made under these
sections.
Discounted market sales housing: is that sold at a
discount of at least 20% below local market value.
Eligibilityisdeterminedwithregardtolocalincomesand
local house prices. Provisions should be in place to
ensurehousingremainsatadiscountforfutureeligible
households.
Other affordable routes to home ownership: is
housing provided for sale that provides a route to
ownership for those who could not achieve home
ownership through the market. It includes shared
ownership,relevantequityloans,otherlowcosthomes
forsale(atapriceequivalenttoatleast20%belowlocal
market value) and rent to buy (which includes a period
of intermediate rent).
5.32Housingthatdoesnotmeettheabovedefinition
ofaffordablehousingsuchaslow-costmarkethousing,
is not defined as affordable housing for the purpose of
this policy.5.33The need for affordable housing has been
established in the SHMA 2015 which identifies 64
dwellingsperannumtobeprovidedtomeetbothcurrent
and future needs in the district.
5.34Atotalof205affordablenew housinghasbeen
delivered since the beginning of the plan period 2013.
In the period April 2013 to April 2018 some 1,385
new dwellings were built which equates to 15% of all
new builds.
5.35The council as part of its Housing Revenue
Account(HRA)deliveryplanhasalsoidentifiedsix sites
to deliver around 100 affordable homes between
2018and2023.Thesewillbedeliveredonthefollowing
sites:
Rosemary Avenue;
Newark Way, Close and Drive;
Bellamy Road Centre;
Sandy Lane;
Manor Road; and
Shirland Avenue.
5.36Thispolicyseekstomaximiseaffordablehousing
delivery whilst adopting a flexible approach which
recognises that viability varies across the district and
that on-site provision may not always be appropriate.
5.37The Mansfield Whole Plan and Community
Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment, 2018 tested
the viability of affordable housing on both brownfield
and greenfield sites. The study considered evidence
ofresidentiallandandpropertyvaluesacrossMansfield
district, and concluded that there were sufficient
distinctionsbetweensalespricestowarrantdifferential
value assumptions being made in the Whole Plan
Viability Assessment based on geographical zones.
Appendix 6 shows the geographical location to which
Policy H4 will apply.
5.38Off-sitecommutedsums(intotalorinpart)may
be made rather than on-site contributions where there
is evidence to suggest that there are site specific
constraints or demonstrable viability issues, or there is
already a substantial amount of affordable housing in
close proximity to the site. Off-site contributions may
alsobeappropriatewhereitcanbeshown,indiscussion
with the council, that they can contribute to the
successful provision of affordable housing elsewhere
withinthedistrictand/orwhereaffordablehousingneed
maybemorepressing,includingkeyregenerationsites
and the regeneration of existing social housing areas.
725.39The council will determine the mix of
rented/intermediateaffordablehousingandthesizeand
type of homes to be delivered, having regard to up to
date evidence of local housing need and discussions
with registered affordable housing providers as
appropriate. This will ensure that delivery is well
matched to local needs at the time when development
is being delivered.5.40When appropriate, the council will work with
developers to secure available funding from Homes
England or other sources to help deliver affordable
housing on schemes were viability is an issue.
5.41The council will prepare a Supplementary
Planning Document on affordable housing providing
further guidance on affordable housing including
viability, and the justification for off site provision.
Figure 5.1 Affordable housing zones as of October 2017
Table 5.6 Policy H4 - Supporting information
Policy H4: Affordable housing
Yes -NPPF Paragraphs 47, 50, 54, 159, 173, 174, and 177 Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Nottingham Outer Strategic Housing Market Assessment, 2015; and What evidence has informed this policy?
73Whole Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment, 2018.
Through the development management process, having regard to up to date local need assessments. Funding
fromHomesEnglandwillbesoughtwereavailableandsuitabletoassistwiththedeliveryofaffordablehousing.How will it be delivered?
3 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
Five: HousingMansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
5.5PolicyH5:Customandself-buildhomes
Policy H5
Custom and self-build homes
1. Proposals for self-build and/or custom housing will be supported provided the following criteria are met:
a. itiswithintheboundaryofasettlementoraccordswithPolicyS5(Developmentinthecountryside);
b. itisofahighstandardofdesignanddoesnotadverselyaffecttheareabyreasonofitsscale,bulk,
form, layout or materials;
c. itwouldnotcauseasignificantadverseimpactontheamenityofnearbyresidentsoroccupiers;and
d. there is no significant adverse impact on highway safety and appropriate provision for parking is
made.
Explanation
5.42Self build or custom build housing is housing
built or commissioned by individuals (or groups of
individuals) for their own occupation. The Government
considers that self build is a way to widen housing
choice, enable delivery of the homes people actually
wantandprovideworkforsmallbuilders.Thedefinition
includes:
self build homes – where a person manages the
designandconstructionandmayundertakesome
of the building work or contract it to others (which
may include kit houses);
custom build homes- after deciding on a design,
a contractor is employed to do all of the building
work; and
group projects - where a group of people set
themselves up as an organisation to procure the
constructionofanumberofhomesasacollective.5.43The council is required to keep a register of
persons wishing to self or custom build and to have
regard to that register as a material planning
consideration when preparing Local Plans and
determining planning applications.
74Table 5.7 Policy H5 - Supporting information
Policy H5: Custom and self-build dwellings
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 32, 50, 56, 57, 59, 61, 63, 64, 120, and 159. Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Mansfield Nottingham Outer Strategic Housing Market Assessment, 2015;
Whole Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment, 2018; and
Mansfield self-build and custom house building registers.
Through the development management process . All housing and mixed use developments providing 100 or
more dwellings will be required to comply with Policy H5. Further guidance will also be set out in a Custom and
Self Build SPD.How will it be delivered?
3 and 5. Which local plan objectives will it meet?5.6 Policy H6: Specialist housing
Policy H6
Specialist housing
1. DevelopmentproposalsforspecialisthousingwhichfallswithinUseClassC2,suchasshelteredand
extracareaccommodation,willbesupportedonsiteswithinexistingorproposedresidentialareasprovided
theyare:
a. convenientlysituatedinrelationtolocalretail,communityservicesandpublictransportfacilities;
and
b.areofadesign,layoutandaccessibilitysuitableforoccupationbypeoplewithdisabilitiesandpeople
withcareneeds.
Explanation
5.44Oneofthekeychallengesfacedbythecountry
ishowtoadapttoanageingpopulation.Oneofthe
waysinwhichtheplanningsystemcanhelpisby
ensuringthatsufficientaccommodationisprovidedto
meetpeoples'needsastheychangeovertheirlifetime.
Thiscanincludetheprovisionofbungalowsorsmaller
accommodationtoallowpeopletodownsize,ensuring
thatapercentageofnewhomesmeetshigherstandards
requiredbyPartM4(2)oftheBuildingRegulationsand
alsosupportingthedevelopmentofresidentialcare
homes.5.45Thispolicyappliestoresidentialuseswhichfall
underC2oftheUseClassOrder;thisincludes
residentialcarehomes,hospitalsandnursinghomes.
Overtheplanperiod,theneedforthistypeof
accommodationasaresultoftheageingpopulationis
identifiedas400bedspaces.Thepolicysupports
provisionofC2developmentsinlocationswhichhave
goodaccessibilitytolocalfacilities,especiallyhealth
facilities,andalsoseekstoensurethatthedesignand
layoutissuitedtothefutureresidents.
Table 5.8 Policy H6 - Supporting information
Policy H6: Specialist housing
Yes-NPPFparagraphs50,56,57,69,and159. Does it meet national planning policy?
MansfieldNottinghamOuterStrategicHousingMarketAssessment,2015: What evidence has informed this policy?
WholePlanandCommunityInfrastructureLevyViabilityAssessment,2018;and
MansfieldHousingNeedsofParticularGroups,2018.
Throughthedevelopmentmanagementprocessandthedeterminationof planningapplicationsforC2uses. How will it be delivered?
2,3 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
75MansfieldDistrictLocalPlan2013-2033
Five: Housing5.7 Policy H7: Houses in multiple
occupation and bedsit accommodation
Policy H7
Houses in multiple occupation and bedsit accommodation
1. Development proposals relating to the multiple residential occupation of buildings, including apartments
and/or bedsit accommodation, will be supported where it would:
a. be appropriate in respect of the characteristics of the site, including whether the proposal would
result in the re-use of a vacant building or disused land in accordance with wider regeneration
benefits;
b. contribute to the achievement of mixed and balanced communities; and
c. provideadequateinternalaccommodationandexternalprivateamenityspacewithoutcausingany
significantly adverse impact on the amenity enjoyed by the occupiers of adjacent properties.
Explanation
5.46Over recent years there has been a growth in the number of homes in multiple occupation (HMO) within
Mansfield. WhileHMOsprovideflexibleaccommodation,thereisapotentialforthemtobeconcentratedintosmall
areasadverselyaffectingthemixandbalanceofcommunities. ThepolicyseekstoensurethatproposalsforHMOs,
or similar developments, are appropriate to the local area, would lead to a mixed and balanced community and
provide appropriate living conditions for residents of the HMO and other nearby residents.
5.47HMO developments raise issues relating to residential amenity and the visual character of the areas, for
example: as a result of additional windows, external staircases, parking on and off-site, cycle storage, bin storage
and access for rubbish collection, etc. The assessment of the individual characteristics of the proposal and its
immediate locality may include (but is not limited to):
its size;
location;
nature of and relationship of the site to neighbouring uses;
availability of / scope for external amenity space;
parking provision; and
any other special character or attributes that, having regard to the scale and intensity of the proposal, could
facilitate/limit suitability for that purpose, or for alternative use.
765.48In determining whether the proposal will contribute to the creation of mixed and balanced communities,
consideration will be given to the number and location of existing HMOs. A report published by the Government in
2008, “Evidence Gathering: Housing in Multiple Occupation and possible planning responses – Final Report”
recognises the impacts that can occur as a result of high concentrations of HMOs. These include:
anti-social behaviour, noise and nuisance;
imbalanced and unsustainable communities;
negative effects on the physical environment and streetscape;
pressure upon parking provision;
increased crime;
growth in the private rented sector at the expense of owner-occupation;
pressure upon local facilities; and
restructuring of retail, commercial services and recreational facilities to suit the lifestyles of the predominant
population.
5.49Where the existing number in the local area is considered to adversely impact the community, proposals
may not be supported unless there are other benefits for the local community, such as the reuse of building or site
that has been vacant for a substantial period of time.
Table 5.9 Policy H7 - Supporting information
Holicy H7: Houses in multiple occupation and bedsit accommodation
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17 (bullet point 4,), 50, 51, 58, 69 and 120. Does it meet national planning policy?
Evidence Gathering: Housing in Multiple Occupation and possible planning responses – Final Report , DCLG,
2008; andWhat evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Housing Needs of Particular Groups, 2018.
Through the development management process and the determination of planning applications How will it be delivered?
1, 3 and 5 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
77Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: Housing5.8PolicyH8:AccommodationforGypsies,
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
Policy H8
Accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
1. Provision will be made to meet the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers between 2013 and
2033 for a minimum of:
a. 2017-22: two pitches and one transit /stopping place;
b. 2022-33: one pitch and zero transit /stopping place; and
c. and any arising need for travelling show people plots.
2. The council is preparing a Gypsy and Travellers Site Allocation Development Plan Document (DPD) to
allocate suitable site/s to meet the identified need set out in 1 a - c above.
3. Proposals for new sites, and extensions/improvements to existing permitted or lawful sites, will be
supported where they meet the following criteria:
a. belocatedwithreasonableaccesstoarangeofservices,suchasshops,schools,welfarefacilities
or public transport;
b. be proportionate to the scale of the nearest settlement; its local services and infrastructure;
c. have suitable highway access, and is not detrimental to public highway safety;
d. provides for adequate on-site parking and turning of vehicles as well as appropriate facilities for
servicingandstorage,andinthecaseofashowpeoplesitesufficientspaceforfairgroundequipment
maintenance;
e. be capable of being provided with adequate services including water supply, power, drainage,
sewage disposal and waste disposal facilities;
f. be compatible with landscape, environment, heritage and biodiversity as well as the physical and
visual character of the area;
g. would not significantly harm the amenities of neighbouring properties and land uses; and
h. would be appropriately located in terms of flood risk.
4. Authorised existing and new sites will be safeguarded for Gypsy, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
groups unless they are no longer required to meet identified need.
78Explanation
5.50Inprovidingforthehousingneedsforthewhole
population,wemustalsomeettheneedsofGypsies
andTravellersandTravellingShowpeople.ThePlanning
PolicyforTravellerSites(PPTS)August2015,which
relatestoGypsies,TravellersandTravelling
Showpeople,setsouttheGovernment'splanningpolicy
andshouldbereadinconjunctionwiththeNPPF.
5.51TheGypsyandTravellerAccommodationNeeds
Assessment,2017identifiesthedistrict'sneedsbetween
2013and2033andhasprovidedtheevidenceforPolicy
H8.Localauthoritiesshouldalsoprovideafiveyear
supplyofdeliverablesitesagainsttheselocallyset
targets,aswellasasupplyofdevelopablesitesorbroad
locationsforyears6to19,andwherepossible11to
15.
5.52Theamountofaccommodationneededfor
Gypsies,TravellersandTravellingShowpeopleisvery
smallincomparisontothewiderhousingneeds,but
thecouncilhasaresponsibilitytoaddresstheneed.To
date,nositehasbeenidentifiedwhichissuitableor
availabletoaccommodatetheGypsyandTraveller
needsfortheplanperiod.5.53Permittingnewpitchestomeetneedwillhelp
avoidunauthorisedencampmentsanddevelopments.
MansfieldGypsyandTravellerSiteAllocationsDPD
5.54In2018,thecouncilpreparedaninitial
assessmentofpotentialsitessuitableforGypsyand
Travelleraccommodation.Thisassessmentrevealed
thatnoneofthesesiteswereavailableforthispurpose.
5.55InMay2018,thecouncilresolvedtopreparea
separateMansfieldDistrictGypsyandTravellersSite
AllocationsDPDtoallocatesuitableanddeliverable
site/stomeetthedistrict'sidentifiedneedsupto2033.
Thecouncilalsoresolvedtouseitspowersthroughthe
useofCompulsoryPurchaseOrder(CPO),ifnecessary,
toacquireasuitablesiteandtoconsiderafurther
detailedreportontheoptionsforthedeliveryandfuture
operationandmanagementofallocatedsites.
5.56Thecouncil'sLocalDevelopmentScheme(LDS)
adoptedinMay2018includesatimetableforthe
preparationoftheMansfieldDistrictGypsyand
TravellersSiteAllocationsDPD.
5.57MoreinformationissetoutintheGypsyand
TravellerTechnicalPaper,2018.
Table 5.10 Policy H8 - Supporting information
Policy H8: Accommodation for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Show People
Yes-NPPF Para50,55,69,150,and159. Does it meet national planning policy?
Planningpolicyfortravellersites-Ref:ISBN978-1-4098-4670-3.
MansfieldGypsyandTravellerAccommodationNeedsAssessment,2017;and What evidence has informed this policy?
MansfieldGypsyandTravellerLandAvailabilityAssessment,2018.
Throughthedevelopmentmanagementprocessandthedeterminationofplanningapplicationsfor accommodation
forGypsies,Travellersandtravellingshowpeople.ThecouncilwillprepareaGypsy,Travellerandtravelling
showpeopleSiteallocationDPDtoidentifyanddeliversufficientsite/stomeetMansfielddistrict'srequirements.How will it be delivered?
3 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
79Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Five: Housing6.1Paragraph 19 of the National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF) requires that “significant weight
should be placed on the need to support economic
growth through the planning system”.
6.2Alongside new housing, making sure that there
is sufficient employment land in the right locations to
meet the needs of business and district's workforce is
important in creating a stronger, more diverse, local
economy.Inaddition,aflourishinglocaleconomyworks
strongly towards the objective to raise skills and
qualifications amongst the workforce which is an
important issue locally. This in turn helps to provide
positive benefits for improving longevity of local
businesses and peoples' overall quality of life.
6.3The Derby, Derbyshire, Nottingham and
Nottinghamshire (D2N2) Local Enterprise Partnership
(theLEP)hasproducedaseriesofstrategies,including
the Growth Strategy 2013-2033, with the target to
increase the potential growth in the number of private
sector employee jobs from 30,000 (if current trends
continue) to 55,000 in the ten year period to 2023.
6.4The 'Ashfield and Mansfield - A Plan for Growth'
(2016)reflectsAshfieldandMansfieldDistrictCouncils'
agreement to work together on developing a closer
approach to economic regeneration across the
sub-region. This document provides the strategic
direction for raising prosperity by tackling structural
economic problems which have limited growth in both
areas.The'PlanforGrowth'isconsistentwiththewider
LEP D2N2 Growth Strategy, although not all of the key
growth sectors articulated within the D2N2 Plan are
relevant within the Ashfield and Mansfield areas.
6.5The 'Ashfield and Mansfield - A Plan for Growth'
identifies the following key growth sectors – business
services,healthservices,wholesale,manufacturingand
transport and logistics. These are seen as local
strengths, which will make a significant contribution
towardsrealisingthewiderLocalEnterprisePartnership
(LEP) Growth Strategy.
6.6This Local Plan seeks to develop a strong and
thrivingeconomy,improvingemploymentopportunities
for all skills and diversifying the economy. This reflects
theplan,visionandmainprioritiesidentifiedinthe'Plan
for Growth'. It also helps to meet the council's
aspirations to increase the skills base for existing
residents and employees and to attract a higher skills
baseandmoreknowledgerichindustriesintothearea.
6.7TheLocalPlanwillassistwiththecreationofnew
jobs through:
the allocation of land for employment uses that
are accessible to proposed residential areas;
the protection of key and general employment
areas and the promotion of vacant plots within
these sites for economic development;
supporting sustainable new economic
development outside of these areas;
promoting town centre regeneration;
encouragingemployerstorecruitlocallyandinvest
in training schemes to upskill their work force;
supporting wider service sector jobs, especially
education and health;
ensuring the district, its workforce and physical
environmentisattractivetonewandexistinglocal
businesses wishing to diversify and expand; and
facilitating improvements to transport and
telecommunications including broadband.
Employment land provision - current provision
6.8Inconsideringemploymentlandneeds,wemean
thoseusesfallingwithinUseClassesB1,B2andB8of
the Use Classes Order 2015.
6.9As set out in Policy S2, provision needs to be
madeforaminimumof41hectares(ha)ofemployment
land duringtheplanperiod.Aswithhousing,anumber
ofdevelopmentshavetakenplacesince2013andthere
are also a number of sites where planning permission
has previously been granted for some form of
employmentdevelopment.Itisproposedtoallocatethe
committed employment land at the Berry Hill Strategic
UrbanExtension(PolicySUE3)asitmakesanimportant
contribution to meeting the district's employment land
requirements.
6.10Table6.1identifieswhattheresidualrequirement
is when taking account of completions since 2013 and
existing commitments at 31 March 2018. The Housing
and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA),
2018 identified a number of sites within the key and
generalemploymentareasasbeingsuitable,achievable
and deliverable within the plan period, however on a
number of these sites their availability is unknown.
These sites account for 11.47 hectares (ha) of
employment land and the delivery of these sites will be
supported under Policy E3. A plan of these sites is
provided in Appendix 7.
80Section Six
EmploymentTable 6.1 Residual employment land requirement up-to 2033
Employment Land (ha) Plan period floor space assessment 2013-2033
41 Total floor space requirement (D2N2 Policy On) target 2013-2033
2.38 Total amount of land/floor space developed between 1/04/2013 and 31/03/2018
22 Sites with planning permission at March 2018
11.47 Vacant sites identified within key and general employment areas
5.15 Left to find
6.11It is important that the council can meet its employment land requirements to support economic growth and
housing delivery over the plan period to 2033. To allow for the employment land requirements to be delivered,
approximately 20 hectares (ha) of employment land will be allocated within Policy E2. This will allow for flexibility if
someemploymentsitestakelongertocomeforwardthanexpected.Italsoallowsforthefactthatanumberofsites
within the key and general employment areas are not actively being promoted through the Housing and Economic
Land Availability Assessment (HELAA) 2018, and that the strategic urban extensions at Pleasley Hill Farm (SUE1)
and Land off Jubilee Way (SUE2) are identified as long term commitments.
81Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Six: Employment6.1 Policy E1: Enabling economic
development
Policy E1
Enabling economic development
1. Proposals for economic development will be supported, especially when they involve:
a. major inward investment into the district;
b. the creation of substantial new employment, particularly with skilled jobs; and
c. a contribution to the achievement of wider regeneration initiatives.
2.Majorproposalsareexpectedtobelocatedonsitesallocatedasnewemploymentareasoronundeveloped
land or vacant buildings within existing key or general employment areas but may also be appropriate
on other sites subject to the provisions of Policy E4.
3.Smallerproposals,includingpremisesdesignedforbusinessstart-ups,willbesupportedincloserproximity
to residential areas and as part of mixed use schemes, subject to meeting policies P7 and NE3.
Explanation
6.12ManypeoplelivinginMansfielddistrictcommute
to other areas for work, particularly to neighbouring
Ashfield, Newark and Sherwood and to Nottingham;
there are also strong linkages to Bassetlaw, Bolsover
and Amber Valley. Creating more jobs in Mansfield
district could help it to be more self-contained. Though
duetothephysicalproximityofneighbouringauthorities
and their employment land allocations, some cross
border labour movement is to be expected.
6.13The district has good levels of employment,
particularlybysupportingawiderangeofmanufacturing,
wholesale and construction businesses which rely on
a competitively priced labour supply and low cost
employmentpremises. Upskillingthelabourforceand
enabling companies to improve the value added and
movetowardsmoreadvancedmanufacturingprocesses
couldhelpthedistricttomovetowardsincreasedGross
Value Added (GVA) and higher workforce wage levels.
6.14The Local Plan vision is to improve the district's
economyandthispolicyreflectsthelevelofimportance
the council places on building a strong local economy.Ensuring business and economic development across
the district successfully contributes to delivering
sustainablegrowth.Thus,thecouncilwillseektodirect
development to the most sustainable and appropriate
locationforthegivenuses.Theselocationswillinclude
town centres for office development and key / general
employment areas and employment allocations for
industrial uses. Smaller proposals and premises
designed for start–up units will be supported in closer
proximity to residential areas as they will reduce the
need to travel. The new employment opportunities will
notonlyprovidearangeofopportunitiesforthegrowing
population, but also for existing residents.
6.15Where necessary, planning applications should
be supported by sufficient information setting out the
economicimpactsoftheproposaltohelpthecouncilto
make an informed assessment of the potential
impact.Theeconomicimpactofdevelopmentproposed
outside of the key and general employment areas, and
on land that is not allocated within this plan shall be
determined against the objectives within the 'Plan for
Growth' Strategy (Ashfield and Mansfield - A Plan for
Growth, 2016).
82Table 6.2 Policy E1 - Supporting information
Policy E1: Enabling economic development
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17, 18 to 21 and 37. Does it meet national planning policy?
Ashfield and Mansfield – A Plan for Growth , 2016. What evidence has informed this policy?
Through private sector investment and the development management process. How will it be delivered?
1, and 2 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
83Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Six: Employment6.2 Policy E2: Sites allocated as new
employment areas
Policy E2
Sites allocated as new employment areas
1. ThefollowingsitesareallocatedandshownonthePoliciesMapforemploymentdevelopment(Business
Use Classes B1, B2 and B8):
Site E2a
Ratcher Hill Quarry employment area
1. A 3.45ha extension to the Ratcher Hill Quarry Employment Area is allocated for employment uses with
access off Southwell Road, or Jubilee Way if feasible, provided that:
a. the provision of employment units are of varying sizes to meet the needs of a wide range of
employers, suitable for B1, B2 and B8 developments;
b. contributions are made towards improvements at the following junctions to mitigate the impact of
development:
i. A6191 Southwell Road / Oaktree Lane / Adams Way;
ii. A6191 Southwell Road / Berry Hill Lane;
iii. A6191 / Bellamy Road; and
iv. any additional junctions that are identified as part of the Transport Assessment that will be
required to support a future application for the site;
c. new and enhanced walking and cycling linkages are provided to connect with existing strategic
trails along Mansfield Way to facilitate the use of sustainable transport;
d. an application-specific assessment is provided to identify and address impacts on nightjar and
woodlark and their habitats;
e.ecologicallinkagesandlandscapecharacterareenhancedandrestoredinordertocreatelandscaped
habitat buffers between the employment site and:
i. the northern section of the quarry (planned restoration area); and
ii. adjacent local wildlife sites; and
f. an adequate foul drainage solution is proposed.
84Site E2b
Oakfield Lane, Market Warsop
1. A 2.2ha site adjacent to the recycling depot,
Oakfield Lane, Market Warsop is allocated for
employment uses subject to the following:
a. there is no detrimental impact upon
residential amenity;
b. creation and maintenance of an appropriate
habitat buffer adjacent to the local wildlife
site; and
c. the retention and enhancement of the
existinghabitatbufferalongtherailwayline.
2.Improvementswillberequiredatthejunctionof
A60 Church Street/Wood Street,Warsop and any
future junctions that are identified as part of the
Transport Assessment that will be required to
supportanyfutureplanningapplicationforthesite.
Site E2c
Penniment Farm
1. The site at Penniment Farm is allocated for a
minimum of 9 hectares of B1, B2 and B8
employmentusesandwithdirectaccessfromthe
Mansfield and Ashfield Regeneration Route
(MARR) subject to the following:
a. theprovisionofemploymentunitsofvarying
sizes to meet the needs of a wide range of
employers;
b. there is no detrimental impact upon
residential amenity;
c. the provision of appropriate landscaping,
plantingandotherfeaturessoastominimise
the impact upon adjoining housing
development as well as the impacts on the
wider landscape and biodiversity;
d.theprovisionofcycleandwalkinglinkstothe
adjoining housing development;
e. a comprehensive masterplan is prepared in
accordance with Appendix 8 and agreed in
writing by the local planning authority; and
f. developmentofthesiteshouldnotprejudice
further improvements to the MARR.
6.16This site forms part of a wider development for
a mix of uses, part of which already has planning
permission.Assuch,amasterplanshouldbeprepared
in consultation with stakeholders and agreed in writing
with the local planning authority for the comprehensive
development of the employment area of the site. This
should identify the links to the already-committed and
under construction residential areas, employment and
commercialuses,greeninfrastructureandopenspaces,
pedestrian and cycle links within and beyond the site)
and their relationship to each other and existing
development in the vicinity of the site.
85Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Six: EmploymentExplanation
6.17The site areas identified above reflect the
estimated developable area for each site. The Policies
Map identifies the gross area allocated.
6.18Itshouldbenotedthatstrategicurbanextensions
atPleasleyHillFarm(SUE1)andLandoffJubileeWay
(SUE2) include a total of 3 ha of employment land to
accommodate a mix of B1,B2 and B8 uses.
6.19In order to ensure the delivery of sufficient
employmentlandtomeettheplanrequirementof41ha
over the plan period 2013 to 2033, Policy E2 provides
asupplyoflandtodeliverapproximately20ha.Thiswill
providechoiceandflexibilitytothemarket.Moredetails
on establishing the employment land requirements are
set out within the Employment Technical Paper, 2018.
Policy E2 also sets out criteria for each of the three
employmentallocations(athroughc),asabove.These
criteriaaddressspecificneedsasidentifiedintheLocal
Plan evidence base. It is important that Policy E2 is
read along-side the entire suite of policies in the Local
Plan, as there are likely to be other issues which will
need to be considered and addressed, as appropriate
(e.g. flood risk, landscape character).
6.20The employment land supply will be met from a
varietyofsourcesincludingcompletions,extantplanning
permissions, vacant plots within protected key and
general employment areas and new employment
allocations. Table 6.3 sets out the contribution from
various sources.Table 6.3 Employment land provision
Employment Land
haPlan Period Employment Land Target ha
41* Target
2.82 Total amount of floor space /employment land
developed between 1/4/13 and 1/4/18
-0.98 Loss of employment land 2013/2019
23.83 Sites with planning permission at 31 March 2019
8.95 Landavailableonkeyandgeneralemploymentareas
17.95 Local plan allocations
52.57 Total
*38ha of B1c/B2 and B8 land and 3ha of employment
land for B1a office space
6.21Indecidingwhichsitesshouldbeallocated,we
have had regard to a range of sites that have been
assessed as available, suitable, developable and
achievable in the Housing and Economic Land
Availability Assessment 2018 (HELAA). All of these
sites have been allocated for employment land
development and make an important contribution to
meeting the district's employment needs.
6.22The majority of employment sites are within the
Mansfield urban area. In Warsop Parish the scope for
employment development is much more limited due to
the size of the settlements and the limited number of
existing employment areas. More information on the
site selection of the employment sites can be found in
the Employment Technical Paper, 2018.
Table 6.4 Policy E2 - Supporting information
Policy E2: Sites allocated as new employment areas
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17, 18 to 21. Does it meet national planning policy?
Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment Land Forecasting Study, 2015;
Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018;What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Employment Land Review, 2017; and
Mansfield Annual Monitoring Reports
Through private sector investment and through the development management system. How will it be delivered?
1, 2 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
866.3 Policy E3: Retaining land for
employment uses
Policy E3
Retaining land for employment uses: Key and general employment areas
1. Within the existing key or general employment areas (as shown on the Policies Map and listed below)
and allocated employment areas (as set out in Policy E2), development proposals will be supported
provided that the proposal falls within Use Class B1, B2 or B8:
Key / general employment areas Site ref
Old Mill Lane Industrial Estate, Old Mill Lane, Mansfield Woodhouse E3a
Sherwood Oaks Business Park, Southwell Road West, Mansfield E3b
Millennium Business Park, Chesterfield Road North, Mansfield E3c
Oakfield Business Park, Hamilton Way, Mansfield E3d
Oak Tree Business Park, Oak Tree Lane, Mansfield E3e
Botany Commercial Park, Botany Avenue, Mansfield E3f
Broadway Industrial Estate, The Broadway, Mansfield E3g
Brunts Business Centre, Brunts Way, Mansfield E3h
Commercial Gate, Mansfield E3i
Crown Farm Industrial Estate, Crown Farm Way, Mansfield E3j
Mansfield Woodhouse Gateway, Off Grove Way, Mansfield Woodhouse E3k
Ransom Wood Business Park, Southwell Road West, Mansfield E3l
Bellamy Road Industrial Estate, Bellamy Road, Mansfield E3m
Hermitage Lane Industrial Estate, Hermitage Lane, Mansfield E3n
Maunside, Hermitage Lane, Mansfield E3o
Warsop Enterprise Centre, Burns Lane, Market Warsop E3p
The Hub, Sherwood Street, Market Warsop E3q
Sherwood Business Park (adj. Ransom Wood Business Park), Southwell Road, Mansfield E3r
Ratcher Hill E3s
Bleak Hills E3t
Quarry Lane, Mansfield E3u
Pelham Street E3v
Continued overleaf
87Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Six: EmploymentPolicy E3 continued
2.Withinexistingkeyandgeneralemploymentareas,alternativeuses(outsidetheB1,B2orB8useclasses)
will be supported provided that they:
a. are complementary to B1, B2 or B8 Use Classes;
b. are small scale;
c. wouldaccommodateasignificantnumberofjobsandbecompatiblewiththecharacterandfunction
of the area; it must be demonstrated that the site has been vacant for at least 12 months and;
i. ithasbeensubject togenuinemarketingforcommercial(Bclass)usesforatleast12
months, at reasonable market values, and which has proved unsuccessful;
ii. where the existing use is economically unviable;
iii. the site is no longer capable of meeting the needs of modern businesses; or
iv. continuation in employment use would be inappropriate in terms of adjoining uses or
the amenity of the wider area; and
v. it would not prejudice the wider redevelopment or regeneration of the area.
3. OnsitesallocatedforemploymentdevelopmentunderPoliciesE2,SUE1,SUE2andSUE3,non-Bclass
use developments will only be allowed provided the land has been marketed for at least 5 years for B
class uses.
Explanation
6.23There is a need for the district to provide sites
offering a range of size, location and tenure. Industrial
and business uses provide employment opportunities
close to residential areas and benefiting the local
economy. They are usually difficult or impossible to
replace and their loss can exacerbate unemployment.
Their retention is therefore considered a high priority.
6.24It is important to seek to maintain the existing
stockofemploymentland buildings,in order toprovide
abasisforcontinuingeconomicprosperityofthedistrict.
However, paragraph 22 of National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF) advises against the long term
protectionofsitesallocatedforemploymentusewhere
thereisnoreasonableprospectoftheasitebeingused
for that purpose.6.25A qualitative assessment of employment sites
was undertaken in 2017. This looked at sites in terms
of the following factors to assess the ongoing fitness
for employment uses:
public access;
private access;
quality of environmental and site characteristics;
compatibility of adjoining uses; and
market attractiveness.
6.26The assessment concluded that the majority of
siteswere stillsuitableforemploymentuse and should
thereforeberetainedinemploymentuses. Thesesites
areidentifiedaseitherkeyorgeneralemploymentareas
inthestudy,andlistedinPolicyE3.Theycanbeviewed
at Figure 6.2.
886.27The vacant plots within these areas, identified
within Appendix 7, make an important contribution to
meeting the district's employment land requirements
andthecouncilwillworkwiththerelevantstakeholders
to ensure that these employment areas continue to
provide a diverse stock of buildings in terms of size,
type and condition. They play an important role in the
local economy, supporting jobs and providing good
opportunities for people to work close to where they
live.
6.28Unless protected, employment uses may lose
out to more profitable uses in terms of land value.
Developmentforalternativeuseswithintheseareaswill
onlybepermittedwherethecriteriasetoutinthepolicy
are met.
6.29Protectingthedistrict'semploymentareas,which
are both suitable and viable for continued employment
uses, is essential in ensuring the right amount and
quality of employment land and premises are available
to support the future demands of business and growth
in the local economy, and in promoting a sustainable
pattern of development across the plan area.
6.30For the purposes of this policy, the following
definitions apply:
Business development refers to uses falling with
use classes:
B1(a)- offices;
B1(b)- light industry;
B1(c) - research and development;
B2- general industry; and
B8- storage and distribution.
Economic development is development which
providesjobopportunities,orgenerateswealthor
an economic output or product.6.31Intermsofeconomicdevelopment,theusesthat
may be considered appropriate within designated
employment areas under this policy include food and
drink uses for nearby workers, education and training
facilities,childcarefacilities,andcertainsuigenerisuses
whichhavesimilarcharacteristicsofB1,B2orB8uses,
for example, car showrooms.
6.32Proposals for trade counters will be determined
onacase-by-casebasishavingregardtotheparticular
scaleandnatureoftheoperation,anditspotentialretail
and transport impacts.
6.33In the case of non-B uses, it will be necessary
to submit sufficient information with any planning
application to justify to the council the economic and
employment benefits of the use proposed.
6.34To demonstrate that there is no long term
demand for the site, an applicant will be required to
proactively market the site for a minimum period of 12
monthsforexistingemploymentareasandforfiveyears
for sites within Policies E2, SUE1, SUE2 and SUE3.
They will also be required to provide a fully reasoned
judgement from a professional estate agent as to
whether such a site would likely to be viable in the
longer term, either in its present state or as a
redevelopment site for alternative industrial and
business uses.
89Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Six: Employment
Table 6.5 Policy E3 - Supporting information
Policy E3: Retaining land for employment uses
Yes - NPPF Paragraph 22 Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Mansfield Employment Land Review, 2017; and
Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018.
Through the operation of the development management process. How will it be delivered?
1 and 2 Which local plan objectives will it meet?Figure 6.1 Key and general employment areas
906.4PolicyE4:Otherindustrialandbusiness
development
PolicyE4
Otherindustrialandbusinessdevelopment
1. DevelopmentproposalswithinUseClassesB1(b),B1(c),B2andB8thatareoutsideareasidentified
withinPoliciesE2andE3willbesupportedwhere:
a. thesitelieswithinorontheedgeoftheMansfieldorMarketWarsopurbanareasorsettlement
boundaries;
b. theproposalisfortheexpansionofanexistingbusiness;
c. itwouldprovidehighqualityemploymentfloorspaceforanidentifiedenduser;or
d. itisfortheredevelopmentofestablishedindustrialorbusinesslandorpremises.
2. Inallcasesdevelopmentproposalswillbeexpectedto:
a. beappropriatelyrelatedtothestrategicroadnetworkandaccessibleforHGV'sandiscapableof
beingdevelopedwithoutseverehighwayimpacts;
b. beaccessibletopublictransportservicesandconnectedbyconvenientwalkingandcyclingroutes
toresidentialareas;
c. beinscalewiththebuiltandnaturalfeaturesofthelocalarea;and
d. havenosignificantadverseeffectsontheamenityofadjoininguses.
3. Smallscaleemploymentdevelopmentorfarmdiversificationinruralareaswillbesupportedsubjectto
meetingtherequirementsofPolicyS3.
Explanation
6.35PolicyE4supportsemploymentdevelopmentoutsideofexistingkey/generalemploymentareasand
allocatedemploymentsitessubjecttomeetingcertaincriteriasetoutabove.
6.36Theplanplacesastrongemphasisonpromotingenterpriseandcreatinganenvironmentwhichwillencourage
localbusinessestogrowandattractbetterpaidandskilledjobs.Itisintendedthatnewemploymentdevelopment
shoulddeliverarangeofpremises.
91MansfieldDistrictLocalPlan2013-2033
Six: Employment
Table6.6PolicyE4-Supportinginformation
PolicyE4:Otherindustrialandbusinessdevelopment
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17, 18-22, 37 and 161. Doesitmeetnationalplanningpolicy?
Whatevidencehasinformedthispolicy? Nottingham Core HMA and Nottingham Outer HMA Employment Land Forecasting Study, 2015;
Mansfield Annual Monitoring Reports;
Ashfield and Mansfield – A Plan for Growth , 2016; and
Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018.
Through the development management process Howwillitbedelivered?
1, and 2 Whichlocalplanobjectiveswillitmeet?6.5 Policy E5: Improving skills and
economic inclusion
Policy E5
Improving skills and economic inclusion
1. The c ouncil will seek to negotiate planning agreements to secure local labour agreements for
developments:
a. of 10 or more dwellings;
b. on 0.5 or more hectares of land; or
c. that will create more than full time equivalent 15 jobs.
Explanation
6.37A significant issue facing the district is that
educationalattainmentlevelsremainbelowthenational
average. Mansfield has a continued weak learning
culture with historic low aspirations and expectations.
As a result, Mansfield has a predominately low skill
economy with consequently low average incomes with
limited opportunities for highly qualified workers. It is
therefore important to improve both educational
attainmentlevelsandskillswithintheexistingworkforce.
6.38West Nottinghamshire College has seen
significantinvestmentthathasincludedtheremodelling
of their main campus on Derby Road, and the creation
of two innovative learning facilities as centres of
educationalexcellenceforconstructionandengineering.
A new university centre, which opened on the main
campus in autumn 2016, brings much needed access
to higher education for local residents and businesses.
6.39AkeymessagefromtheAshfieldandMansfield
-APlanforGrowth (2016)strategyisthatlowskillsand
worklessness restrict the capacity to increase
productivity. The council is committed to supporting
opportunities which assist with the long term re-skilling
oftheMansfieldworkforcewhichisnecessarytoensure
the presence of a highly skilled labour pool to take
advantage of new jobs across the district.
6.40Locallabouragreementsareagreementsmade
between the council and a developer to enable local
people to benefit from a proposed development, either
through:
enabling local people to access on-site training,
developmentandemploymentopportunitiesinthe
construction of the development; or
enabling local people to access the jobs created
by the end use of the development, working with
the provider and local partners to try and ensure
local recruitment and retention of staff.
6.41Where a local labour agreement is applied for
theconstructionofthedevelopment,thecouncilwilluse
a recognised methodology from the Construction
Industry Training Board (CITB) for calculating the
employment and skills opportunities for the
development.Bydoingthis,therewillbeaconsistency
of approaches between the district council and
developers that will ensure realistic and achievable
employment and skills interventions on construction
projects.
6.42The approach is based on the model provided
by the CITB. Normally this requires the production of
anEmploymentandSkillsPlantobecompliedwithand
implemented by the developer and also a method
statementsettingouthowthedeveloperwillimplement
the Employment and Skills Plan. The council would
normally seek a planning obligation to secure the
submission of the Employment and Skills Plan and
method statement by the developer.
92Table 6.7 Policy E5 - Supporting information
Policy E5: Improving skills and economic inclusion
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 18 to 21. Does it meet national planning policy?
Ashfield and Mansfield – A Plan for Growth , 2016. What evidence has informed this policy?
Through conditions and or planning obligations relating to appropriate planning application approvals. How will it be delivered?
2 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
93Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Six: Employment7.1Ensuring the vitality of town centres is a key
principlefordeliveringsustainabledevelopment,asset
outintheNationalPlanningPolicyFramework(NPPF).
Paragraph23oftheNPPFrecognisesthattowncentres
are a key focus for communities and requires councils
to set out policies which support their viability and
vitality.7.2EnhancingtheattractionandfunctionofMansfield
towncentre,andthedistrictandlocalcentreswithinthe
area,isfundamentaltothedeliveryoftheplan'svision.
Mansfield town centre, in particular, faces significant
challenges in responding to changes brought about
through the increasing popularity of internet based
shopping.
94Section Seven
Retail7.1 Policy RT1: Main town centre uses
Policy RT1
Main town centre uses
1. Maintowncentreuses(suchasretail,office,entertainmentandleisure)willbe
supportedwithinthetowncentressetoutbelowandshownonthePoliciesMapprovidedthatthey:
a. areofascaleandcharacterwhichreflectstherole,functionanddistinctivequalitiesofthe
towncentre;and
b. wouldnotharmthevitalityandviabilityofatowncentreorresultina
reductioninA1usesbelowthethresholdssetoutinPoliciesRT3andRT8.
2. Thehierarchyoftowncentresis:
Location/name of town centre Policy ref Types of town centre
Mansfield RT1a Town centre
MansfieldWoodhouse RT1b District centre
MarketWarsop RT1c
ClipstoneRoadWest RT1d Local centre
FulmarClose RT1e
LadybrookLane RT1f
NewgateLane/RedcliffeRoad RT1g
NottinghamRoad RT1h
RatcliffeGate RT1i
PleasleyHill SUE1
BerryHill SUE3
3. Newlocalcentreswillbesupportedaspartofthecomprehensivedevelopment
oftheBerryHillcommitment(PolicySUE3),andlandallocatedatPleasleyHillFarm(PolicySUE1).
Sequentialandimpacttestswillberequiredattheplanningapplicationstage.
4. Developmentproposalsformaintowncentreusesoutsideofthesetowncentres,includingextensions
toexistingfacilities,willbesupportediftheywillmeetthedaytodayconvenienceneedsoftheimmediate
area,areanofficeuseproposedwithinakey/generalorallocatedemploymentsite*,or,followinga
sequentialtest,itcanbesatisfactorilydemonstratedthat:
a.thedevelopmentcouldnotbeaccommodatedonasuitableandavailablesitewithinanearbycentre,
orthenonanedgeofcentresite,havingshownappropriateflexibilityintheformatandscaleof
developmentproposed;and
95MansfieldDistrictLocalPlan2013-2033
Seven: Retail
ContinuedoverleafPolicy RT1 continued
b. the development is within an accessible and well connected location.
5. Retail and leisure developments over 500 sqm (net**) which are proposed in edge of centre and out of
centrelocationswhicharenotallocatedintheLocalPlanforsuchpurposes,willberequiredtosatisfactorily
demonstrate, through an impact assessment, that there will be no significant adverse impacts upon
relevant town centres (including within adjoining local authorities).
* designated by Policies E2 or E3.
** net retail sales floorspace - excludes areas not accessible to the public, toilets and cafe areas.
Figure 7.1 Retail hierarchy
Explanation
7.3This policy is intended to ensure the vitality of
Mansfield town centre and other key district and local
centres.
7.4It sets out a retail hierarchy which defines
Mansfield town centre (a sub-regional centre) as the
main location for the retail and leisure development
needed to deliver the long term visions for Mansfield
and the wider district.
7.5The policy also sets the context for the overall
distributionofretailandleisuredevelopment,assetout
in Policy S2.
7.6Ensuring the vitality of town centres is a key
priority of the NPPF which emphasises (para 23) that
planning policies should be positive, promote
competitive town centre environments and set outpoliciesforthemanagementandgrowthofcentresover
the plan period. This is especially important due to the
impact of internet shopping upon the high street. Local
plans should, amongst other things:
recognise town centres as the heart of their
communities and pursue policies to support their
viability and vitality;
define a network and hierarchy of centres that is
resilient to anticipated future economic changes;
and
promote competitive town centres that provide
customer choice and a diverse retail offer and
which reflect the individuality of town centres.
7.7The policy allows for the development of
floorspace that meets the day to day convenience(2)
needs of the immediate area. This is expected to be
smallscaledevelopment,notexceeding280sqm,such
as a new corner shop. 'Immediate area' would
include residential areas and business park / industrial
estate locations.
7.8It is recognised that large, stand-alone
supermarkets also play an important part in meeting
the shopping requirements of the district. However,
further development of out of centre stores will be
required to comply with this policy.
2 Convenience goods are items that you need on a day to day basis, such as food. They differ from comparison goods which are items
that you tend to shop around for; these can include shoes, clothes, books, electrical items, household goods etc.
967.9 St Peter’s Retail Park and Portland Retail Park
are preferred locations for the development of new bulky
goods retail floorspace. They complement the retail offer
at nearby Mansfield town centre and their close
proximity makes linked trips possible. Development
proposals in these locations will be required to comply
with this policy.
7.10 Main town centre uses are defined in the NPPF
as:
retail development (including warehouse clubs 
and factory  outlet centres);
leisure, entertainment facilities and the more 
intensive sport and recreation uses (including 
cinemas, restaurants, drive-through  restaurants,  
bar and pubs, night-clubs, casinos, health and 
fitness centres,  indoor bowling centres, and bingo 
halls):7.11 The requirements for sequential testing and
impact assessments are set out in the NPPF (paras 23
to 27) and the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG).
7.12 Table 7.1 shows the role and function of town
centres within the district. These are also shown in
Figure 7.2, along with the district's neighbourhood
parades and retail parks.
Table 7.1 Town centres in the district
Role and functionPolicies Map / Figure
7.1 refTown centre type Town centre
Mansfield town centre is the highest level of retailing centre in the district and
includes a primary shopping area and secondary areas of leisure, business and
other main town centre uses. New and enhanced retail and other town centre
activity should be focused here.RT1a / a Town centre Mansfield
District centres are primarily used for convenience shopping, often containing at
least one supermarket or superstore, with some comparison shopping and a range
of non-retail services, such as banks, building societies, restaurants andRT1b / b
RT1c / cDistrict centre Mansfield Woodhouse
Market Warsop
takeaways, as well as local public facilities such as a doctor's surgery, dentist,
opticians, post office and library for the settlement and the surrounding
communities
Local centres include a range of small shops of a local nature, serving a small
catchment.RT1d / d Local centre Clipstone Road West
RT1e / e Fulmar Close
Typically, local centres might include, amongst other shops, a small supermarket,
a newsagent, a sub-post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a
hot-food takeaway and launderette.RT1f / f
RT1g / gLadybrook Lane
Newgate Lane /
Redcliffe Road
RT1h / h Nottingham Road
RT1i / i Ratcliffe Gate
SUE3 Berry Hill*
SUE1 Pleasley Hill Farm**
*New local centre  (committed)
97offices; and
arts, culture and tourism development (including 
theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, 
hotels and conference facilities).
**New local centre (allocated)
Table 7.2 Policy RT1 - Supporting information
Policy RT1: Main town centre uses
Yes- NPPF paragraphs 23 to 27, 156 and 161. Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Mansfield District Retail and Leisure Study 2011, 2014 Addendum and 2017 Update; and
Mansfield Retail Update (annual report).
This policy will be delivered by the planning decisions taken when development proposals come forward, by
directing development to the most appropriate locations and refusing development that does not meet the policy.How will it be delivered?
1, and 6 Which local plan objectives will it meet?Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: RetailFigure 7.2 Retail areas
987.2 Policy RT2: Mansfield town centre
vision and strategy
Mansfield town centre vision
7.13The following vision has been developed in consultation with members of Mansfield's Town Team and the
Mansfield Community Partnership. The membership of these groups comprises various public and private
organisations including the Mansfield Business Improvement District (BID) and Nottinghamshire Police.
In 2033 Mansfield town centre will offer a welcoming and friendly experience for all visitors. Those travelling
into the centre by public transport will arrive into the light and airy transport interchange and have a short and
pleasant walk into the heart of the town centre. They will notice the high quality public realm which is clean
andattractiveandfosterscivicpride.Fromhere,theywillbeabletobrowsethehistoricopenairmarketwhich
dates back to 1227, easily access the many niche independent shops and top high street brands, whilst
surroundedbyanenvironmentrichinheritage,complementedbymodernregenerationschemes.Theposition
of the former ‘Centre Tree’, the historic centre of Sherwood Forest, can be found close by on West Gate and
is just one of the features in the town’s heritage trail. There will be a good choice of cafes and restaurants to
takeabreakfromshoppingandenjoyacoffeeormeal,withtheoptiontositoutsideinoneofmanypavement
cafes. The town’s free wifi will allow shoppers to browse for the best offers before they buy, and there will be
opportunitiesforinteractiveshoppingtotakeplace24hoursaday.Aswellasprovidingtopshoppingfacilities,
the newly refurbished Four Seasons Shopping Centre will also have become a hub of community activity,
contributingtothegoodmixofuseswithinthetowncentre,whichincludesfamilyfriendlyleisurefacilitiessuch
as the award winning Mansfield Museum. Various events throughout the year will cater for a wide range of
peopleandinterests,boostingcommunityspiritandresultinginmoretimeandmoneybeingspentinthetown,
to the benefit of the local economy. It will be the ideal place to work and to start a new business due to the
nurturing support offered by the council and its partners; and a growing population of town centre dwellers
who see Mansfield as THE place to live will ensure a high footfall to help businesses succeed.
Asthedaydrawstoaclose,someshoppersleavewhilstothersstaytoenjoyanearlyeveningmealanddrink.
More people come into the town centre, excited to see the latest show at the Palace Theatre, or to catch up
with friends in one of the eating establishments before having a night out; visiting the many vibrant bars and
clubs that can be found around the town centre. Mansfield’s award winning night time economy guarantees a
safe and welcoming experience, with a zero-tolerance approach taken to anti-social behaviour. Those who
find it necessary to drive into the town can be assured that their vehicles are safe in our Park Mark accredited
carparksthatareeasilyaccessedfromthesurroundingroadnetwork,withampleelectriccarrechargepoints.
A choice of hotels give the option for visitors to stay over in the town, either for social or business purposes
and can be used as a base for exploring the wider area, which includes a number of award winning parks
easilyaccessedfromthetowncentrebyanetworkofgreeninfrastructure,andothernearbyleisureandtourist
attractions.
99Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: RetailPolicy RT2
Mansfield town centre strategy
1. The council will work in partnership with developers and town centre stakeholders to help meet the town
centre vision by:
a. focusing the development of main town centre uses which serve the wider area within Mansfield
towncentre,throughallocatingsuitablesitestohelpmeetthedistrict'sretailfloorspacerequirements,
and applying a town centre first approach when considering planning applications;
b. enablingarangeofmaintowncentreusestooperatewithintheprimaryshoppingareatomaximise
the vitality and viability of the centre;
c. negotiating developer contributions towards public realm improvements and public art;
d.encouragingresidentialandofficeuseofupperfloors,andonappropriatesitesoutsideoftheprimary
shopping area;
e. improving accessibility by seeking improvements to pedestrian and cycle routes, and locating any
new car parks on the edge of the town centre; and
f. developing a comprehensive planning and investment framework in consultation with the local
community and key stakeholders.
Explanation
7.14Mansfield town centre is the main retail and
service area in the district and acts as a sub-regional
centre for comparison shopping in the northern and
western parts of Nottinghamshire, as well as parts of
east Derbyshire. There is an open market, many small
shops and a good representation of national retail
outlets. In addition to retailing, there is a wide range of
other uses which contribute to the vitality and viability
of the centre including banks/building societies, and
foodanddrinkestablishments.Therearealsoanumber
ofleisureandculturalfacilitieswithinthetownincluding
The Palace Theatre and the Mansfield Museum.7.15Mansfield, like other town centres around the
country,hasfelttheeffectofchangingshoppinghabits.
The increasing use of the Internet for shopping means
thetowncentrewillneedtoadaptbyofferingabroader
range of retail, leisure, cultural and civic services in
order to remain vibrant. The Mansfield town centre
strategy supports development (including conversion
and redevelopment) that would complement the town
centre and improve its vitality and viability.
7.16ThePPGstatesthatapositivevisionorstrategy
iskeytoensuringsuccessfultowncentreswhichenable
sustainableeconomicgrowthandprovideawiderange
of social and environmental benefits.
100Town centre masterplan
7.17To promote and guide the delivery of the town
centre vision the council will, in consultation with key
partnersandthecommunity,developacomprehensive
planning/investmentframeworkapproachthroughthe
preparation of a masterplan encompassing adjoining
key regeneration sites as identified in Policy S4. This
would potentially be embodied in a supplementary
planningdocumentorareaactionplan.Themasterplan
/ investment framework would:
identify issues, constraints and opportunities,
potential new uses and key design requirements,
aswellasestablishingstrategicrequirementssuch
aspedestrianandcycleroutes,carparking,public
transport and public realm;
explore possible simplified planning tools, such
aslocaldevelopmentorderstoenableandsupport
appropriate development;
identify suitable future town centre management
models; and
engagewithowners,developersandotherpublic
sector partners to develop high quality and viable
projects, in order to deliver the town centre vision
set out in a 'live' and flexible delivery strategy.
7.18PoliciesRT3toRT6ahelpmeetthetowncentre
vision and strategy.
Table 7.3 Policy RT2 - Supporting information
Policy RT2: Mansfield town centre strategy
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 23 and 24 Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield District Retail and Leisure Study, 2011, 2014 Addendum and 2017 Update; What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Retail Update (annual report); and
Mansfield Town Centre Vision, 2018;
The town centre strategy sets out how the planning system can contribute to meeting the town centre vision. How will it be delivered?
Delivery will be through the application of Local Plan policies and negotiations with developers and partners.
1, and 6 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
101Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: Retail7.3 Policy RT3: Mansfield town centre
primary shopping area
Policy RT3
Mansfield town centre primary shopping area
1. Development proposals for town centre uses, which help to diversify the primary shopping area and
increaseitsattractivenessasaplacetovisit,socialise,liveandwork,willbesupportedparticularlywhere
the development proposed is a Use Class A1 retail use. The primary shopping area, as defined on the
Policies Map, is made up of primary and secondary frontages:
Primaryfrontages:
2. Tohelpensurethevitalityandviabilityofthewidertowncentre,developmentproposalsforClassAuses
at ground floor level within primary frontages should:
a. notresultinmorethan25%ofgroundfloorunitsinanydefinedprimaryfrontageofthecentrebeing
in non-A1 use;
b. not result in the loss of units over 500 sqm (gross*) from A1 use, unless clear advantages can be
satisfactorily demonstrated;
c. maintainanactivefrontage(s)totheunit,suchasadisplayofvisualinterest,orviewsintotheunit;
d. not create a continuous frontage of three or more units in non-A1 uses; and
e. not include drinking establishments or hot-food takeaways (Classes A4 or A5), unless it can be
satisfactorily demonstrated that there would be a positive impact upon both the town centre’s
daytime and evening economies.
Secondary frontages:
3. To ensure the vitality and viability of the wider town centre, development proposals for Class A uses at
ground floor level within secondary frontages should:
a. not result in more than 50% of ground floor units in any defined secondary frontage of the centre
being in non-A1 use;
b. not result in the loss of units over 500 sqm (gross*) from A1 use, unless clear advantages can be
satisfactorily demonstrated;
c. maintain an active frontage(s) to the unit, such as a display of visual interest, or views into the
unit; and
d. not create a continuous frontage of four or more units in non-A1 uses.
Continued overleaf
102Policy RT3 continued
4. Development proposals within secondary frontages for other town centre uses that positively contribute
tothebroadeningofthetowncentre’sdaytimeandeveningeconomies,particularlyuseswhicharefamily
orientated, will be supported. Where units have both primary and secondary frontages, the impact upon
both frontages will be considered.
*Gross External Area (GEA) – ground floor only
Explanation
7.19Paragraph23oftheNPPFemphasisesthatlocal
plans should, amongst other things:
'define the extent of town centres and primary
shopping areas, based on a clear definition of
primary and secondary frontages in designated
centres, and set policies that make clear which
uses will be permitted in such locations' (third
bullet point).
7.20This policy defines the primary shopping area
andthefrontageswithinit.Itseekstomaintainretailas
the dominant use within primary and secondary
frontages at ground floor level. As such, only Class A
useswillbepermittedintheprimaryshoppingfrontages,
with a more flexible approach to a wider range of uses
in the secondary frontages. Please note that the
conversion of upper floors for office or residential use
is encouraged by policies RT2 and RT4.
7.21Itisrecognisedthatanumberofchangesofuse
areabletotakeplacewithoutrequiringaformalplanning
application.Incaseswherethelocalplanningauthority's
permission is required, the targets within Policy RT3
will be used.7.22Inrelationtothelossofalargeretailunit,a'clear
advantage' could include occupation by a non-A1 use
which would benefit the vitality and viability of the town
centre, such as a large national chain restaurant or
leisure use for which a town centre / primary shopping
area location is preferential over an out of centre
location. A town centre use will be considered to have
a positive impact upon both daytime and evening
economies if it remains open throughout both periods.
7.23Family orientated uses would include child
friendly leisure uses and creche facilities. Part four of
thepolicyseekstoaddressthebalanceofleisureuses
in the town centre to make it more family friendly,
helping to meet the town centre vision.
103Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: RetailTable 7.4 Primary and secondary frontages
Units Site ref Frontage
West Gate (odd numbers 1a - 15, even numbers 8-42) RT3pa Primary
frontages
Four Seasons Centre (all units) RT3pb
West Gate (odd numbers 37–71, even numbers 44–66) RT3sa Secondary
frontages
Stockwell Gate (all existing units) RT3sb
Regent Street (odd numbers 1–21, even numbers 2– 32 including Regent House) RT3sc
Leeming Street (odd numbers 1–29, even numbers 2–42 including Clumber House) RT3sd
Church Street (odd numbers 1–39, and 1 Bridge Street, even numbers 8–36 including the Swan Hotel
PH)RT3se
Rosemary Centre (all units) RT3sf
Queen Street (all units) including 4 Market Street and 11 Stockwell Gate RT3sg
Market Place (numbers 19–31 inclusive) RT3sh
Market Street (numbers 1–4a, 11–19 inclusive) RT3si
Clumber Street (odd numbers 1–5, and Unit 1) RT3sj
Table 7.5 Policy RT3 - Supporting information
Policy RT3: Mansfield town centre primary shopping area
Yes - NPPF paragraph 23 Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield District Retail and Leisure Study 2011, 2014 Addendum and 2017 Update; What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Town Centre Vision, 2018; and
Mansfield Retail Update (annual reports)
Through the development of new floorspace and changes of use within the primary shopping area of Mansfield
town centre.How will it be delivered?
1 and 6 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1047.4 Policy RT4: Mansfield town centre
improvements
Policy RT4
Mansfield town centre improvements
1. Development proposals which help improve the vitality and environment of Mansfield town centre, will
be supported, particularly where they involve:
a. appropriate development of the site identified by policies RT6a and RT6b;
b. enhancement of townscape, civic and open spaces and heritage assets and their setting;
c. improvement of the appearance of key gateways, by providing well designed
landmark buildings which help create a positive image of the town and give it a sense of identity;
d. improvements to Mansfield’s market;
e. enhancements to the Old Town Hall which support its reuse and ensure its conservation;
f. improvements to energy efficiency and resilience to flooding and climate change, and adoption of
low carbon technologies including electric vehicle charging points, where applicable;
g. improvements to traffic arrangements, including the reduction of vehicle / pedestrian conflict and
the barrier effect of the Mansfield town centre ring road;
h. provision of cycle parking and facilities as set out in Policy RT5;
i. creation of stronger walking and cycling links within, and to, the town centre,
including opening up of the River Maun to create an attractive riverside walk;
j. refurbishmentofkeypremises,inparticularFourSeasonsShoppingCentre,RosemaryCentreand
Beales Department Store;
k. shopfront refurbishments (in accordance with Policy P8)
and remodelling of floor plans, where appropriate, to create more attractive and usable retail units;
l.conversionofupperfloorsofpropertieswithintheprimaryshoppingareaforofficeorresidentialuse;
m. provision of new accessible car parking spaces, including replacement for any lost
through redevelopment; and
n. appropriate security and crime prevention measures.
2. All development proposals within Mansfield town centre should demonstrate how the proposal helps to
achievetheaimsofthispolicy,whererelevantandproportionatetothescaleandnatureoftheproposed
development.
105Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: Retailencouragemorecustomerstovisitacentreandtohave
an increased dwell time, which in turn adds to the
vibrancy of the area and helps support town centre
businesses as more money is spent.
7.27When considering appropriate security
measures,regardshouldbegiventoboththereduction
ofcrime and disorder,and (due tothelarge volumes of
people that use town centres) how the design could
help to deter, detect and delay a terrorist attack.
Measures should be proportionate to the degree of
threat expected, and consultation carried out with the
police architectural liaison officer.
7.28Incaseswheretowncentreresidentialschemes
are proposed, developer contributions towards
improvementstothetowncentre’spublicrealmmaybe
considered in lieu of off-site open space contributions.
This policy will help inform spending decisions. More
details will be set out in the Planning Obligations
Supplementary Planning Document.Explanation
7.24 Mansfield  is mostly an attractive town centre 
which  has benefited  from a sustained  programme  of 
investment in its public  realm to improve  the shopping  
environment.  The majority of the centre is 
pedestrianised.
7.25 However, there are some areas of poor 
environmental  quality. For example,  parts of the White 
Hart area (particularly  around  the junction  with Dame 
Flogan  Street) are largely  vacant, with some buildings  
boarded  up and falling  into dereliction.  The Four 
Seasons  Shopping  Centre, Rosemary  Centre and 
Beales  department  store are all buildings  which  would  
benefit from refurbishment.
Table 7.6 Policy RT4  - Supporting  information
Policy RT4: Mansfield town centre improvements
Yes – paragraphs 17, 21, 23, 35, 56 to 58 and 69. Does it meet national planning policy?
Urban Design Compendium: Mansfield Town Centre; What evidence has informed this policy?
Conservation Area Character Appraisals and Management Plans;
Consultation responses – What you told us, Town Centre Survey, 2011, Town Centre Survey, 2014;
Mansfield Town Centre Vision, 2018;
Mansfield Retail Viability Study, 2016; and
Crowded Places: The Planning System and Counter-terrorism, 2012.
This policy will be delivered through a combination of public and private sector investment i nto Mansfield. This
maybeintheformofnewdevelopmentwithinthetowncentre,developercontributions,grantfunding,allocation
of council resources, and BID resources.How will it be delivered?
4, 5, and 6 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1067.26 Policy RT4 supports the delivery of  the Mansfield  
town centre vision and strategy by  setting out  measures  
which
 would help improve the town centre environment.  
The quality  of the public  realm is important; it can7.5 Policy RT5: Accessing Mansfield town
centre
Policy RT5
Accessing Mansfield town centre
1. Major development proposals in or on the edge of Mansfield town centre will be supported where they
make relevant improvements to the accessibility of the town centre, prioritising:
a. pedestrians and cyclists; then
b. users of public transport and taxis, and green and blue badge holders; and finally
c. private car users.
Explanation
7.29Good accessibility to a town centre by a choice
of transport options is important in attracting residents
andvisitors.Mansfieldtowncentrebenefitsfromahigh
quality bus and rail interchange providing services into
the centre from the district and beyond. It also has a
goodnetworkofcarparks.However,theringroadwhich
bounds the town centre can be a barrier to pedestrian
access, and the presence of vehicles in the
pedestrianised areas can raise safety concerns.7.30This policy aims to achieve better access to the
town centre by pedestrians, cyclists, public transport
users,taxisandprivatecars.Thepolicyhelpstodeliver
a more accessible town centre, encouraging people to
visit the town and help to reduce pedestrian / vehicular
conflict.
7.31Improving access to the town centre is key to
the achievement of the town centre vision.
7.32Table7.7providesexamplesofhowaccessibility
could be improved for different users groups:
107
Seven: RetailMansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Table 7.7 Examples of accessibility improvements
Pedestrians and cyclists
Supporting the creation or enhancement of safe, convenient and legible pedestrian and cycle routes into and out of the
town centre. These routes should avoid a proliferation of signage, be clutter-free and be designed to be inclusive for all
sectors of Mansfield's community.
Introducing traffic calming measures, such as crossing points which are more pedestrian / cycle friendly, to reduce the
dominance of vehicular traffic on the town centre ring road, whilst helping to improve the appearance of key gateways.
Improving pedestrian crossings on Quaker Way to help reconnect both sides of the inner ring road and reduce its physical
impact.
Maximising opportunities to link into and enhance the district’s green infrastructure network, and where appropriate open
up the River Maun to create an attractive riverside walk.
Providing secure cycle stores within new developments, and on the edges of pedestrianised areas.
Physically restricting vehicular access to the pedestrianised areas of the town centre between normal shop opening hours,
allowingonlyforemergencyvehiclesandspecialpermit(greenbadge)holders,whoshallparkwithinspecialaccessareas.
Users of public transport
andtaxis,andbluebadge
holders
Usingdevelopercontributions/LTPfundingtofundtheimplementationofbus/taxilaneswhichcomplementpedestrianised
areas and routes, giving users easy access to shops and services, whilst reducing the amount of traffic within the town
centre environment.
Including dedicated areas for blue badge holders to park.
Locating new taxi ranks close to shops and providing well-lit,safe and sheltered waiting areas for users.
Private car users
Locating new car parks, which should be designed and maintained to meet ParkMark® or similar safety standards, at the
edgeofthetowncentrewherethereis,orcanbe,easyaccesstothetowncentreforbothpedestriansandmobilityscheme
users.
Making mobility schemes and recharging points for electric cars available at all new multi-storey car parks.
Ensuring replacement spaces are provided if necessary, or other improvements to town centre accessibility are made, if
existing town centre car parks are to be lost.
7.33The council will develop a movement and parking strategy possibly as part of a town centre masterplan/
investment framework (see Policy RT2). Planning obligations will be secured from major developments to deliver
appropriate elements of this strategy.
Table 7.8 Policy RT5 - Supporting information
Policy RT5: Accessing Mansfield town centre
Yes - NPPF paragraph 29 and 35. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Town Centre Parking Strategy Update, 2007; What evidence has informed this policy?
Town Centre Survey, 2011 and 2014;
Consultation with MDC officers and town centre stakeholder; and
Mansfield Town Centre Vision, 2018.
Throughthedeterminationofplanningapplicationsandnegotiationoffinancialcontributionsthroughdevelopment
management process and the promotion of alternative transport methods such as cycling. There will need to
begoodpartnershipworkingwiththehighwaysdepartmentatNottinghamshireCountyCouncil(NCC)forchanges
to access rights and signage.How will it be delivered?
6, and 9 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1087.6 Policy RT6: Retail and leisure
allocations
Policy RT6
Retail and leisure allocations
1. Thefollowingthreesites,asshownonthePoliciesMap,areallocatedforretailandleisuredevelopment:
Site RT6a
Former bus station, Stockwell Gate North (approx. 0.6 ha)
This town centre site is allocated for a hotel-led development scheme, to include around 3,500 sqm of retail
and leisure floorspace. Development should take account of the following issues:
theneedtocreateahighqualityflagshipdevelopmentonthiskeygatewayintothetowncentre,including
landscaping to soften the urban form;
thedeliveryofahotel,newretailfloorspaceandarangeofothercomplementaryuseswhichcouldinclude:
offices, restaurants and cafes, community facilities, leisure, car parking and a taxi rank;
theprovisionofgoodquality,attractivepublicrealmthatconnectsthesiteintotherestofthetowncentre;
theform,massing,materials,locationandheightofnewbuildingsshouldconserveandenhancenearby
listed buildings and their settings;
archaeology-anydevelopmentproposalswouldneedtobesupportedbydetaileddeskbasedarchaeology
assessmentandtheresultsofastagedpre-determinationprogrammeofarchaeologicalinvestigationon
the basis of an approved Written Scheme of Investigation; and
the design of the development should take account of and complement nearby local green space.
7.34Existing land level differences on the site need to be taken into account and considered carefully, with new
development proposals seeking to secure a ground level retail frontage that relates well to Stockwell Gate, with
stepped development behind; acknowledging the viability of the site.
109Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: RetailSite RT6b
Belvedere Street (approx. 0.5 ha)
Thissiteisallocatedforaround11,500sqmofmaintowncentreuses,compromisingfloorspaceinUseClasses
A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, B1A, D1, D2 or C1 (or any mix of those uses) and related servicing and car parking
facilities. Development should take account of the following issues:
theneedtocreateahighqualityflagshipdevelopmentonthiskeygatewayintothetowncentre,including
landscaping to soften the urban form;
the provision of good quality, attractive public realm and direct pedestrian linkages that connect the site
into Mansfield bus station, Stockwell Gate, and the rest of the town centre; and
theform,massing,materials,locationandheightofnewbuildingsshouldconserveorenhancethenearby
listed buildings and their settings.
Site RT6c
Frontage to Ransom Wood Business Park (approx. 1.4 ha)
This site is allocated for around 1,750 sqm of retail and leisure floorspace. Development should take account
of the following issues:
satisfactorily demonstrate that the development primarily meets the needs of the business park;
the need to protect and enhance existing multi-user access (walking and cycling) along Mansfield Way;
the need to enhance and create complementary habitat buffers adjacent to nearby local wildlife sites;
and
an application-specific assessment will be required to identify and address impacts on nightjar and
woodlark and their habitats.
7.35Itisenvisionedthatthissitecouldincludeconvenienceretail,restaurant/caféandhoteldevelopmenttomeet
theneedsofthebusinesspark.Anydevelopmentproposedthatislikelytoserveawidercatchmentarea,including
drive-thru facilities, would need to fulfil the provisions within Policy RT1.
1107.7 Policy RT7: Retail and leisure
commitments
Policy RT7
Retail and leisure commitments
1. Thefollowingsites*,asshownonthePoliciesMap,haveplanningpermissionandareallocatedforretail
and / or leisure use:
a. Mansfield urban area
Amount and type of floorspace
Site name Ref
Leisure (A3, A4, A5) Comparison (A1) Convenience (A1)
- - 1,000 sqm net Berry Hill SUE3
155 sqm net - - 116-120ChesterfieldRoad
NorthRT7a
135 sqm net - - FormerPavilion,Racecourse
ParkRT7b
200 sqm net 39 Stockwell Gate RT7c
b. Warsop Parish
Amount and type of floorspace
Site name Ref
Leisure (A3, A4, A5) Comparison (A1) Convenience (A1)
- 80sqm net 715sqm net Former Strand Cinema,
Church StreetRT7d
* (Commitments as of 1 April 2019).
Explanation
7.36 Policy RT6 allocates  land for retail and leisure  
in accordance  with the settlement and retail hierarchies  
and the strategic aims of Policy S2  and RT2. Policy RT7 
gives ongoing  support for sites which  currently have an 
extant planning  permission.  The council  will work with 
site promoters to support the development  of these 
sites, where  necessary.renewing  permission.  Generally  speaking,  the council  
would  wish to support renewals  on these sites and 
Policy RT7 allows  for this.
7.38 Paragraph  23 (sixth bullet  point) of the NPPF 
requires  local planning  authorities  to identify a range  of 
suitable  sites to meet the needs  of town centres over 
the plan period.  The objectively  assessed  retail and 
leisure  need  for Mansfield  district between  2013  and 
2033  has been  identified  in the Mansfield  District Retail  
and Leisure  Study Update, 2017  and is shown  in Table 
7.9.
111Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: Retail
7.37 The principle  of development  on the committed 
sites has already been established and it is not possible  
for the council  to reverse these decisions  unless  the 
permissions  were to lapse. However,  if this did happen  
the council  would  need  to have robust reasons  for notTable 7.9 Retail and leisure  requirement to 2033
By 2033 By 2031 By 2026 By 2021 2017
13,200 9,500 1,100 -7,200 0 Comparison goods
floorspace (sqm)
-2,100 -2,400 -3,000 -3,500 300 Convenience goods
floorspace (sqm)
3,500 2,400 900 800 0 Leisuregoodsfloorspace
(sqm)
7.40This is split across the district as set out in Table 7.10 below:
Table 7.10 Distribution of retail and leisure requirement (sqm)
Housing growth areasMarket Warsop district
centreMansfield Woodhouse
district centreMansfield town centre
700 700 700 11,100 Comparison (A1)
540 0 0 0 Convenience (A1)
0 350 350 2,800 Food and drink leisure (A3,
A4, A5)
7.41 More details  on the retail and leisure  
requirements,  and how they have been  established,  
can be found in the Retail  and Leisure  Technical  Paper, 
2018.
1127.39 It is advised that long-term quantitative forecasts  
(post-2026)  should  be treated as indicative  only, and 
reviewed  within  the next three to five years. This is due 
to the inherent uncertainty over long-term estimates of 
expenditure growth, and how the market might behave 
over the next 15 years.
7.42 The retail and leisure  requirements  will be met 
from a variety of sources, such as extant planning  
permissions  (commitments), reoccupation  of vacant 
floorspace and proposed new developments. Table 7.11 
sets out the contribution  from various  sources.Table 7.11 Sources of retail and leisure supply (as at 1 April 2019)
Other usesLeisure floorspace (sqm) (A3,
A4, A5)Convenience goods
floorspace (sqm) (A1)Comparison goods
floorspace (sqm) (A1)
- 3,500 0 (-2,100) 13,200 Requirement (2017 - 2033)
- 900 0 (-3,000) 1,100 Medium term requirement
N/A 155 (2019/0037/NMA) – A5 - 200 (2018/0732/COU) Commitments (sites with planning
permission minus those taken account
of within the requirement calculation -
see Retail Update 2019)624 (2018/0488/COU) – SG*
135 (2018/0513/COU) – A4
490 (2018/0630/COU) – SG*84 (2010/0805/ST)
91 (2018/0319/FUL)
51.5 (2018/0523/FUL)
N/A 63 (2016/0513/ST) – A3 250 (2017/0407/FUL)
40 (2017/0814/FUL)
52 (2018/0452/FUL)127 (2017/0754/FUL)
335 (2018/0281/FUL)
18.5 (2015/0578/ST)Completions / commencements
131 (2017/0644/FUL) – A3
167 (2018/0305/FUL) – A3
Hotel and D2 use
– RT6a550 – RT6a
tbc – RT6b
500 – RT6c
tbc – SUE1
250 – SUE2tbc – RT6b
250 – RT6c
tbc – SUE1
500 – SUE21,500 – RT6a
tbc - RT6b
tbc - SUE1On allocated sites (those listed in RT6
and SUE)
(Figures are approximate) tbc – RT6b
Hotel – RT6c
Hotel, gym and
nursery – SUE1
- 1000 0 2,000 Reoccupation of vacant town centre
units
- - - 101 (2015/0733/ST)
182 (2016/0719/FUL)+Totallapsed/superseded(ifcounted
in calculation of need)
- 0 (-565) 0 (-3,192) 9,076 Balance (against long term needs)
*SUI GENERIS – But proposal is akin to an A3 / A4 use
*Includes  approximately  100sqm  committed/developed  on small sites (2010/0805/ST  and 2015/0578/ST).
7.43Sufficientlandtomeettheshorttomediumterm
comparisonretailrequirementhasbeenidentified.The
longer term requirements will be reassessed when the
plan is reviewed (in accordance with Policy IM1).
Table 7.12 Policy RT6 and 7 - Supporting information
Policy RT6 - retail and leisure allocations
Policy RT7 - Retail and leisure commitments
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 23 and 161. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield District Retail and Commercial Leisure Study Update, 2017; What evidence has informed this policy?
113Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: Retail
Mansfield  Retail  Update, 2018; and
Mansfield  Retail  and Leisure  Technical  Paper, 2018.
Through private sector investment and through the development management process. How will it be delivered?
1, and 6 Which local plan objectives will it meet?7.8 Policy RT8: District and local centres
Policy RT8
District and local centres
1. Development proposals within district and local centres, as shown on the Policies Map, which help to
sustain and enhance the range of retail and community provision, will be supported where:
a. retail (use class A1) remains the predominant use* within the centre; and
b. they contribute to the quality of the physical environment and vitality of the centres through one or
more of the following measures:
i. public realm improvements;
ii. reinstatement and enhancement of historic architectural detail;
iii. reuse of vacant units;
iv. shop front refurbishments;
v. conversions that enable the use of upper floors of premises;
vi. improving the pedestrian environment / reducing the impact of vehicular traffic;
vii. creation of a key focal point;
viii. reduction of visual clutter through the rationalisation of street furniture, lighting columns,
traffic signage, road markings and pedestrian guard rails; and
ix. improvements to cycle parking provision.
*Predominant use will be measured against a 40% target (of units within the relevant district or local centre)
Explanation
7.44District and local centres play an important role
in meeting the retailing needs (primarily convenience
shopping)oftheirsurroundingcommunities.Thispolicy
is intended to help consolidate their main role as town
centres,whilsthelpingthemadapttochangingeconomic
and social conditions by supporting appropriate new
uses and environmental improvements.
7.45Thispolicydefinestheextentofthecentresand
which uses will be permitted there. Ensuring that the
A1UseClassformsthepredominantuseofeachcentre
protectstheirimportantretailingfunction.Itisexpected
that A1 will remain the largest single use class in each
centre.7.46Both Mansfield Woodhouse district centre and
Market Warsop district centre have a requirement for
an additional 700sqm of A1 comparison goods
floorspace, and 350sqm of A3, A4 and A5 leisure
floorspace over the plan period. Development of this
floorspace would need to comply with Policy RT1.
7.47Appropriatetowncentreusesfordistrictcentres
include:retail(foodandnon-food),arangeofnon-retail
services(suchasbanks,buildingsocieties,restaurants
and takeaways), and local public facilities (such as a
doctor’s surgery, dentist, opticians, post office and
library). Local centres tend to have fewer non-retail
services and public facilities.
1147.48The purpose of this policy is to encourage
improvements to be delivered over the plan period, in
order to cumulatively contribute to the enhancement of
the district or local centre environment, either as part
of a wider development, or through the use of grant
funding should this become available.
District centres
7.49Whilst there is a fairly strong retail mix in both
district centres, with a range of shops and services,
further retail development would provide opportunities
for the district centres to broaden and modernise their
offer, whilst supporting the local population.
Mansfield Woodhouse district centre (RT1b)
7.50The district centre comprises an elongated
shopping street stretching for about 600 metres along
the High Street and Station Street. Most of the district
centre is also designated as a conservation area, and
many shops are located in old stone buildings which
were formerly houses and, as a consequence, have
architectural or historic interest and townscape value.
7.51The Mansfield Woodhouse Conservation Area
Appraisal and Management Plan highlights a number
of improvements which could be made to enhance the
public realm of the area.
Market Warsop district centre (RT1c)
7.52MarketWarsopdistrictcentreplaysanimportant
roleinmeetingtheretailingneedsoftheMarketWarsop
urban area and its surrounding communities within
Warsop Parish.
7.53MarketWarsopdistrictcentreisatraditionaland
historictowncentrelocatedwithinaconservationarea.
The retail core is centred around the Sherwood Street
/ High Street / Burns Lane / Church Street Junction
where a range of shops and services provide some of
the daily and weekly requirements for the resident
population and surrounding areas.
7.54TheMarketWarsopConservationAreaAppraisal
and Management Plan highlights a number of
improvements which could be made to enhance the
public realm of the area.Local centres
Clipstone Road West local centre (RT1d)
7.55This local centre serves communities on the
eastern side of the district living in Forest Town and
nearby areas. It extends for approximately 200 metres
alongClipstoneRoadWestandprovidesanewsagent,
pharmacy, hairdressers, a public house, café and a
number of hot food takeaways, as well as other uses,
such as bookmakers and insurance brokers.
Fulmar Close local centre (RT1e)
7.56Fulmar Close local centre serves communities
living in Forest Town and surrounding areas. It has a
number of modern units occupied by hot food
takeaways/restaurants, a drive-thru, a coffee shop,
furniture shop, children’s soft play, a day nursery, pet
shopandapub/restaurant.Itisincloseproximitytoan
Asda supermarket.
Ladybrook Lane local centre (RT1f)
7.57Ladybrook Lane local centre consists of a
number of shops, a pharmacy, post office and a library
within a pedestrianised area on the south east of
Ladybrook Lane, and a public house and convenience
store on the north east side of the road. The centre
serves residents to the west of Mansfield.
Newgate Lane / Redcliffe Road local centre (RT1g)
7.58Newgate Lane local centre is fairly centrally
located within the district and serves communities to
theeastofMansfieldtowncentre.Incomprises,among
other uses, a convenience store, newsagents, post
office, a number of hairdressers and barbers, a beauty
salon, an electrical repair shop, a social club and hot
food takeaways.
Nottingham Road local centre (RT1h)
7.59This local centre is situated on a key arterial
routeintoMansfieldtowncentre.Itservescommunities
tothesouthofthedistrictandcomprises,amongothers,
anewsagent,hairandbeautysalons,aflorist,afurniture
shop, a balloon shop, hot food takeaways, a public
house, and a church. There are also further retail and
leisure uses nearby, namely Sainsbury’s / Argos, Aldi,
Odeon, a number of restaurants and gyms, Halfords,
PC World and a B&M Home and Garden store.
115Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: RetailRatcliffe Gate local centre (RT1i)
7.60ThislocalcentrerunsalongRatcliffeGate,akey
routeintoMansfieldtowncentre.Itconsistsofanumber
ofretailunitssuchasbutchers,abakeryandabrewers
centre, three public houses, a restaurant and hot food
takeaway.
Berry Hill local centre
7.61Thisisacommittednewlocalcentre(seePolicy
SUE3).Pleasley Hill Farm local centre
7.62Thisisanallocatednewlocalcentre(seePolicy
SUE1).
7.63Subject to funding, the council will consider the
need to develop targeted intervention, including the
preparation of masterplans to provide detailed
frameworks to guide investment in public realm,
transport,andenvironmentalimprovements.Thecouncil
will work with Warsop Parish Council to consider how
theneighbourhoodplanprocessmayalsocontributeto
shaping the development and enhancement of Market
Warsop district centre.
Table 7.13 Policy RT8 - Supporting information
Policy RT8: District and local centres
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17, 23, 35, 56 to 58, 69 and 70. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Woodhouse Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan; What evidence has informed this policy?
Market Warsop Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plan; and
Mansfield Retail Update (annual report).
Through the development management system: How will it be delivered?
Thepolicysetsouttheacceptableuseswithinthedistrictandlocalcentresandwillbedeliveredthrough
private investment, such as new business start-ups, and planning decisions taken. The policy may also
be used to help secure grant funding towards the works required.
Subject to funding the council may consider preparing masterplans to provide a detailed framework for
public realm, transport, and environmental improvements.
6 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1167.9 Policy RT9: Neighbourhood parades
Policy RT9
Neighbourhood parades
1. Neighbourhood parades, as shown on the Policies Map, will be protected as areas of local convenience
retailing,withapresumptionagainsttheirloss.Proposalsforthechangeofuseandextensionstoexisting
units will be supported where they will enhance the vitality and viability of the parade.
2. The development of new neighbourhood parades of an appropriate design and type will be supported
wheretheymeettheimmediatelocalneedsofnewresidentialdevelopmentbutdonotundermineexisting
town centres.
Explanation
7.64Inadditiontothelargerretailareasinthedistrict,
there are a number of neighbourhood parades (see
Table7.14)whichformafourthtieroflocationsthatare
important for meeting the day-to-day needs of the
communitiestheyserve.Theseparadesareparticularly
valuableforthosemembersofourcommunitieswithout
access to a car. References in the NPPF to 'town
centres' or 'centres' apply to town centres, district
centres and local centres, but exclude small parades
of shops of purely neighbourhood significance.
7.65Thispolicyprovidesprotectiontoneighbourhood
paradesandallowsappropriatedevelopmenttopromote
theirvitalityandviabilityaskeyelementsofsustainable
communities. A proposal for an A1 use, or one which
makesapositivecontributiontothediversityofuseson
offer, is considered to enhance vitality and viability.
Proposals which would create a clustering of similar
non-A1 businesses, such as hot food takeaways, is
likely to have a detrimental effect and should be
avoided.7.66Development proposals that involve the loss of
shopping facilities should only be permitted if the
premiseshavebeenvacantforatleastsixmonthswith
evidence of marketing. It will also be important to
considertheresultingbalanceofuses,thecontribution
the unit makes to the function of the parade in terms of
itssizeandlocationwithintheparade,theimpactofthe
proposal on the shopping function of the parade - for
example, would it create an active frontage, would the
use bring visitors to the centre?
7.67Extensions to neighbourhood parades should
not exceed 280 sqm net over the plan period, change
the status of the parade, or undermine other town
centres within the district's retail hierarchy.
7.68There will be a new neighbourhood parade
developed as part of the Jubilee Way strategic urban
extension (see Policy SUE2). This will include some
convenience retail provision and food and drink leisure
provision to serve new and existing residents, as well
as employees of Crown Farm Industrial Estate.
7.69Neighbourhood parades are not town centres
and therefore proposals for new parades of shops of
purely neighbourhood significance do not require
sequential testing and are usually not large enough to
requireimpacttesting.Howeverifaparadeisproposed
ofsuchascalethatitwouldbelikelytodrawtradefrom
a town centre it would be considered as a local centre
and determined against Policy RT1.
117Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: RetailTable 7.14 Neighbourhood parades
Role and function Neighbourhood parade Site Ref
Small parades of shops of purely
neighbourhood significance.Birding Street RT9a
Bright Square RT9b
Carter Lane/ Mill Street RT9c
Carter Lane/ Rock Street RT9d
Chesterfield Road North RT9e
Chesterfield Road South RT9f
Cox’s Lane/ Brown Avenue RT9g
Garabaldi Road RT9h
Harrop White Road RT9i
Ladybrook Lane/ Tucker’s Lane RT9j
Lingforest Road RT9k
Madeline Court RT9l
Newgate Lane / Scarcliffe Street RT9m
Ossington Close RT9n
Pecks Hill RT9o
Ravensdale Road RT9p
Southwell Road East RT9q
Southwell Road West RT9r
Jubilee Way*
*This is a new neighbourhood parade, to be developed during the plan period.
Table 7.15 Policy RT9 - Supporting information
Policy RT9: Neighbourhood parades
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 23 and 70 Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Retail Update (annual report), and Survey Work What evidence has informed this policy?
Throughthedevelopmentmanagementprocessbyplanningdecisionstakenwhendevelopmentproposalscome
forward.How will it be delivered?
6, 7 and 11 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1187.10 Policy RT10: Hot food takeaways
Policy RT10
Hot food takeaways and exclusion zones
1. Proposals for hot food takeaways (Use Class A5) will be supported provided that they are not within a
hot food takeaway exclusion zone as shown on the policies map (within a 400m radius from the main
access point to any secondary school or college).
2. Inallcases,hotfoodtakeawaysmustnotcausesignificantharmtoresidentialamenityintermsof:noise,
vibration, odour, traffic disturbance, litter or hours of operation.
Explanation
7.70In 2011, the Government published ‘Healthy
lives, healthy people: a call to action on obesity in
England’, which described the scale of the obesity
epidemic and set out plans for action across England.
Obesityis a complex problem thatrequires action from
individuals and society across multiple sectors. One
important action is to modify the environment so that it
doesnotpromotesedentarybehaviour,orprovideeasy
access to unhealthy food.
7.71Takeaways can be a source of unhealthy food.
Research indicates that once a child or adolescent
develops obesity, they are more likely to remain obese
through adulthood, have poor health and reduced life
expectancy.
7.72The National Institute of Clinical Excellence
(NICE) Cardiovascular Disease Prevention guidance
(2010) recommends that local authorities should take
action to limit the planning permission for fast food
outlets in specific areas (e.g. near schools).
7.73Mansfielddistricthasachildobesityprevalence
at Year 6 of 19.7% vs 20.0% in England in 2016/17.
Child obesity prevalence has been similar to England
in this district since 2007/8 and has one of the highest
prevalence in Nottinghamshire.7.7467.3% of adults are classified as overweight or
obese in Mansfield (2015/16) compared with 61.3 % in
England.InNottinghamshire25.7%ofadultsareobese.
7.75Information provided by Public Health England
showsthatMansfielddistrictalsohadafastfoodoutlet
densityof96.3per100,000residentsin2015compared
to 88 per 100,000 residents in England.
7.76Evidence provided by Nottinghamshire County
Councilshowsthatareaswhereseveralprimaryschools
and four secondary schools are located already have
a density of fast food outlets higher than the national
average.
7.77Furthermore, hot food takeaways can generate
unacceptable levels of noise, vibrations, odours, traffic
disturbance and litter, and are often open late at night.
It is therefore important that such uses are controlled,
or restricted, to protect the residential amenity of
occupiers living in close proximity to such
establishments.
7.78A condition may be imposed which removes
permitted development rights in cases where the size
and / or location of the proposed hot food takeaway
could undermine the district's retail hierarchy, should a
change of use occur.
119Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: Retail
Table 7.16 Policy RT10 - Supporting information
Policy RT10: Hot food takeaways
Yes - NPPF paragraphs 17 (bullet 12), and 69 Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Fast food outlets and obesity– Mansfield Briefing, 2018 (NCC);
The Department of Health Annual Health Profile for Mansfield, 2015;
The Nottinghamshire Joint Strategic Needs Assessment - Excess weight in children, young people and adults,
2016;
The Nottinghamshire Health and Wellbeing Strategy;
Department of Health 2010, ‘Healthy lives, healthy people; and
Rapid Health Impact Assessment, 2018.
Throughthedevelopmentmanagementprocessandplanningdecisionstakenonproposalsforhotfoodtakeaways. How will it be delivered?
5 and 7 Which local plan objectives will it meet?7.11 Policy RT11: Visitor economy
Policy RT11
Visitor economy
1.Development proposals for visitor  facilities*, accommodation and sporting  attractions, including proposals
for temporary permission  in support of the promotion  of events, will be supported  provided  that they:
a.benefit both local communities  and visitors; and
b.respect and enhance  the natural  and built environmental  qualities  of the area, and are appropriate
in scale and nature.
2.Development  should  be located  within  the existing  Mansfield  urban  area boundary, Market Warsop urban
area or village  boundaries,  or as part of strategic sites, unless  it can be demonstrated  that:
a.such locations  are unsuitable  for the nature of the proposal;
b.there is an overriding benefit to the local economy and/or community  and/or environment for locating
away from the urban  areas; and
c.the criteria within  Policy S3 can be met; or
d.it relates to a suitably  located  existing  visitor facility which  is appropriate  for redevelopment  or
expansion.
3.Development  of town centre uses shall also be in accordance  with Policy RT1.
*such as cultural and leisure facilities
Explanation
7.79This policy aims to encourage sustainable growth in the visitor economy within the district. The policy
recognisesthatthetourismofferofurbanareasisdifferenttothatinruralareaswherethescaleandtypesofvisitor
economyusesneedtobeinscalewiththeirsurroundings.Thecounciliskeentopromotethetown'svisitoreconomy
and has launched the Visit Mansfield website: www.visitmansfield.co.uk
120Figure 7.3 Mansfield visitor economy
7.80TheD2N2VisitorAccommodationStrategy,2017
highlights that the Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP)
area is lagging behind other destinations in terms of
certainaccommodationtypes.Thisincludesluxuryand
boutique country house hotels, market town boutique
hotels, boutique inns, B&Bs and holiday cottages and
glamping accommodation.
7.81Mansfield currently only provides 0.5% of the
LEParea'stourismrelatedbedspaces,andstandsout
as a large town with very little hotel provision; with a
clearshortageofhotelaccommodation,bothduringthe
week and at weekends. There is potential interest
highlighted in the report from operators of three star,
upper-tier budget and budget hotels.7.82The strategy identifies a number of potential
sitesforhotelandvisitoraccommodationdevelopment,
including in Mansfield:
Stockwell Gate North (former bus station site);
Berry Hill / Lindhurst; and
Ransom Wood Business Park.
7.83The stratgey also states that there is clear
potentialforbudgethoteldevelopmentintheMansfield
and Sutton-in-Ashfield area, and scope possibly for an
uppertierbudgetorthreestarhotelononeofthemajor
business parks that are being developed here.
Population growth will drive further growth in hotel
demand, and a budget hotel in Mansfield town centre
shouldbeaprioritytosupporttowncentreregeneration.
121Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Seven: Retail7.84Aproposalwouldmeetcriterion1awhereitcan
beusedby,and/orprovidesemploymentopportunities
for, local communities, and would also attract visitors
from outside of the district.
7.85The council has aspirations for the following
enhancementstoMansfieldPalaceTheatre,Mansfield
MuseumandtheOldLibrary,whichshouldbesupported
provided all relevant criteria can be met:
rear extension to Mansfield Palace Theatre;
facaderefurbishmenttoMansfieldPalaceTheatre;
7.86SportEnglandhasanonlinetoolwhichgivesan
indication of the overall contribution that sport makes
to the economy of local authority areas (as at 2013).
DataforMansfieldincludesafigureforspectatorsports
of£2.7mwhichhighlightstheroleofsportinthedistrict's
visitor economy.
Table 7.17 Policy RT11 - Supporting information
Policy RT11: Visitor economy
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 23 and 28. Does it meet national planning policy?
D2N2 Visitor Accommodation Strategy, 2017; What evidence has informed this policy?
Economic Value of Sports - Local Model (2013), Sport England; and
Economic Value of Sports - Local Model: User guidance for model update PV2 (Nov 2015), Sport England.
Through the development management process and planning decisions taken on proposals for visitor facilities. How will it be delivered?
1 and 6 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
122provision of a coach drop off point outside of
Mansfield Museum;
energy efficiency improvements; and
alterations necessary to allow facilities to be
shared, creating a central hub for cultural activity.8.1National planning policy guidance requires the
council to seek to meet the full objectively assessed
needs for market and affordable housing through the
LocalPlan.Largescalemixed-usesitesontheedgeof
theurbanareacancontributetomeetinghousingneeds.
They can deliver new communities including homes,
employment opportunities and new infrastructure.
However, due their size, need for upfront infrastructure
and potential for multiple landowners, they are more
complex to deliver in a sustainable way and often face
challenges of viability.
8.2Astrategicsitehasalreadybeengrantedplanning
permission. Berry Hill is located to the south of the
district and has planning permission for 1,700 homes,
up to 18.8ha of employment land and a new local
centre.
8.3It is also proposed to allocate a further two
strategicsites;LandoffJubileeWay(800homes,1.6ha
of employment land and retail) and Pleasley Hill Farm
(925 homes and 1.7ha of employment and retail land).
Land off Jubilee Way is located to east of the district. It
involves the development of the spoil tip of the former
MansfieldcollieryandimprovementstoMansfieldRugby
Club and Sherwood Golf Club. This area includes a
number of Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs),
LocalWildlifeSites(LWS)andotherareasofecological
importanceandprotection,mitigationandenhancement
willberequired.PleaselyHillFarmislocatedtothewest
of the district with access from the MARR. The site is
locatedinahighervaluelandscapeandthedesignand
layout will be required to reflect this.8.4Ahousingsupplyof6,500homesplusabufferof
around 13% can be delivered during the plan period
withoutthesetwonewstrategicsites.Giventhebenefits
thatbothofthesitesofferintheprovisionofemployment
landandmeetingthecouncil'saspirationsofdelivering
longtermsustainablegrowthbycreatingwelldesigned
neighbourhoods,thesetwostrategicsitesareallocated
within the Local Plan. The council will continue to work
withthesitepromotersandstrategicpartnersincluding
Homes England and the D2N2 LEP to deliver these
siteswiththesupportinginfrastructureandfacilitiesthat
are required. In addition the committed site at Berry
Hill(SUE3)isexpectedtodeliverover300homesafter
the end of the plan period in 2033.
8.5Allocationofthesesitesestablishestheprinciples
of development giving certainty to both residents and
developers, enabling funding to be sought to support
bringing them forward and also provides a head start
in identifying future housing and employment land
supply.
124Section Eight
Strategic urban extensions8.1 Policy SUE1: Pleasley Hill Farm
Policy SUE1
Pleasley Hill Farm
1. Land at Pleasley Hill is allocated as a strategic sustainable urban extension delivering:
a. approximately 925 new homes (including retirement accommodation);
b. a care home;
c. a new local centre including retail (Class A), leisure (Class D2) and community uses (Class D1)
appropriate to a local centre;
d. a hotel; and
e. a minimum 1.7ha (developable area) of mixed employment uses.
f. There is also land available for a petrol filling station, nursery and gym
2. New retail or leisure floorspace proposed at Pleasley Hill will be expected to meet the requirements of
Policy RT1.
3. A field evaluation, incorporating a systematic walking survey, geophysical survey and intrusive trial
trenching will be required to be carried out prior to determining a planning application.
4. The following junctions have been identified within the Mansfield Transport Study 2018 and will require
improvements at Chesterfield Road/Debdale Lane, Kings Mill Road/Beck Lane/Skegby Lane/Mansfield
Road and A6191 Chesterfield Road/A617 MARR Pleasley.
5. This new neighbourhood will be developed comprehensively in accordance with an agreed masterplan,
includingdeliveryandphasingarrangementsandinformedbykeydesignprinciples,independentdesign
reviewandcommunity/stakeholderconsultation.ThismasterplanwillbeincorporatedintoaSupplementary
Planning Document and/or an outline planning application and supporting section 106 agreement.
6. Thedevelopmentwillcreateasustainableandhighqualitylivingenvironment,includingtheprovisionof:
a. an appropriate buffer to the adjoining employment development and Pleasley village to the north;
b.anetworkofgreeninfrastructurelinkingtonearbylocalwildlifesites (CottonPlantationandPleasley
Hill Pastures), and the existing public rights of way;
c. adequateSuDSalongtheexistingfloodingroutes,includingenhancingecologicalconnectionswith
the adjoining natural spring and local wildlife site;
d. on-site open space and play facilities in locations which are accessible from surrounding areas;
and
e. the protection of areas of archaeological significance informed by a Geophysical Survey.
125Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Eight: Strategic urban extensionsExplanation
8.6 Pleasley  Hill Farm  is located  to the north-west of 
the Mansfield  urban  area, close to the settlement of 
Pleasley (part of which lies in Bolsover district).  The site 
lies
 alongside  the Mansfield  Ashfield  Regeneration  
Route (MARR) which  was opened  in 2004  with the aim 
of contributing  to the regeneration  of the area following  
the closure of coal mines and de-industrialisation. Other 
development  sites along  the MARR include  Lindhurst,  
Prologis  Park and Penniment  Farm.
8.7 The site lies on both  sides of the MARR; this offers 
good  access to the site and the potential  for the 
penetration  of bus routes into the site. A detailed  
transport assessment will be required  in accordance  
with Policy IN9. A number  of junctions  have been  
identified  within  the Mansfield  Transport Study, 2018  
as requiring  improvement  as a result of the scale of 
growth proposed  in the Local  Plan.
8.8 The Heritage  Impact Assessment, 2018  carried  
out to support the Local  Plan has identified  regionally  
important archaeology. The presence  of Mesolithic  
material within the site is of high importance;  in general, 
Mesolithic  material  culture is under-represented  in
 the 
archaeological  record. The Neolithic  to the Bronze Age 
period  material  has also been  identified  as being  
present, and again  is considered  to be of high 
importance.  There are a number  of Roman  and 
medieval  finds and features within  the site and it is 
reasonable to expect that development of this site would 
disturb archaeology.
8.9 Further information is therefore required to  support 
any future planning  application.  In
 the first instance  a 
systematic field walking  survey should  be undertaken,  
which could then be supported by a geophysical  survey, 
and finally  an intrusive  trial
 trenching  survey would  also 
be required.  These surveys should  provide  enough  
information to determine mitigation of any archaeologic al 
remains  either by preservation  by
 record or by seeking  
to leave  the highest  sensitive  areas undeveloped,  
therefore securing  the preservation  of the archaeology  
in situ.layout of the development mitigates any harm. The
provisionofnewgreencorridorswithinthedevelopment
shouldprovideappropriatewildlifecorridorsthroughthe
creation of new habitat areas to link with nearby local
wildlifesitesandandalsointegratewithnaturalfeatures
and open space. Networks of strategic green
infrastructure (GI) are located near to this site (Meden
Valley and Oxclose Woods). New recreational green
corridors should complement these and and provide
multi-user trail connections, linking together new and
nearbyopenspaceandwithexistingwalkingandcycling
trails to improve multi-purpose access through the site
and to areas of strategic GI.
8.11The provision of the new local centre and
employment on site helps make the new development
moresustainablebyensuringthatfacilitiesandservices
are conveniently located reducing the need to travel,
preferablytheretailandleisureusesshouldbelocated
to create a local centre in the format of a high street to
ensure that a sense of place is created and local
services and facilities are accessible by foot to local
residents and businesses.
8.12Due to the size and complexity of the scheme
an overall masterplan is required. An indicative
masterplan has been prepared by the council in
partnership with the site promoters and is shown at
Appendix8.Thisshouldaddressthewholesiteshowing
how the different elements including residential,
retail/leisure,employment,openspace,pedestrianand
cycle links relate to each other and how the site will
operate as one. The masterplan should be prepared in
such a way to enable it to be easily adopted as a
Supplementary Planning Document. Further guidance
on masterplan requirements is set out in Appendix 8.
1268.10 The proximity to the existing  settlement of 
Pleasley  requires  careful management.  The layout of 
the scheme, location  of open  space and landscape  
buffers should  minimise  the perception  of coalescence  
between  Pleasley  and the Pleasely  Hill Strategic Urban  
Extension which is ultimately part of  the Mansfield urban  
area. This will also
 protect the amenity of existing  
residents  in this area. The site also sits within  a valued  
local landscape;  it will be important that the design  and8.2 Policy SUE2: Land off Jubilee Way
Policy SUE2
Land off Jubilee Way
1. Land off Jubilee Way is allocated as a strategic sustainable urban extension delivering:
a. approximately 800 new homes;
b. a new neighbourhood parade;
c. provision of a new primary school on site; and
d. a minimum of 1.6ha (developable area) extension to Crown Farm Way Industrial Estate.
2. This new neighbourhood will be developed comprehensively in accordance with an agreed masterplan,
including delivery and phasing arrangements and informed by key design principles, an independent
design review and community/stakeholder consultation. This masterplan will be incorporated into a
Supplementary Planning Document and / or an outline planning application and supporting section 106
agreement.
3. An application specific assessment will be required to identify and address impacts on nightjar and
woodlark and their habitats.
4. A Nitrogen Deposition Study will be required to assess the impact on sites of biodiversity importance
nearby.
5. Any development proposal would need to be supported by a detailed desk based assessment and the
results of a staged pre-determination programme of archaeological investigation on the basis of an
approved Written Scheme of Investigation.
6. The masterplan will create a sustainable and high quality living environment, including the provision of:
a. cycle and walking links to the adjoining housing development and to the wider area including
Timberland Trail, Oak Tree LNR, the restored Mansfield colliery and Vicar Water (strategic GI area
#10) and the wider Sherwood Forest (strategic GI area #6);
b. a network of green infrastructure including new habitats adjacent to the SSSIs/LWSs;
c. measures to prevent any loss of value of the LWS and ensure the protection of Sn 41 habitats and
species;
d. the appropriate protection of adjacent heathland and SSSIs;
e. appropriateaccounttakenoftheppSPAinlinewiththerecommendationsoftheapplicationspecific
assessment including measures to protect nightjar and woodlark and their habitats;
f. adequate SuDS and improving the flows and water quality of Vicar Water;
g. contributions to junction improvements including at A6117 Oak Tree Lane/Eakring Road, A6191
SouthwellRoad/OakTreeLane/AdamswayandA6117OldMillLane/B6030ClipstoneRoadWest;
h. the identification and appropriate protection of areas of potential archaeological importance; and
127Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Eight: Strategic urban extensions
i. enhancement and integration of the former mineral railway line along Jubilee Way North, as a
wooded landscaped buffer, where feasible.Explanation
8.13LandoffJubileeWayislocatedtotheeastof
MansfieldandwaspreviouslypartofMansfieldColliery
(alsoknownasCrownFarm). Sincethecollieryclosed
thewiderareahasbeenusedforinformalrecreation
andcurrentlyincludesMansfieldRugbyClubandtwo
golfcourses.
8.14ThesiteisclosetothreeSSSIs(OaktreeHeath,
SherwoodForestGolfCourseandStrawberryHills)and
theareaidentifiedasbeingpartofaSherwoodpotential
prospectivespecialprotectionarea(ppSPA);thereare
alsoanumberoflocalwildlifesitesintheareaalong
withareasofheathland. Itisthereforeimportantthat
appropriateprovisionismadefortheprotectionand
enhancementofbiodiversity. Theapplicationspecific
assessmentrequiredbyPolicySUE2(3)willconfirm
thefullpackageofmeasurestoensurethattherewould
benoadverseimpactontheppSPA. Anumberof
potentialmitigationmeasureshavebeenidentified
including:
reducingaccessalongEakingRoad;
diversionofbridleways;
theinclusionoflandscapebuffers,habitat
connectivity;
theprovisionofSuitableAlternativeNatural
Greenspaces(SANGs)andanaccess
managementplantoensurethatsensitiveareas
arenotinappropriatelyaccessed;
measurestoreducepredationofprotectedwildlife
bydomesticanimals;
provisionforthelongtermmanagementof
habitats;
therecordingandmonitoringofkeyspeciesbefore
andduringconstructiontoensurethatmitigation
andecologicalcompensationisworkingandto
informdevelopmentoffurthermeasuresif
required;
provisionofalternativeareasfordogwalking;and
potentialprovisionofcompensatoryhabitat.
Anassessmentoftheimpactofnitrogendepositionwill
alsoberequired. Thisareaalsorequirescareful
managementoffloodriskandsurfacewaterrunoff.
RunoffshouldbedirectedtowardsVicarWater.8.15Anewneighbourhoodcentre,conveniencestore
andprimaryschoolformpartofthedevelopment.This
willhelpmakethesitemoresustainablebyreducing
theneedtotravel. Wherethereisaneedtotravel,the
provisionofbusstopswithinthesite,andgood
pedestrianandcyclelinks,willprovidesustainable
alternativestothecar.
8.16AccesstothesitecanbemadeoffJubileeWay
butimprovementswillalsoberequiredtoanumberof
nearbyjunctions. Alinkroadfromthedevelopmentto
CrownFarmWaymayalsohelpmitigatetheimpacts
ofthedevelopment. Adetailedtransportassessment
willberequiredinaccordancewithPolicyIN9. A
numberofjunctionshavebeenidentifiedasneeding
improvementsasaresultofthescaleofgrowth
proposedintheLocalPlan. Asthelargestsiteinthis
area,itisexpectedthatcontributionstowardstheir
improvementwillbemade.
1288.17Theschemealsoofferstheopportunityto
improvesportsprovisionforMansfielddistrict. Mansfield
RugbyClubiswellusedandexpansionwillallowitto
improveitsoffercontributingtothehealthandwellbeing
ofthedistrict. Golfprovisionisproposedtobe
remodelledwiththecreationofagolfacademyallowing
accesstogolftobewidened.
8.18Duetothesizeandcomplexityofthescheme
anoverallmasterplanisrequired. Anindicative
masterplanhasbeenpreparedandisshownin
Appendix8. Thisshouldaddressthewholesiteshowing
howthedifferentelementsincludingresidential,retail/
leisure,employment,openspace,pedestrianandcycle
linksrelatetoeachotherandhowthesitewilloperate
asone. Themasterplanshouldbepreparedtoenable
ittobeeasilyincorporatedintoaSupplementary
PlanningDocument. Furtherguidanceonmasterplan
requirementsissetoutinAppendix8.8.3 Policy SUE3: Land at Berry Hill
Policy SUE3
Land at Berry Hill - Committed strategic urban extension
1. Land at Berry Hill is allocated as a strategic sustainable urban extension delivering:
a. approximately 1,700 new homes (including 10% on site affordable housing);
b. new local centre including class A retail and leisure uses and appropriate class D1 uses *;
c. commercial uses;
d. a minimum of 18.8 ha (developable area) of mixed employment uses;
e. 3.1 hectares commercial / leisure use***;
f. health centre;
g. a new primary school;
h. a community park, outdoor play space and equipped children’s play provision; and
I. a road link for the potential cemetery.
2. New retail or leisure floorspace proposed at Berry Hill above the 1,000 sqm already permitted will be
expected to meet the requirements of Policy RT1.
3. This new neighbourhood will be developed comprehensively in accordance with existing planning
permissions*** and the agreed masterplan***.
* The proposed retail shall comprise of no more than 1,000sqm gross floorspace and shall be split between 5
units, none of which shall exceed 500sqm. Any proposal to vary this amount of floorspace will be determined
against the criteria within Policy RT1.
** Any proposals for main town centre uses, as defined by the NPPF, will be determined against the criteria
within Policy RT1
***2010/0089/ST
Explanation
8.19The principle of development on this site has already been established and it is not possible for the council
to reverse the decision unless the permissions were to lapse. However, if this did happen the council would need
tohaverobustreasonsfornotrenewingpermission.Generallyspeakingthecouncilwouldwishtosupportrenewals
and Policy SUE3 allows for this. The land at Berry Hill (Policy SUE3) had the benefit of planning permission as of
April 2018 and development has commenced. The employment land makes an important contribution to meeting
thedistrict'semploymentlandrequirementsfortheplanperiodandthecouncilwillcontinuetoworkcloselywiththe
developers to support the delivery of this allocation.
129Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Eight: Strategic urban extensions
Table 8.1 Policy SUE 1, 2 and 3 - Supporting information
Policy SUE 1, SUE 2 and SUE 3
Yes – paragraphs 38, 47, 50, 52, 58, 61, 69. Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Mansfield Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment (HELAA), 2018; and
Whole Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment, 2018.
This policy will be delivered through the development management process. How will it be delivered?
Objectives 1, 2 and 3 Which local plan objectives will it meet?9.1Infrastructure provides the physical, social and
economicfabricforsupportingcommunities.Thesehelp
deliver essential services and take on various forms
which are often interrelated. These include:
social – health (e.g. doctor’s surgeries and
hospitals),education(nursery,primary,secondary
and higher), libraries, community facilities,
children’scentres,postofficesandsports/leisure,
social and elderly housing, disabled people’s
access and services;
wastemanagement–wastecollection,processing
and disposal/recycling;
utilities - gas, electricity, water, wastewater,
telecommunications, broadband;
flood risk – flood prevention/protection/alleviation
from different sources;
transport – public transport, walking, cycling and
highways;
green/ blue infrastructure - natural and
semi-naturalgreenspace,greencorridors,amenity
green space, parks and recreation grounds,
outdoorsportfacilities,playareas,allotmentsand
water features. This also includes networks of
greeninfrastructureprovidingmultiplebenefitsfor
people and wildlife;
cultural facilities – museum and theatre;
public realm improvements and public art; and
any other infrastructure deemed necessary to
mitigate the impact of a development.9.2Ensuringthatsufficienthighqualityinfrastructure
is available or delivered is an essential requirement in
achieving sustainable growth. The National Planning
Policy Framework (NPPF) paragraphs 7, 17, 156, 157
and 162 highlight the importance of infrastructure
provision in accompanying, and enabling, the
sustainable growth of communities.
9.3Thischapteraddressesthedeliveryofandfunding
for infrastructure as it relates to new development. It
also covers specific policy requirements in relation to
green infrastructure, open space, outdoor sport
provision, allotments, sustainable and highways
transport networks, car and cycle parking, community
and cultural facilities, and telecommunications.
130Section Nine
Infrastructure and facilities9.1 Policy IN1: Infrastructure delivery
Policy IN1
Infrastructure delivery
1. All development proposals will be expected to:
a. meet all reasonable costs associated with new infrastructure required as a consequence of
the proposal;
b. where appropriate, contribute to the delivery of necessary related infrastructure to enable the
cumulative infrastructure impacts of developments to be managed, including identified transport
infrastructure requirements;
c. provide for the future maintenance of facilities delivered as a result of the development; and
d. where appropriate and necessary, enter into clawback agreements.
2. When determining the nature and scale of any planning obligations sought, account will be taken of any
evidenceofviability,specificsiteconditions,prioritiesintheInfrastructureDeliveryPlanandothermaterial
considerations.
3. Whereappropriate,developercontributionswillbepooledtoallowtheprovisionofstrategicinfrastructure
that will serve more than one scheme.
Explanation
9.4This policy seeks to ensure that growth is
supported by necessary infrastructure and helps to
preserveandenhanceournaturalandbuiltenvironment.
Weneedtoensurethattheareareceivesthenecessary
improvements to its infrastructure so that the provision
ofnewhomesandjobsdoesnotputtoomuchpressure
on existing services and facilities.
9.5The council will work in partnership with
infrastructureproviders,grantfunders,thedevelopment
industry and other delivery agencies (including Homes
EnglandandD2N2)toseekthenecessaryinfrastructure
to support new development and mitigate its impact.
Necessary actions to ensure delivery of the
infrastructure required will be taken including, where
appropriate: applying planning conditions; securing
developer contributions; assisting with site assembly;
usingcompulsorypurchasepowers(CPO);andseeking
external funding. In some cases, developer
contributionscanbepassedtootherappropriatebodies
to facilitate the implementation of infrastructure.9.6The additional planned levels of growth in
Mansfield district will generate more traffic; measures
will be needed to mitigate the impacts of new
development as identified in the Mansfield Transport
Study, 2018. This may include a range of transport
measures to ease traffic flows at identified road
junctions,andtheimplementationofotherlocaltransport
schemesintheLocalTransportPlan3,oritssuccessor.
FurtherdetailsoftheseschemescanbefoundinPolicy
IN8:Protectingandimprovingoursustainabletransport
network.
9.7It is important to ensure that the infrastructure
necessarytoservicenewdevelopmentisprovidedina
timely and financially viable way. Establishing the
capacity of existing infrastructure to accommodate the
demandsarisingfromtheoccupiersofnewdevelopment
is a key starting point. However, in some cases, new
development can be sited to enable new infrastructure
in locations that will promote longer term sustainable
growth.
131Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.8The Mansfield Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)
2018identifiestheneedfornewinfrastructuretosupport
new development proposed in the Local Plan. In
particular, it:
establishes the capacity of existing infrastructure
to meet the needs of existing residents and
businesses;
identifies where capacity is insufficient or absent
to meet the needs of new planned development;
identifyprioritiesfortheprovisionofinfrastructure;
and
setsouttheinfrastructurenecessarytodeliverthe
keydevelopmentrequiredtodelivereconomicand
housing and growth set out in the plan.
9.9The IDP includes a schedule that lists the main
strategic infrastructure requirements that can currently
be foreseen based on the scale of growth and broad
locations of sites. This will be used to help identify
prioritiestoinformnegotiationswhensecuringdeveloper
contributions. The IDP does not set out to list all the
infrastructure needs associated with all developments
thatmayoccurinMansfielddistrictovertheplanperiod.
Inevitably,circumstanceswillchangeovertimeandthe
schedulewillneedtobekeptunderreview.However,it
provides the basis for strategic development viability
assessmentandwillinformfutureworkoninfrastructure.
Asummaryofkeyinfrastructurerequirementstodeliver
key proposals of this Local plan is set out in Appendix
9.9.10The IDP is a “live document” which the council
willupdateregularlyasnewinformationoninfrastructure
delivery, funding sources, investment programmes or
new government guidance become available. The
council will continue to engage with key infrastructure
providers to ensure that issues, proposals and
aspirations are captured.
9.11Where appropriate, the council will assess
viability evidence submitted in support of planning
applications relating to infrastructure provision with the
need to achieve sustainable development. Where a
developerofalargesite,tobedevelopedoveranumber
ofyears,providessatisfactoryevidencetodemonstrate
that it is not viable to deliver policy requirements at the
timeoftheplanningapplication,thecouncilmayrequire
developers to enter a ‘clawback’ agreement. This will
allowtheviabilityoflaterphasesofthedevelopmentto
be reviewed. If these later phases are deemed to be
viable, then those contributions required by planning
policy may be required. In all cases where viability
evidenceisprovided,thiswillbereviewedbyasuitably
qualified person and any costs met by the developer.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
9.12The council will continue to keep under
consideration the need to introduce a Community
Infrastructure Levy (CIL) charging schedule, having
regardtolocalviabilityconditionsandanyfuturereview
of the system.
Table 9.1 Policy IN1 - Supporting information
Policy IN1: Infrastructure delivery
Yes: NPPF- Paragraphs 156, 157, 160, 162, 173, 177 and 180. Does it comply with national policy?
Mansfield Infrastructure Delivery Plan, 2018; and What evidence has informed this policy?
Whole Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment, 2018.
Through: How will it be delivered?
determination of planning applications through the development management process, including
negotiation of appropriate s106, s 278 agreements (having regard to the IDP where appropriate) to
provide necessary infrastructure;
the potential introduction of a CIL charging schedule.
8, 9, and 10. Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1329.2 Policy IN2: Green infrastructure
Policy IN2
Green infrastructure
1. Development proposals within or adjoining areas of strategic green infrastructure (as shown on the
Policies Map) will be supported, provided it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that:
a. the functions and key assets of the green infrastructure network are protected and reasonable
opportunitiesforenhancementofthesearesecuredtodeliveradiverserangeofbenefitsforpeople
and wildlife;
b. good quality connections are maintained to,and within,the green infrastructurenetwork for people
andwildlifeand,wherepractical,improveaccessibilitytoensurenewlinksarecreatedand/orgaps
restored;
c. significantadverseimpactsonsensitivelandscape,ecologicalandheritageassetsandtheirsetting
are avoided where possible or at least minimised, including through the use of buffer strips;
d. opportunities are secured, where feasible, to improve resilience to the impacts of climate change;
e.thequalityofthegreeninfrastructurenetworkisimproved,suchthatitsupportsimprovedecosystem
networks and services, and healthy neighbourhoods; and
f. future management of any features created is financially secured through an agreed management
plan.
2. On and off-site contributions for new, and where appropriate enhancements to existing, provision will be
secured through developer contributions or conditions.
3. Development outside, and not adjoining, the strategic green infrastructure network should, where
appropriate, create local green infrastructure or provide links to the strategic network.
Explanation
9.13Greeninfrastructure(GI)ismadeupofnetworksofnaturalandmanagedgreenspacesi.eparks,countryside,
walking, cycling and bridleway routes, the water environment (blue infrastructure) and ecological networks. Good
quality GI provides multi-functional benefits required to support healthy communities, economic regeneration and
resilience to climate change. GI networks provide essential ecosystem services such as clean air and water, and
flood protection. Its protection and enhancement are important for supporting the delivery of sustainable places.
133Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.14Policy IN2 supports new development where it
takes a holistic approach to planning for green
infrastructure, such that development takes an active
role in facilitating the:
protection of key assets, functions and
connections;
avoidance and/or mitigation of harm to sensitive
assets;
enhancement of existing GI assets in terms of
quality and function;
creation of new connections where these are
absent; and
longer term management of green infrastructure.
9.15This approach reflects the NPPF and planning
practiceguidance,suchthatGIshouldprovideadiverse
range of (i.e. multiple benefits for people and wildlife).
It is essential that provision for GI, including its
management, should be considered early on in the
planningprocess.Thispolicyshouldbereadalongside
related design, transport, landscape and nature
conservation policies. Supporting evidence to
demonstrate IN2 has been met is likely to include a
combination of the following, for example: design and
accessstatement,designandlayoutmapsshowingGI
connectivity, GI management plan, and evidence
submitted as part of a design review process. A
Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure SPD will provide
further guidance for policy implementation.9.16There are thirteen identified strategic green
infrastructurenetworks/areasinthedistrictwhichalso
link with green infrastructure in neighbouring districts.
They reflect the district's distinct geology, heritage and
ecological networks, and recognise opportunities to
strengthenkeyareasforpresentandfuturegenerations.
Further details on strategic GI networks are provided
on the polices map and in the Mansfield Green
Infrastructure Study, 2018. Local green infrastructure
networks function on a site-specific level but don't
connect to the wider strategic GI network; these are
likely to be created through new development.
9.17The strategic urban extension at Berry Hill
(SUE3), when complete, will provide additional
recreational green corridors, open space and new
habitat areas. Additionally, there may be other local
green corridors that provide a range of GI benefits .
9.18If located outside of settlement boundaries
proposals within or adjacent to the identified Green
InfrastructureareaswillalsoneedtoaccordwithPolicy
S3 (Development in the Countryside).
134Figure 9.1 Mansfield strategic green infrastructure network
135Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.19Table 9.2 defines the main GI key functions and their related assets. It gives some examples of how these
should be considered in relation to new development. These functions often overlap, and therefore need to be
considered holistically. For example, providing access to nature whilst mitigating negative impacts on sensitive
habitats.
Table 9.2 Key green infrastructure functions
Considerations for new development (examples of) Key functions and related assets
Recreation and commuting – open space, allotments, and
walking,cycling,horse riding and multi-user routes.
Howcannewgreencorridors,pathwaysandopenspacebeintegratedtocomplement
and/or provide improved access to strategic GI corridors? How can the recreational
provision along existing green corridors be improved or gaps addressed?
Thisfunctionincludesproviding‘accesstonature’closetowhere
people live.
 How can new GI support active, healthy neighbourhoods and access to nature?
Where might harm to sensitive sites be avoided and/or how might on-site or off site
openspacebebetterdesignedtoencouragerecreationalaccessawayfromsensitive
sites?
Landscape character and amenity – landscape policy zones,
landscape features and public amenity areas (e.g. paths, open
space, etc.) .
Considerthesensitivityandconditionofalandscapepolicyzone(LPZ). Canactions
associated with the district’s LPZ be appropriately addressed?
Howcandevelopmentavoidand/orminimiseadversevisualeffectsonareasofpublic
amenity?
Is the development appropriate regarding its location, scale and/or type?
Climatechange -areasoffloodrisk ,opportunitiesforecological
enhancements within the water environment, areas of shade
within urban areas, and woodland which are effective in storing
CO2.
How can new development design in resilience to climate change (e.g. reducing
flooding and the urban heat effect) through the integration of SuDS, layout, design
and landscaping?
Consider opportunities to improve connections for wildlife, especially within the river
corridors and to naturalise sections to help reduce flood risk.
How can landscaping and layout help reduce health risks related to air pollution?
Heritage value - heritage assets and areas of potential
archaeological significance.
Consider the protection of historic assets and their settings.
Can heritage assets be positively and sensitively integrated into new development?
Nature conservation - designated sites, habitats and habitat
opportunity areas. Also include ecological networks made up of
a combination of designated sites and areas of habitat outside
these designations.
Consider the protection of ecological and geological sites and priority habitats. How
do protected and priority species use existing ecological networks?
Howcannewdevelopmentfacilitatetherestorationofhabitatlinkagesand/orcreation
of new habitat areas within and adjacent to the site boundary? How can net gains in
biodiversity be addressed through planned green corridors? This function includes supporting the movement of wildlife.
1369.20Figure 9.2 below shows how the various components of GI can connect with each other:
Figure 9.2 Green infrastructure network
9.21Whilst the overall emphasis is to protect and enhance green infrastructure networks, assets and functions,
development may be considered acceptable where it contributes to the enhancement and management of the
existingnetwork.DevelopmentmayalsocontributetoextensionoftheGInetworkthroughthedeliveryofnewlocal
wildlife and recreational green corridors.
Table 9.3 Policy IN2 - Supporting information
Policy IN2: Green infrastructure
Yes- NPPF Paragraphs 17, 70, 99, 109, 114, 117 and 165. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Green Infrastructure Study, 2018; and What evidence has informed this policy?
Various mapped GI components.
Through the development management process and the preparation of a Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure
SPD .How will it be delivered?
7, 9, 10 and 12 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
137Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.3 Policy IN3: Protection of community
open space and outdoor sports provision
Policy IN3
Protection of community open space and outdoor sports provision
1. All areas of community open space shown on the policies map, outdoor sports provision identified for
protection in Appendix 10, and any additional future provision made as part of new development will be
safeguarded, unless it is satisfactorily demonstrated that:
a. the proposed development is ancillary to the existing recreational use of the site;
b. the open space or outdoor sports provision is surplus to requirements, as set out in Part 2 of this
policy;
c. alternative provision of an equivalent or greater standard will be provided in an
accessible location nearby, or accessibility is improved to existing provision, such that
the Mansfield Green Space Standard and sports provision needs are met; or
d. the development proposals involve the loss of a small area of a protected community open space
or outdoor sports provision, and would lead to an improvement to the remaining area whilst
maintaining its overall function and contribution to meeting the Mansfield Green Space Standard
or appropriate sports provision standards.
In all cases development should avoid the fragmentation of open space into smaller parcels.
2. Developmentproposalsinvolvingthelossofopenspacearerequiredtoprovideanassessmentofneed,
identifying proposed enhancements and/or replacement facilities, as relevant. This should:
a. incorporate relevant findings from the council's community open space assessment
andplayingpitchassessment/strategy,includingapplicationoftheMansfieldGreenSpaceStandard
(Appendix 11); and
b. satisfactorily demonstrate that the development will not prejudice community use for existing or
future outdoor sport, in terms of quality, quantity or access as set out in the council's playing pitch
assessments and strategy.
Sites may be subject to review, and regard will be had to any updates in the council’s public open space
assessment. Any new green spaces developed after the local plan is adopted will be protected under this
policy.
1389.4PolicyIN4:Newcommunityopenspace
and outdoor sports provision
Policy IN4
New community open space and outdoor sports provision
1. New residential development of 10 or more dwellings (net) will be required to contribute towards:
a. the creation of new community open space (including play) and outdoor sports provision; and/or
b. improvingthequalityofand/oraccessibilitytoexistingcommunityopenspace,naturalgreenspace,
play and outdoor sports provision.
2. New on-site provision and/or contributions towards enhancements to existing provision should:
a. be informed by the council's community open space assessment and playing pitch assessment
and strategy, including the Mansfield Green Space Standard and Sport England pitch standards;
b. be proportionate to the size of the development;
c. be multi-functional, accessible, of good quality and fit for purpose; and
d. have appropriate mechanisms to ensure their future satisfactory maintenance, management and
sustained community use.
Explanation
9.22Policies IN3 and IN4 seek to protect and
enhance community open space and outdoor sports
provision in order to support healthy communities and
enhance place shaping in the district by:
protectingandimprovingthequalityof,andaccess
to, existing open spaces and outdoor sports
facilities;
ensuringnewdevelopmentprovidesappropriately
located and accessible open space, play and
outdoorsportsfacilitiesneartowherepeoplelive;
and
ensuringthatnewandexistingprovisionpositively
contributes to place shaping, access to natural
greenspace,natureconservationandthehistoric
environment.
9.23Communityopenspaceisdefinedasanoutdoor
area that is open to the public that supports health and
wellbeing, through sport, play and/or relaxation. Thisincludes parks and recreation grounds, play areas,
amenity spaces and areas of natural green space.
Allotments are covered separately in Policy IN5.
9.24Outdoor sports provision supports organised
team sports such as, football, rugby, hockey, cricket,
bowls,tennisandathletics. Thisincludessportspitches
and their associated facilities (e.g. changing or social
meeting rooms, etc.) that are open for community
access. These may be located on community open
space,schoolplayingfieldsorprivatelyownedgrounds.
9.25These spaces can also form key connections
withinthegreeninfrastructurenetwork(seePolicyIN2)
andsupportbiodiversity.Theymayalsohaveadditional
relevance, such as, heritage importance, helping to
defineneighbourhoods,andimprovingfloodresilience.
Protection of community open space and outdoor
sports provision
9.26Applications involving the loss of a community
open space and outdoor sport provision (Policy IN3)
and the creation of new provision (Policy IN4) should
139Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilitiesrefer to standards and actions set out in the following
evidence documents and demonstrate that these have
been appropriately considered:
Appendix 10 – protected outdoor sports pitches;
Appendix 11 – Mansfield green space standard;
Mansfield Community Open Space Assessment,
2018 (or equivalent updated version);
MansfieldPlayingPitchAssessmentandStrategy,
2016 (or equivalent updated version);
Sport England and national sports body national
standards and calculators;
Mansfield Green Infrastructure Study, 2018 (or
equivalent updated version); and
Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure SPD (to be
prepared).
9.27Where a proposed development involves the
loss of outdoor sport provision, and its subsequent
replacement,this should not prejudice community use.Thismeansthatitsfabric,andanyagreementsinplace,
should support use outside of the hours used for
educational or private use.
New community open space and outdoor sports
provision
9.28Newhousingdevelopmentscreateanadditional
need for both open space and recreational facilities. It
willalsobeimportanttoconsiderhowneworenhanced
openspaceprovision(onand/oroff-site)canbestserve
thedevelopmentinrelationtoitslocation,sizeandtype
of user. Opportunities for creating new or enhanced
facilities and / or improved access to nearby facilities
will be sought.
9.29Newandimprovedopenspaceprovisionshould
be designed to be of overall good quality, meet the
community’svariedneeds,bemulti-functional,integrate
with green infrastructure networks, support access to
nature, contribute to place shaping, and be accessible
to people with disabilities. Good quality is defined
further in the Mansfield District Green Space Standard
(Appendix11)andCommunityopenspaceassessment
(2018).
9.30Further guidance on requirements for on-site
provision for, and/ or financial contributions which will
be sought to meet the recreational needs of new
residential developments may be set out in a Planning
Obligations Supplementary Planning Document.
Table 9.4 Policy IN3 and 4 - Supporting information
Policy IN4: Creation of open space and outdoor sports provision in new development
Policy IN3: Protection of community open space and outdoor sports provision, and
Yes- NPPF paragraphs 17, 69, 70, 73, and 74. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Community Open Space Assessment, 2018; What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Final Playing Pitch Strategy Assessment, 2016, and Addendum, 2018; and
Mansfield Final Playing Pitch Strategy Action Plans, 2016.
Through the determination of planning applications through the development management process: How will it be delivered?
byapplyingtheMansfieldGreenSpaceStandard,MansfieldPlayingPitchStrategy(2015)orsubsequentupdates,
and
by further guidance provided by the Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure SPD and Planning Obligations SPD.
7 and 10 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1409.5 Policy IN5: Allotments
Policy IN5
Allotments
Protection ofexistingprovision
1. All existing allotments as shown on the Policies Map, and any future provision, will be safeguarded from
development unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated that:
a. the whole of the allotment, or the proportion proposed to be developed, is surplus to requirements
based on existing and known future demand ; or
b. alternative equivalent replacement provision is being provided.
Creation ofnewallotments
2. Thecreationofnewallotmentswillbesupportedprovidedthatmanagementandmaintenanceconditions
are secured.
Explanation
9.31Allotmentsare valuable community spaces that
areimportantforpeople'shealthandwellbeing.Existing
allotmentprovisioninthedistrictincludesbothstatutory
(councilowned)andnon-statutoryallotments(privately
owned or owned by charities). All allotments, whether
statutory or not, are protected through this policy.
Statutory allotments receive additional protection
through the Allotments Act 1925. Council's cannot
disposeofstatutoryallotmentlandwithouttheSecretary
of State’s consent.
9.32Where development is proposed on an existing
allotment site, it must be determined that the allotment
is surplus to requirement. Determining whether or not
it is surplus should be based on existing and future
demand. Demand is informed by documented current
use (i.e. number of plots in use), and an appropriate
demonstration of existing demand including, for
example, information on those on waiting lists,
availability, and rate of uptake for allotment plots.
9.33To address any latent demand, it must be
demonstrated that any vacant plots have been actively
advertisedtothewidercommunitybyavarietyofmeans
foratleastafullseason(i.e.notjustaone-offattempt).
This may include, for example: on-site and/or off-site
posters, advertisements in local publications,promotional open days, etc. This message should be
clearandsimpleaboutwhotocontactandhowtoobtain
a plot.
141Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities
9.34Whether replacement provision under Part 1b
of Policy IN5 is adequate should take into account
current activity levels at the allotment, and the soil and
ground conditions and accessibility of the replacement
plots. These are defined by the following:
plots – this is based on plots of a standard size of
250 sqm; where plots are smaller or larger,
replacement provision should be standardised
accordingly.
suitablesoilandgroundconditions–analternative
location should be workable and free from
contamination and flooding.
accessibility - an alternative allotment site should
be located within a 15-minute walk (a pedestrian
route of 1 kilometre) of the existing allotment site
and be easily accessible taking reasonable
accountoftheneedsofusers,includingthosewith
disabilities. The site should also have suitable
parking arrangements.Table 9.5 Policy IN5 - Supporting information
Policy IN5: Protection and creation of allotments
Yes- NPPF paragraphs 17, 69, 70, 73, and 74. Does it meet national planning policy?
Allotment disposal guidance: Safeguards and alternatives, DCLG, 2014; and What evidence has informed this policy?
A place to grow: a supplementary document to Growing in the community, National Allotment Society, 2010
Through the development management process. How will it be delivered?
7, 10 and 11 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1429.6 Policy IN6: Designated local green
space
Policy IN6
Designated local green space
1. Other than in very special circumstances, proposals will only be supported for development on a site
designated as local green space, as shown on the Policies Map, where the development would clearly
enhance or be ancillary to the reason/s why it was designated.
2. Development proposed within close proximity to a local green space will only be supported where it can
beclearlyandsatisfactorilydemonstratedthatthedevelopmentwouldnotsignificantlyharmthepurpose/s
for which the local green space was designated.
Explanation
9.35Localgreenspacedesignationprovidesspecial
protection for green areas with particular importance
for local communities. Local green space sites have
been identified in accordance with paragraphs 76 and
77 of the NPPF because of their beauty, historic
significance,recreationalvalue,tranquillity,orecological
value.
9.36Thispolicyrecognisestheuniquebenefitsofthe
designatedsitesandensurestheirlong-termprotection
beyond the plan period. It also addresses the need to
consider any potential impacts from nearby proposed
development.9.37Theterm‘veryspecialcircumstances’inrelation
to designated Local Green Spaces is required by the
NPPF. Substantial weight will be given to any harm to
Local Green Space. To show there are ‘very special
circumstances’ the applicant will need to demonstrate
that the potential harm to the Local Green Space in
question, including the reasons for its designation and
any other harm resulting from the proposal, is clearly
outweighed by other considerations.
9.38Furtherdetailsoflocalgreenspacedesignations
and their special benefits are detailed in Appendix 12
andtheMansfieldLocalGreenSpaceStudy,2015and
its addendum, 2018.
Table 9.6 Policy IN6 - Supporting information
Policy IN6: Designated local green space
Yes– NPPF Paragraphs 76, 77, and 78. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Local Green Space Study, 2015; What evidence has informed this policy?
Designating Local Green Space Addendum, 2018; and
Local Green Spaces - Statement of Consultation, 2015.
Throughtheoperationofthedevelopmentmanagementprocessintermsofdeterminationofplanningapplication
and enforcement action.How will it be delivered?
7 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
143Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.7PolicyIN7:Localshops,communityand
cultural facilities
Policy IN7
Local shops, community and cultural facilities
Protection ofexistinglocalfacilities
1. Development proposals which involve the loss of local facilities will only be supported where it is
satisfactorily demonstrated that:
a. appropriate replacement facilities will be provided in a suitable alternative location*;
b. the facility is no longer viable, and this can be justified through adequate marketing of the premises for its
current or former use for at least six months **; or
c. the facility will be reinstated and enhanced as part of any redevelopment of the building or site.
Neworextended localfacilities
2. Proposals will be supported for small scale local shops that meet the day to day convenience needs of
the immediate area***, or for other community and cultural facilities, provided:
a. they are within settlement boundaries****;
b. theproposedfacilitiesareofatypeandscaleappropriatetothecharacteroftheareaandsettlementsize;
c. the proposal would not result in significantly adverse impact on public amenity; and
d. where appropriate, the new building is capable of accommodating multiple uses without the necessity of
structural conversion.
*400m radius around the proposal - based on an appropriate five minute walking time. Some community
facilities will serve a wider area not usually accessed by walking. In these cases, evidence of the availability
ofalternativeexistingorproposedreplacementfacilitieswhichareaccessiblebypublictransportandarewithin
a reasonable travel time will be considered when making a decision.
** Marketing should be through an appropriate agent as well as through the council’s regeneration service's
property search service - for at least six months. Evidence of the results of the sustained marketing strategy
will need to be submitted with any planning application and may be scrutinised by an independent assessor
if deemed necessary.
*** Proposals should not exceed 280sqm (net) or will need to be in accordance with Policy RT1.
****Proposalsfornewcommunityandleisurefacilitiesmaybeacceptableincountrysidelocationsiftheymeet
part (g) of Policy S5.
144Explanation
9.39Sustainablecommunitiesrequireaccesstolocal
community and cultural facilities and services that
provide for health and wellbeing, social, educational,
spiritual, recreational, leisure and cultural needs of the
community. These include theatres, museums, village
halls,communitycentres,localshops,churches,church
halls,libraries,youthcentres,indoorsportsandleisure
centres and public houses.
9.40The council will seek to maintain and improve
the provision of local community and cultural services
and facilities by supporting proposals which protect or
enhance existing community facilities (including multi
use and shared schemes), or lead to the provision of
newfacilities.Criterion2dseeksthat,whereappropriate,
new buildings can be easily adapted to accommodate
multiple uses, or a suitable new use in the future.
9.41Itisrecognisedthatpermitteddevelopmentrights
exist which allow for certain changes of use, however
this policy will help avoid the loss of important facilities
whereplanningpermissionisrequired.Thecouncilwill
considerremovingtheserightsinparticularareaswhere
theloss offacilitiesmay become an issue in thefuture.9.42Inadditiontotheprotectionofferedbytheabove
policy, if community facilities that are successfully
recorded on the council’s Community Asset Register
come to be sold, a moratorium on the sale (of up to six
months) may be triggered under the Community Right
to Bid, providing local community groups with a better
chance to raise finance, develop a business case and
to make a bid to buy the asset on the open market.
9.43Thereisalsoaneedtomanagethedevelopment
of new or extended local shops, so that they do not
underminetheretailhierarchyofthedistrictbybecoming
solargethattheyattractcustomawayfromestablished
neighbourhood and local centres.
9.44Accordingly, the policy sets a maximum size
threshold for new local shops. Existing local shops
serving a local community are by their very nature
convenience shops. The policy excludes comparison
retail which should be concentrated within the town
centre, district and local centres. Conditions will be
appliedtorestrictfloorspacebeingusedforcomparison
retail.
Table 9.7 Policy IN7 - Supporting information
Policy IN7: Local shops, community and cultural facilities
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 28, 58, and 70. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Infrastructure and Delivery Plan (IDP), 2018. What evidence has informed this policy?
Through the development management process. How will it be delivered?
7, 10 and 11 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
145Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.8 Policy IN8: Protecting and improving
the sustainable transport network
Policy IN8
Protecting and improving the sustainable transport network
1. Development proposals which enhance the existing sustainable transport network will be supported
where they:
a. protect and improve access to and along multi-user trails network across the district especially the
Maun Valley Trail, Mansfield Way, Timberland Trail, Meden Trail, Dukeries Trail, Clipstone
to Warsop, the National Cycle Route 6 and the Mansfield Strategic Cycle Route;
b. provide new sustainable transport measures such as pedestrian and cycle routes, public transport
facilities, and provision for community transport and taxis;
c.assistthepotentialre-openingoftheDukeriesrailwaylineincludingtheformerMarketWarsoprailway
station;
d. facilitate the shift towards the use of ultra-low emissions vehicles; and
e. facilitate the delivery of highway improvement schemes/sustainable transport solutions along the
district’s main arterial routes and public transport corridors, including:
i. A60 corridor including Nottingham Road/ Woodhouse Road/ Leeming Lane/ Mansfield Road;
ii. A38 Sutton Road;
iii. A617 Chesterfield Road North / A6191 Chesterfield Road South;
iv. A6191 Southwell Road West / Ratcliffe Gate;
v. A6075 Debdale Lane / Abbott Road; or
vi. Mansfieldtowncentreincludingitsringroads(A60,A6009ChesterfieldSouthandRosemary
Street).
2. Proposals for development which do not adequately safeguard the following routes (as shown on the
Policies Map) identified within Local Transport Plan 3 schemes will not be approved:
a. A6191 Ratcliffe Gate Improvement (bus priority);
b. A60 Nottingham Road (bus priority);
c. A60 Woodhouse Road Improvements (bus priority);
d. A6075 Abbott Road (Carriageway widening and realignment); and
e. Dukeries Line Improvement (Rail).
146Explanation
9.45This policy seeks to support and promote
sustainable transport across the district by:
encouragingmodalshifttowardsmoresustainable
transport modes including walking, cycling and
public transport;
setting out priorities for improvements; and
safeguarding existing key infrastructure and
potential routes.
9.46Itisimportantthatthefuturegrowthofthedistrict
is supported by a high quality sustainable transport
network. Opportunities to improve the existing network
or provide new facilities and services will be supported
especially along the public transport corridors and in
association with the development proposals promoted
through the plan. The routes of key proposed Local
Transport Plan schemes will also be safeguarded.
9.47The district’s existing sustainable transport
network includes:
strategic rail and road routes;
the multi-user trails network including the Maun
Valley Trail, Mansfield Way, Timberland Trail,
Meden Trail, and the Dukeries Trail;
SUSTRAN's National Cycle Route 6 and the
proposed Mansfield strategic cycle routes
(construction commenced September 2017);
other walking and cycling routes including the
Public Rights of Way and footway networks;
the Robin Hood Line and the railway stations at
Mansfield, and Mansfield Woodhouse;
the bus networks, made up of bus priority lanes,
bus stops and bus stations, including the new
MansfieldTransportInterchangewithinMansfield's
central area; and
community transport and taxi services.9.48Where major developments are proposed that
are not effectively served by existing public transport,
cycling and pedestrian provision, the council will seek
to enter into a planning obligation or other legal
agreement with developers to ensure either direct
provisionorafinancialcontributiontowardstheprovision
of necessary transport improvements (including rail
whereappropriate)aremade.Thiswillbeinaccordance
with Policy IN1.
9.49The new Mansfield bus station has made an
important contribution to the local economy and it is
important for these benefits to be maximised through
provision of new bus stop facilities in appropriate
developments. Nottinghamshire County Council will
wish to explore with developers the provision of
contributions for the provision of waiting facilities
includingrealtimedeparturedisplaysandraisedkerbs,
complemented by Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL)
and Traffic Light Priority (TLP), where appropriate,
through section 106 agreements.
9.50Community transport is an important part of the
local sustainable transport network, especially in the
villages. The potential for community transport and
related services (i.e. taxis, buses) to complement the
local bus network should be considered as part of
accessingpublictransportforappropriatedevelopments.
9.51Licensedtaxisalsohaveanimportantroleinthe
localeconomy,providingasustainabletransportservice.
Provision for new taxi ranks should be considered in
new developments that generate high levels of traffic
movements such that a taxi rank may be feasible.
9.52Where there is robust evidence, paragraph 41
of the NPPF is clear that councils should identify and
protect sites and routes which could be critical in
developinginfrastructuretowidentransportchoice.The
transport scheme routes set out in Policy IN8 part 3 (a
to e) and shown on the Policies Map are safeguarded
to ensure that their implementation is not impeded
during the life of this plan (see also Figure 9.3).
147Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilitiesFigure 9.3 Safeguarded transport routes/sites
148Current details of planned implementation are set out in Table 9.8. Further updates can be found at http://www .
nottinghamshire.gov .uk/transport/ public-transport/plans-strategies-policies/local-transport-plan
Table 9.8 Sustainable transport network implementation programme (as at Sept. 2018)
Nottinghamshire County Council is currently safeguarding a scheme for possible construction during the third Local
Transport Plan for Nottinghamshire, 2011-2026. This scheme does not however feature in the LTP3 implementation
programme for 2018/19.A6191 Ratcliffe Gate Improvement
(bus priority)
Nottinghamshire County Council is currently investigating the feasibility of a scheme for possible construction during
the third Local Transport Plan for Nottinghamshire, 2011-2026. This scheme does not however feature in the LTP3
implementation programme for 2018/19.A60 Nottingham Road (bus priority)
Nottinghamshire County Council is currently investigating the feasibility of a scheme for possible construction during
the third Local Transport Plan for Nottinghamshire, 2011-2026. This scheme does not however feature in the LTP3
implementation programme for 2018/19.A60WoodhouseRoadImprovements
(bus priority)
Nottinghamshire CountyCounciliscurrentlyinvestigatingthefeasibilityofaschemeforpossibleconstructionduring
the third Local Transport Plan for Nottinghamshire, 2011-2026. This scheme does not however feature in the LTP3
implementation programme for 2018/19. Please note that this scheme may be delivered as part of development
proposals in Mansfield.A6075 Abbott Rd
Nottinghamshire County Council is currently investigating the feasibility of a scheme for possible construction during
the third Local Transport Plan for Nottinghamshire, 2011-2026.This scheme does not however feature in the LTP3
implementation programme for 2018/19.Dukeries Line Improvement (Rail)
NottinghamshireCountyCouncilweresuccessfulintheirbidtotheD2N2forthemonies(jointbidwiththeotherD2N2
members).TheLEPmoneywillbecomplementedwithNCCmatchfunding.ConstructioncommencedinSeptember
2017. This scheme is being implemented by Via East Midland.Mansfield Strategic Cycle Route
Table 9.9 Policy IN8 - Supporting information
Policy IN8: Protecting and improving the sustainable transport network
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 29, 30, 34, 35, 41, 58, 75, and 156. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Transport Study, 2018; and What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Air Quality Impact Assessment Local Plan Junctions Effects, 2018.
Through the operation of the development management process. How will it be delivered?
9 and 10 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
149Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.9 Policy IN9: Impact of development on
the transport network
Policy IN9
Impact of development on the transport network
1. Development proposals will be supported provided:
a.theydonotendangerhighwaysafety,andallowforsatisfactoryaccessandegressfromthehighway
and internal movements within the site;
b. any significant impacts on the highway network can be suitably mitigated; and
c. they do not impact on the safe operation of the rail network.
2. Development proposals that generate significant levels of movements are required to:
a.besupportedbyatransportassessmentorstatement,togetherwithatravelplanwhichdemonstrates
how sustainable transport measures set out in IN8 have been addressed; and
b. be situated within settlement boundaries, as shown on the Policies Map, or in locations that are, or
can be, well served by the full range of transport modes including public transport.
Explanation
9.53This policy requires proposals for new
development to be acceptable in terms of safety and
their impact on the local highway network. The impact
will be considered both individually and cumulatively in
relationtoallplanningapplicationshavingregardtothe
Mansfield Transport Study, 2018 and any subsequent
updates.
9.54Whilst a move towards more sustainable travel
will reduce the reliance on the car, new developments
will generally put pressures on the local highway
network.
9.55Transport Assessments will be required for
proposals that develop significant levels of movement.
The scope of the assessment including the need toaddressanycumulativeimpactsonthehighwaynetwork
will need to be agreed with the council in consultation
with Nottinghamshire County Council as Highway
Authority.
9.56The council has a statutory responsibility under
planning legislation to consult the statutory rail
undertaker where a proposal for development is likely
to result in a material increase in the volume or a
material change in the character of traffic using a level
crossingoverarailwayorimpactuponrailinfrastructure.
Any planning application which may increase the level
ofpedestrianand/orvehicularusageatalevelcrossing
should be supported by a full Transport Assessment
assessing impact and mitigation measures including
assessmentofclosure;andthedevelopershouldassess
the impacts any development could have upon the
railway infrastructure.
Table 9.10 Policy IN9 - Supporting information
Policy IN9: Impact of development on the transport network
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 30, 32, 35, 36, and 162. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Transport Study, 2018 What evidence has informed this policy?
Through the development management process How will it be delivered?
9 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
1509.10 Policy IN10: Car and cycle parking
Policy IN10
Car and cycle parking
1. Development proposals will be supported where there is appropriate provision for vehicle and cycle
parking,includingmeetingtheneedsofthedisabled. Provisionshouldbedesignedsothatitisanintegral
part of the development, does not dominate the public realm and:
a. meets the minimum standards and design requirements set out in adopted guidance;
b. where practical, includes electric car charging provision appropriate to the scale and use of the
proposed development;
c. incorporates sustainable urban drainage paving systems where appropriate.
Explanation
9.57Without adequate car parking provision for
residents,customersandvisitors,orasaresultofpoor
design, inappropriate and illegal parking will occur on
pavements verges, and adjoining areas leading to
impacts on local highway network and surrounding
neighbourhoods.
9.58In any new development, it is important that car
parking is sensitively designed in order to not be
obtrusive or damaging to the character of an area ofthe development and should be an integral part of the
design process. This should be considered at an early
stage of the development process to ensure that they
are successful, sustainable developments, which do
not discourage the use of more sustainable transport
modes and minimise impacts on the local highway
network.
9.59Until the council provides further guidance, the
NottinghamshireCountyCouncil'sguidancewillbeused
to determine the appropriate provision of parking
facilities.
Table 9.11 Policy IN10 - Supporting information
Policy IN10: Car and cycle parking
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 39 and 40 Does it meet national planning policy?
Government ministerial statement on planning matters which included guidance on the provision of car parking
spaces, March 2015;
Nottinghamshire County Council Highway Design Guide documents: Foreword, Part 1, Part 2 & Part 3. What evidence has informed this policy?
Through the development management process and the determination of planning applications ensuring that
developmentproposalsmeettherequirementsofPolicyIN10. ThecouncilwillprepareaSPDprovidingfurther
local parking design guidance.How will it be delivered?
9 and 10 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
151Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Nine: Infrastructure and facilities9.11 Policy IN11: Telecommunications and
broadband
Policy IN11
Telecommunications and broadband
1. Major development proposals will be supported where adequate broadband infrastructure is to be made
available to all residents and / or users of the development.
2. Major development proposals should incorporate a bespoke duct network, designed and implemented
in cooperation with a recognised network provider, and where viable, a fibre to the premises (FTTP)
solution.
3.Otherformsofinfrastructure,suchasfacilitiessupportingmobilebroadbandandWi-Fi,shouldbeincluded
in major development proposals and designed in a sympathetic and appropriate way in order to reflect
the character of the surrounding area.
4. Telecommunications development proposals will be permitted where:
a.thereisnosignificantimpactonthecharacterorappearanceofthebuildingonwhich,orspace
in which, the equipment is located, including not contributing to street clutter;
b. the significance, appearance, character and setting of heritage assets are conserved;
c.thereisnosignificantadverseimpactuponbiodiversity,ecology,geodiversityorbestandmost
versatile agricultural land;
d. all options for sharing of existing equipment, and erecting masts on existing tall buildings or
other structures have been fully explored;
e. they are appropriately designed, minimising size and scale and camouflaging appearance
wherever possible;
f.allmastsandadditionstoexistingmastsareself-certifiedtomeetInternationalCommissionon
Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) standards; and
g. provision is made to ensure that equipment that has become obsolete or that is no longer in
use is removed as soon as practicable and the site restored to its former condition.
152Explanation
9.60The NPPF requires local plans to support the
expansion of electronic communications networks,
including telecommunications and high speed
broadband (NPPF paragraphs 42 and 43) . Through
the Local Plan, the council will support the provision of
telecommunication growth whilst ensuring adverse
impacts to the character of the built form or physical
environment is minimised.
Broadband
9.61The council recognises that access to modern
highspeedtelecommunicationandbroadbandnetworks
is an essential requirement for modern living and to
deliver economic growth in the district.
9.62Broadband Delivery UK (BDUK), part of the
Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport, is
delivering superfast broadband and local full fibre
networks to the nation.
9.63The Government:
is supporting investment to provide superfast
broadband coverage to as many premises as
possible beyond the 95% level achieved in
December 2017;
is also introducing a broadband Universal
Service Obligation so that by 2020 everyone
across the UK will have a clear, enforceable
right to request high speed broadband;
has provided access to basic broadband
(2Mbps) for all for those who do not currently
have coverage otherwise; and
is supporting investment to stimulate private
investment in full fibre connections by 2021
9.64It is important for the Local Plan to facilitate the
provision of appropriate infrastructure on new
development to assist in meeting these Government
targets and promoting economic growth and quality of
life in the district.
9.65Applications for major residential and
employment development should be supported by a
connectivity strategy that delivers future-proofed
infrastructureandsupportssustainablecommunications
services having regard to the latest appropriate BDUKstrategy and other relevant industry guidance.
Developersareencouragedtoengagewithbroadband
providers at the earliest opportunity to enable the
highest possible internet connection speeds to be
providedinnewdevelopments.Theyshouldalsoensure
that future occupiers have access to a sustainable
communications infrastructure, giving appropriate
consideration to the choice and availability of UK
communications providers that can offer high speed
data connections. The provision of the necessary
infrastructure may be funded by the service providers.
This applies particularly on larger urban sites but may
be more problematic on smaller developments in rural
locations.
Telecommunications
9.66Policy IN11 aims to ensure a thorough
assessment for all telecommunication proposals,
whether they are prior approval applications or
developments requiring full planning permission. It
providesguidanceforbothnewandreplacementmasts,
whilst providing the flexibility to allow for an efficient
expansion of the network and meet the demands
imposed by technological advancements.
9.67Appropriate camouflage and screening may be
necessary where the proposed development would
cause an intrusive visual impact on the surroundings.
Reasonable justification should be provided by the
applicant to demonstrate why the chosen site is the
preferred option. In order to ensure this has been
reasonablyconsidered,thecouncilwillrequireevidence
demonstratingthatmastsharinghasbeeninvestigated
andthatalternativesiteshavebeenexplored.Theonus
is on the developer to demonstrate that the preferred
site is the most suitable for the proposal; without
sufficient information being provided the local planning
authority may refuse an application.
9.68The NPPF also requires the applicant to supply
informationrelatingtotheoutcomesofanyconsultations
with local communities or other organisations which
have an interest in the proposal (NPPF paragraph 45).
It is especially important to gain these views if the
proposed siting is close to a sensitive location such as
a school or hospital. In accordance with the Mobile
UKs Code of Best Practice(3), the proposal must be
able to demonstrate that it complies with the
International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation
Protection (ICNIRP) Guidelines for public exposure (or
any updated replacement/successor scheme).
3http://www .mobileuk.org/cms-assets/documents/259876-147086.code-of-best-practice-2016-edition-pub
153
Nine: Infrastructure and facilitiesMansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Table 9.12 Policy IN11 - Supporting information
Policy IN11: Telecommunications
Yes – NPPF Paragraphs 42 to 46 and 156. Does it meet national planning policy?
Broadband Delivery UK, HM Government 2018; and What evidence has informed this policy?
Mobile UK Code of Best Practice on Mobile Network Development in England, 2016
Throughthedevelopmentmanagementprocess,andthroughthesubmissionofconnectivitystrategiesformajor
planning applications.How will it be delivered?
10 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
15410.1Thenaturalenvironmentprovidesvitalresources
for supporting healthy communities, mental well being,
and sustainable growth. They also provide us with a
unique combination of landscape features that help
define local identity. The district's landscape
character is defined by its heathlands and woodlands,
the rivers Maun and Meden, limestone outcrops,
quarries and grasslands.
10.2Over time, the area's native habitats have
become fragmented and biodiversity has experienced
considerable losses. In order to address this, it is
important that we protect and sensitively manage what
we have whilst seeking opportunities to restore
connections for wildlife that have become fragmented,
and improve the health of the district’s habitats and
species. In turn, this will also ensure that the overall
health of the environment, and ultimately its residents,
is improved. Within new development, there are
significant opportunities to design in cost effective
measures to help support biodiversity.10.3When planning for new growth, it is also
important that potential pollution and other
environmental hazards, which might lead to adverse
impactsonhumanhealthandthenaturalenvironment,
are avoided, minimised and mitigated. The district’s
industrial history, increases in road traffic and land
stability issues due to former coal mining activities are
all important considerations when planning for new
development.
10.4Mansfield is known for its unique sources of
minerals, contributing historically, for example, to
building the Houses of Parliament. Minerals can only
be worked where they naturally occur. As such,
economically viable and environmentally acceptable
locations for mineral extraction may be limited.
Nottinghamshire County Council within the Minerals
Local Plan has identified safeguarding areas so that
these are protected from non-minerals development.
156Section Ten
Natural environment10.1 Policy NE1: Protection and
enhancement of landscape character
Policy NE1
Protection and enhancement of landscape character
1. Development proposals will be supported where they are informed by and are sympathetic to the area's
landscapecharacterasdefinedintheMansfieldDistrictCouncilLandscapeCharacterAssessment2010
andAddendum2015,includingrelevantaddendumsandnationalcharacterareaprofiles(Sherwoodand
Southern Magnesian Limestone).
2. Development within in a landscape policy zone will be supported where it can be satisfactorily
demonstrated, where appropriate and feasible, that it:
a.positivelycontributestowardsmeetingthedefinedlandscapepolicyactionsfortherelevantlandscape
policy zone(s) (LPZ) and national character profile(s);
b. is designed to conserve and enhance important landforms, historic assets and their settings and
landscape features;
c. identifiesandmitigatesanylikelyindividualandcumulativeimpactsonthesensitivityandcondition
of the appropriate LPZ(s);
d. identifies and mitigates visual impacts on character and amenity; and
e. restores the landscape or removes any detracting features.
3. Development proposed outside but adjoining a landscape policy zone will be required to satisfactorily
demonstrate that it will:
a. create no significant adverse visual impact on the character and appearance of the LPZ(s); and
b. where feasible, contribute to the enhancement of landscape character.
157Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environmentExplanation
10.5Thispolicyrecognisestheimportancelandscape
plays in conserving our natural, cultural and built
heritage. Landscape character reflects the relationship
betweenpeopleandplacethroughdistinct,recognisable
and consistent patterns within the natural and cultural
environment.Itisimportantthatdevelopmentproposals
are sensitively integrated into the existing landscape,
demonstrate an understanding of the intrinsic qualities
of the landscape setting and, where possible, seeks to
make the most of the opportunities to protect and
enhance landscape characteristics and features.
10.6Landonthefringeofanyoftheurbanareaswill
ofcoursehaveadifferentcharactertothatinthecentre.
Proposed development on the urban fringe, adjacent
tolandscapepolicyzones,willalsoneedtoensurethat
the layout and design of new development respects,
and where possible, enhances, the character of the
surrounding area. Also see the local plan design
chapter and policies.
10.7In addressing criteria within NE1(2), the criteria
listed in NE1(2) will be applied having regard to the
scaleandtypeofdevelopmentproposed.TheMansfield
DistrictCouncilLandscapeCharacterAddendum(2015)
identifies a number of locally specific landscape policy
zones (LPZs) to support policy implementation. Each
zone has a strategic policy action based on an
assessment of landscape sensitivity and landscape
condition, identifying which areas are more locally
sensitive than others to change. Additionally, LPZ
descriptions, characteristic visual features, landscape
analysis and detailed landscape actions help inform
further site-based assessment work and planning
decisions. A map of LPZs is provided at Figure 10.1.10.8Fortheoverallpolicyactions,'conserve'means
that a significant proportions of the LPZ is of high
condition/sensitivityandthereforeitisadvantageousto
directdevelopmentelsewhereorrequireahighlevelof
design. Priority should be given, firstly, to locate
development within LPZs with the actions 'restore' and
'restore and create'. Development within or directly
bordering more than one LPZ should consider actions
within all of those that are applicable.
10.9Development proposals should identify and
address likely negative and beneficial impacts on
landscape character, and visual impacts by means of
detailedsurveys,whichmayincludeafurther,morefine
grainedlandscapecharacterassessmentorlandscape
capacity studies. These should be informed by and
address the actions in the evidence base.
10.10 There may also be circumstances in which
there are more sensitive, localised areas within LPZs
without the term 'conserve' included in the strategic
policy action.
158Figure 10.1 Landscape character policy zones
159Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environmentTable 10.1 Policy NE1 - Supporting text
Policy NE1: Protecting and enhancing landscape character
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 64, 99, 109, 113, 156, and 170. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Landscape Character Assessment, 2010 and Addendum, 2015; and What evidence has informed this policy?
Natural England National Character Area profiles for Sherwood (NCA49) and Southern Magnesian
Limestone (NCA30).
Through the development management process. How will it be delivered?
11 and 14 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
16010.2 Policy NE2: Biodiversity and
geodiversity
Policy NE2
Biodiversity and geodiversity
1. Developmentproposalswillbesupportedwhere,commensuratewiththeirscale,locationandtype,they:
a. protect, enhance and contribute to the management of the ecological network of habitats and sites
of European, national and local importance (statutory and non-statutory);
b. avoid and/or minimise adverse individual and or cumulatively impacts, on biodiversity, geodiversity
and ecosystem services;
c. seek to deliver a net gain in biodiversity across local and landscape scales; and
d. prioritise the de-fragmentation, restoration, retention and sensitive management of habitats and
landscape features, to allow for the movement of wildlife.
Designated European sites
2. Development proposals will not be permitted where they would have an adverse impact on the integrity
of a site of European significance unless it has been demonstrated that there:
a. are no alternatives;
b. are imperative reasons of overriding public interest; and
c. all necessary compensatory measures will be required to ensure the overall coherence of the
network of European sites, as a whole, is protected.
Designated national sites
3. Developmentproposalswillnotbepermittedwheretheywouldhaveanadverseimpactonadesignated
national site. Exceptions will only be made where the benefits of the development clearly outweigh both
the adverse impacts on the designated national site and the national network of such sites.
Designated localsites
4. Development proposals will not be permitted where they will have a significant adverse impact on a
designated local wildlife site, local nature reserve, or l ocal geological site. Exceptions will only be made
where the reasons for, and benefits of, the proposed development clearly outweigh the adverse impact
on the loss or deterioration of the designated site.
Continued overleaf
161Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environmentPolicy NE2 continued
Sherwood Forestpossible potential SpecialProtection Area(ppSPA)
5. Where development is proposed within 400 metres of the non-designated Sherwood Forest ppSPA, a
risk based approach, as set out in Natural England’s Advice Note to Local Planning Authorities, will be
adopted to all planning applications in relation to the possible potential special protection area for the
Sherwood Forest region.
Irreplaceable habitats
6.Planningpermissionwillberefusedfordevelopmentresultingintheloss,deteriorationand/orfragmentation
ofirreplaceablehabitats,includingancientwoodlandandveterantrees,unlesstherearewhollyexceptional
reasons and a suitable compensation plan exists.
Avoidance ,mitigation andcompensation ofadverse impactsonnatureconservation
7. In exceptional circumstances where adverse impacts on designated sites and irreplaceable habitats are
demonstrated to be unavoidable and the benefits outweigh the harm, as set out in 2 to 6 above,
development proposals will only be permitted where:
a.impactsareappropriatelymitigated,withcompensationmeasurestowardslossusedasalastresort
where mitigation is not possible; and
b. appropriate provision for management is made.
Species,habitats, landscape features
8. On sites supporting protected species, important landscape features, and priority habitats and species
(as defined by legislation), development proposals will only be supported where:
a.itcanbedemonstratedthatthebenefitsofthedevelopmentclearlyoutweighstheimpactonspecies,
habitats, important landscape features; and
b.thatappropriateavoidance,mitigation,enhancementandmanagementmeasurescanbesatisfactorily
secured.
162Explanation
10.11The National Planning Policy Framework
(NPPF)stressesthatpursuingsustainabledevelopment
includestheconservationandenhancementthenatural
environment(paragraphs7,9and17)andmovingfrom
a net loss to achieving net gains for biodiversity
(paragraph 109). Policy NE2 has been drafted to meet
the requirements of the NPPF, planning guidance and
the Section 40 of the Natural Environment and Rural
CommunitiesAct(NERC2006),whichplacesadutyon
all local authorities to conserve biodiversity.
10.12Thedistrictsupportsawealthofuniquehabitats
and designated sites. Additionally, the district’s urban
greenspacesandformerindustriallandalsocontribute,
or have the opportunity to contribute, to the ecological
network. A majority of the district’s green spaces have
natural and / or landscaped features that support
biodiversity. Efforts to improve the level of biodiversity
onopenspacesandothergreenareasintegratedwithin
new development are important for supporting, for
example,pollinatorsandbirds.Thedistrict'secological
network is further defined in the Mansfield Green
Infrastructure Study, 2018.
10.13 Anappropriatelevel ofecological assessment
will be required to demonstrate how development
proposals meet the requirements of this policy.
Considering how new development can strengthen
ecological networks is key to providing net gains in
biodiversity whilst improving the natural environment's
resiliencetochange.TheDefraBiodiversityMetricand
key principles, as set out in the ‘Biodiversity Net Gain:
good practice principles for development 2016’ (see
table 10.3), are key tools for assessing and
demonstrating how net gains in biodiversity will be
delivered and monitored through new development.10.14 This policy should be read alongside Policy
CC4 which supports the protection, restoration and
enhancementofthedistrict'srivers,sotheycanachieve
'good ecological status' in line with the requirements of
theWaterFrameworkDirective. Thiswillhelptoensure
that development contributes positively to biodiversity
networks and wider enjoyment of the district's diverse
waterside habitats.
10.15 New development should also explore and
implementsolutionsforpreventingandreversinghabitat
fragmentationacrosslocalandlandscapescales. This
may include retaining and enhancing existing habitats
andimportantlandscapefeaturesonsite,suchasponds
and hedgerows (see Figure 10.3).
163Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environmentFigure 10.2 Habitats and designated sites
164Figure 10.3 Ecological network
165Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environment10.16 The NPPF emphasises that local plan policies should address the distinctions between the hierarchy of
designated sites so that their protection is in keeping, and balanced with, their level or weight of importance and
their contribution to the wider ecological networks (NPPF paragraph 113). This hierarchy, set out in Table 10.2, is
defined from highest to lowest level of importance, as:
Table 10.2 Hierarchy of designated sites
Numbers Designations Level of importance
European sites
 Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) (1) Birklands and Bilhaugh SAC located just
outside the district to the east of Market
Warsop, within Newark and Sherwood district
Special Protection Areas (SPA)
Ramsar sites
ThishierarchylevelalsoincludessitesofEuropeanimportancewherethe
government has formally initiated public consultation, including: potential
SPA, candidate SAC and listed Ramsar sites. These have the same
protection as designated European sites in the planning system.
National sites
 (7) SSSI
 Sites of Special Scientific Interest
National Nature Reserve (1) Sherwood Forest NNR located just outside
the district to the east of Market Warsop, within
Newark and Sherwood district
Local sites
 (9) LNRs
 Local Nature Reserves (LNR)
Local Wildlife Sites (LWS) (over 80) LWS
(around 11) LGS Local Geological Sites (LGS)
10.17 The Sherwood Forest and surrounding areas
have been recognised as important habitat supporting
European protected birds - nightjar and woodlark. This
has not been formally designated as a European site,
norhasanyformalpublicconsultationbeeninitiatedby
Government. As such, a collective area of habitats
known to support nightjar and woodlark is referred to
as the Sherwood Forest possible potential SPA
(ppSPA).
10.18 Natural England (NE) advises that in order to
reduce future risks, should designation be proposed in
thefuture,localauthoritiesmustsatisfythemselvesthat
currentplanningapplicationscontainsufficientobjective
information to ensure that all potential impacts on the
breeding nightjar and woodlark populations have been
adequatelyavoidedorminimised. Thisshouldbedone,
in order to ensure, that planning permissions do not
need to be revoked following any future review under
the 2010 Habitats Regulations.
10.19Localgeologicalsites(LGS)representthemost
importantgeologicalareasofcountyimportancewhere
they meet adopted criteria. Records are held by the
Nottinghamshire Biological and Geological Records
Centre. These sites should be protected fromdevelopment and, where possible, their geodiversity
interest incorporated and enhanced as part of
development. Specialsitesandscientificinterest(SSSI)
canalsorepresentnationallyimportantgeologicalsites,
butpresentlyallSSSIsinthedistrictaredesignatedfor
their biodiversity interests.
10.20 Where there is a reason to suspect the
presenceofprotectedandpriorityspeciesandhabitats,
importantlandscapefeaturesandirreplaceablehabitats,
an ecological assessment will be required to support a
planning application. These should be carried out by a
certified ecologist as defined within the Government’s
standing advice. National and European protected
species are covered by specific legislation (see Table
10.3). Priority species and habitats are defined in
Section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural
Communities Act (NERC 2006).
10.21Wherehabitatbuffersandcompensatoryhabitat
are required to mitigate and compensate adverse
impacts on biodiversity (including designated sites),
these should be designed early on in the planning
process and should be accompanied by an agreed
management plan.
16610.22 Providing net gains in biodiversity is possible
for all development proposals from a single house to
larger strategic extensions by measures such as:
incorporating bird and bat boxes into the fabric of
buildings;
using native trees and shrubs in landscape
planting (in keeping with the landscape character
area);
establishing areas of wildflower meadows, urban
woodland,communityorchardsand/orheathland
within open space, landscaping and other areas
adjacenttonearbyareasofexistingwildlifevalue;
designing in green roofs or walls;
prioritising the integration of 'green' sustainable
drainage systems (SuDS) to benefit wildlife; and
restoringconnectionsforwildlife(e.g.hedgerows)
and re-moving barriers to movement (e.g. river
culverts).
10.23 Simple measures can also be put in place to
avoid creating additional barriers for wildlife, such as
designing in gaps in garden fences and joining up
landscaped areas with open spaces and habitat areas
to facilitate movement for wildlife.Locally designated sites
10.24 Local wildlife sites (LWS) are designated by
theNottinghamshireBiologicalandGeologicalRecords
Centre (NBGRC). Local geological sites (LGS) are
updated as and when new sites are put forward for
consideration. Adoption criterion are set out in the
‘Nottinghamshire LWS Handbook: Guidelines for the
selectionofLocalWildlifeSitesinNottinghamshire’and
the ‘Nottinghamshire LGS Handbook: Guidelines for
the selection of Local Geological Sites in
Nottinghamshire’. The location of LWS and LGS sites
are published on Nottingham Insight
http://maps.nottinghamcity .gov.uk/insightmapping/
hosted by Nottingham City Council.
10.25 The council intends to prepare a Biodiversity
and Green Infrastructure supplementary planning
document (SPD) which will provide further guidance.
167Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environmentTable 10.3 Policy NE2 - Supporting information
Policy NE2: Biodiversity and geodiversity
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 7, 9, 14, 17, 61, 109, 113, 114, 117, 118, 119, 156, 157 and 165. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Green Infrastructure Study, 2018;
Habitat Regulations Screening Report, 2018;What evidence has informed this policy?
Biodiversity, 2020: A strategy for England's wildlife and ecosystem services;
Natural Environment White Paper, 2011;
Defra's planning guide to valuing ecosystem services (An introductory guide to valuing ecosystem services) ,
2007;
Biodiversity Net Gain: Good Practice Principles for Development 2016 - a joint CIRIA, CIEEM and IEMA
publication;
Natural England’s advice notes on the Sherwood ppSPA, 2014, or subsequent updates;
National Government’s Standing Advice on ancient woodland and protected species;
Woodland Trust’s Ancient and Veteran Tree Inventory;
Nottinghamshire Biological and Geological Records Centre - for local wildlife sites and geological information;
Wildlife and Countryside Act, 1981;
Countryside and Rights of Way Act , 2000;
The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations, 2017;
Protection of Badgers, 1992;
The Hedgerows Legislation, 1997; and
Sections 40 and 41 of the Natural Environment & Rural Communities Act (2006).
Through the development management process with consultation with Natural England and reference to
appropriate as appropriate. By reference to the future Biodiversity and Green Infrastructure SPD.How will it be delivered?
8 and 12 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
16810.3 Policy NE3: Pollution and land
instability
Policy NE3
Pollution and land instability
1. Development proposals will be supported where they are sited, designed and constructed to avoid
adversely impacting on human health and wellbeing, amenity and the natural environment through
unacceptable levels of soil, air, light, water or noise pollution or land instability.
2. Development proposed to be located where such unacceptable levels of pollution or land instability
alreadyexistwillonlybesupportedinexceptionalcircumstancesanditcanbesatisfactorilydemonstrated
that the risks of adverse impacts have been fully assessed and mitigated to an acceptable level.
3. Development proposals for remediating and mitigating existing occurrences of despoiled, degraded,
derelict, potentially contaminated and unstable land or for reducing air, water, light or noise pollution will
be supported.
Explanation
10.26 Pollution comes in many forms and types. In
its broadest sense, pollution can be described as the
result of the release to air, water or soil from any
process or of any substance, which is capable of
causing harm. This can occur when the source of the
pollution is inadequately managed or controlled. The
avoidanceandminimisingofpollutionofair,water,soil,
light and noise should be considered at all stages of
development including the design and layout,
construction and monitoring stages of development.
Avoidance and prevention will most always be less
costlythanremediation. Anypotentialpollutionscenario
should be understood and addressed at the source,
pathway and receptor stages.
10.27TheNPPFmakesclearthatlocalplansshould
aim to prevent unacceptable risks from pollution and
landinstabilitybyaddressingindividualandcumulative
impacts on human health and the natural environment
(NPPF paragraph 120). Where risks, existing or
potential, are demonstrated to be unavoidable and the
benefits of the development outweigh the harm, these
should be minimised and mitigated for.
10.28 Thus, development should firstly be directed
to locations that avoids risk. When planning for
development, the sensitivity of its users, nearby
residents and the local environment, including habitats
andwildlife,shouldinformitslocation,typeanddesign.10.29 Policy NE3 considers impacts on air, soil and
waterquality,contaminatedorpotentiallycontaminated
land, land stability, and light and noise pollution. A
related but separate Policy P7 concerns impacts on
local amenity.
Despoiled, degraded, derelict and contaminated
land
10.30 Due to the mix of current and historical land
useswithinthedistrict,therearemanyareaswherethe
land or buildings could be contaminated.
10.31 Radon is a naturally occurring gas which may
affect a small number of properties located over
limestone geology in the north and west of the district.
Where this is likely, new properties will need to ensure
that measures are included to address this.
10.32 Redevelopment of a contaminated site is an
ideal way to secure improvements to the environment,
provided that the results create no unacceptable risks
to human health or the environment. Developers /
owners should have a full understanding of a site's
history to determine the likelihood of risk from
contamination and any associated costs.
169Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environment10.33Wheredevelopmentisproposedonoradjacent
to land that is known or suspected to be contaminated,
itshouldbeaccompaniedbyanappropriateandrobust
investigation such as tiered risk assessment which:
a. identifies the level and precise nature of any
contaminationandneedforremovalortreatment;
b. demonstrates that there is no unacceptable risks
to human health, surface water, groundwater or
environmental receptors both during and after
construction;
c. identifies acceptable decontamination/ mitigation
measures required to achieve a level of land
quality suitable for the proposed end use; and
d.demonstratesmeasurestobetakentoensurethat
migrating gas is safely dealt with where
development is proposed on land adjacent to an
uncontrolled ‘gassing’ landfill site.
10.34 Where planning  permission  is granted, 
conditions  may be imposed  requiring  the execution  of 
any necessary  remedial  works. The measures  for any 
contaminated  site should  deal with any unacceptable  
risks to health, safety or the environment,  taking into 
account its actual or intended  uses. Further advice  and 
guidance  on contaminated  land is available  on the 
environmental  health  pages  of the council’s  website.
Land instability
10.35 Policy NE3 also aims to ensure  that where  
development  occurs, it can be made safe depending  
on the physical conditions of the land. Development that 
does not take account of unstable  ground  conditions  
can potentially  suffer  severe structural problems.  The 
situation can result in  rebuilding and high financial costs  
to occupiers  /
 owners.
10.36 The Coal Authority manages the effects of past 
coal mining, including subsidence  damage claims which  
are
 not the responsibility  of licensed  coal mine 
operators. It deals  with mine water pollution  and other 
mining  legacy  issues. This includes  areas identified  as 
being  a High Risk Coal Area. Details  of areas in 
Mansfield district affected by coal  mining and information  
requirements  can be found online
https://www.gov.uk/guidance/planning-applications-coal-mining-
risk-assessments.
10.37
 Unstable  land also takes
 into consideration  
steep cliffs on or adjacent  to the site. In former quarry 
locations,  which  are common in Mansfield,  this is 
particularly  relevant.10.38Itwillremaintheresponsibilityofanydeveloper
to demonstrate to the local planning authority’s
satisfaction the precise nature, extent and effects of
unstable ground conditions, as well as any remedial,
preventative or precautionary measures required to
overcome unstable ground conditions.
Air quality, water and soil quality
10.39 Poor air, water and soil quality can arise from
a variety of sources but can be particularly associated
with industrial and agricultural processes. All such
emissionsaresubjecttonon-planning,pollutioncontrol
legislation but the design and location of emitting
developments and the siting of ‘receptor’ residential
areasandthenaturalenvironmentarewithinthescope
of the planning system.
10.40ThemajorityofNottinghamshirehasparticulate
matter air pollution (PM2.5) above World Health
Organisation (WHO) standards as described in the
Nottinghamshire Joint Strategic Needs Assessment
www.nottinghamshireinsight.org.uk/research-areas/jsna/ .
In several parts of the district, there are locations with
relative poor air quality arising from high volumes of
slowmovingroadvehiclesand,onastretchoftheA617
where the effects are compounded by enclosed
topography.Atpresent,noneofthelocationsexperience
concentrations of nitrogen oxides or vehicle exhaust
particulate matter that trigger a need to declare Air
Quality Management Areas. The council will continue
to monitor air quality as appropriate. Development
proposals at risk of unacceptably adding to these poor
air quality locations will be subject to strict
implementation of appropriate mitigation measures.
10.41 It is important that both the occupiers or users
ofnewdevelopment,andthoseelsewherewhomaybe
affected by it indirectly, will not be subjected to below
acceptable standards of air quality. Therefore, in
controllingthepotentialimpactofdevelopmentuponair
quality, the council will require an effective air pollution
mitigation strategy for significant developments. An Air
Quality and Emissions Mitigation Guidance for
Developers SupplementaryPlanning Document (SPD)
will provide further guidance for policy implementation.
10.42 Habitats such as heathland can also be
sensitive to airborne pollution in the form of nitrogen
deposition.Sourcescanincluderoadtraffic,incineration,
power facilities, agriculture and heavy industry.
Highways England can provide further advice.
Furthermore, detailed consideration of air quality
170impacts may be required for projects that would
significantly increase traffic flows within 200m of the
Sherwood ppSPA.
10.43 Much of the district is located on a principle
aquifer where groundwater is sensitive to pollution. All
previous and future uses of a development site must
be investigated to determine whether there is potential
tocausecontaminationtogroundwater. Locationsover
principle aquifers also exhibit high permeability and
usually provide high water storage. These are of
strategicsignificanceastheysupportwatersupplyand
baseriverflow. TheseareshownintheMDCStrategic
Flood Risk Assessment (2008). Risk of contamination
ofprincipleaquifersandotheropenwaterbodies,during
constructionandpostconstruction,shouldbeassessed
andsatisfactorilydemonstratedthataviableremediation
can be implemented. Development proposals should
take into account the Environment Agency’s Source
ProtectionZone(SPZ)andSafeGuardingZonepolicy,
the principles of the Water Framework Directive and
River Basin Management Plan for the Severn River
Basin.
10.44 If a development is within close proximity to a
river or other main water body, it will be important that
the watercourse is protected from the release ofchemicals, sewage, soil and other suspended solids
(i.e.silting),andalsothespreadofinvasiveweeds(e.g.
Japanese knotweed, Himalayan balsam) during the
construction phase and also during the development's
lifetime (e.g. through erosion of river banks, surface
waterrun-off,etc.).Thiscouldbecontrolledthroughthe
use of sustainable urban drainage systems (SuDS),
retainingwallsandlandscaping. Duringtheconstruction
phase, appropriate management and monitoring
measures should be put in place.
Lighting, noise and vibration
10.45 Artificial light can provide many benefits, such
as addressing safety and extending opportunities to
playsport. However,itcanalsocausenegativeimpacts
onpeopleandwildlife,underminetheenjoymentofthe
countryside and detract from the night sky.
Consideration will need to be given to ways to avoid
adverse impacts. Sport England provides guidance on
floodlights as part of sports pitch use and buffer
distances to residential areas.
10.46 The location and choice of building materials
are key considerations when taking account of noise
and vibration, particularly from factories, vehicle traffic
or music venues.
Table 10.4 Policy NE3 - Supporting information
Policy NE3: Pollution and land instability
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 109, 110, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, and 125. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Contaminated Land Inspection Strategy, 2002; What evidence has informed this policy?
The Coal Authority’s workings records;
Mansfield Air Quality Review reports (various);
The Nottinghamshire Joint Strategic Needs Assessment - Air Quality, 2015;
Pleasley Detailed Assessment Report, 2016;
Mansfield Transport Study - Stage 1: Baseline & Reference Case, 2018;
Mansfield Transport Study - Stage 2: Local Plan Growth, 2018;
Mansfield Habitat Regulations Assessment, 2016, 2017 and 2018;
Mansfield Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2008, and Addendum, 2018;
Mansfield Water Cycle Scoping Report, 2009; and
Mansfield Air Quality Impact Assessment Local Plan Junctions Effects, 2018.
Through the development management process, requiring detailed assessments in relation to potential pollution and in
consultationwiththeCoal Authority,EnvironmentAgency,NaturalEnglandand MDC environmentalhealthteam,where
appropriate.How will it be delivered?
12 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
171Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Ten: Natural environment10.4PolicyNE4:Mineralsafeguardingareas
Policy NE4
Mineral safeguarding areas
1. In m inerals safeguarding a reas, the m inerals p lanning a uthority will be consulted on non-exempt
development proposals.
2. Planning permission in minerals safeguarding areas will not be granted for non-exempt development
unless the requirements set out in the minerals safeguarding policies of the Minerals Local Plan have
been met.
Explanation
10.47 The NPPF places requirements on both local
planningauthoritiesandmineralplanningauthoritiesin
relation to planning for minerals (Paragraphs 142 to
149). The NPPF identifies that great weight should be
given to the benefits of mineral extraction, and local
planning authorities should identify minerals
safeguarding areas. Nottinghamshire is a two-tier area
for local government and under the Town and Country
PlanninglegislationNottinghamshireCountyCouncilis
the minerals planning authority. The county council will
be identifying minerals safeguarding areas and
supporting policies as part of the emerging Minerals
Local Plan. Policy NE4 sets out the approach that the
districtcouncilwilltakewhendeterminingproposalsfor
non-mineralsdevelopmentwithinmineralssafeguarding
areas.10.48 In accordance with NPPF para 143 (bullet 3),
proposals for non-mineral development in these areas
need to demonstrate that mineral resources will not be
unnecessarily sterilised. Where this cannot be
demonstrated, or where the need for the non-mineral
development is clear and demonstrable, the county
council would require that the practicality of prior
extraction be fully investigated.
Table 10.5 Policy NE4 - Supporting information
Policy NE4: Mineral safeguarding areas
Yes - NPPF Para 142, 143, and 156. Does it meet national planning policy?
Consultation with Nottinghamshire County Council. What evidence has informed this policy?
Thiswillbedeliveredbythedeterminationofplanningapplicationsthroughthedevelopmentmanagementsystem
in consultation with Nottinghamshire County where development lies within mineral safeguarding areas.How will it be delivered?
12 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
17211.1It is important that our historic environment is
protected and enhanced for existing and future
generations.
11.2The most significant parts of our historic
environment are designated heritage assets, including
listed buildings, scheduled monuments, conservation
areas and historic parks and gardens, which are
considered to be nationally important. At a more local
level, non-designated local heritage assets include
plannedindustrialhousingandcollieryvillages,buildings
oflocalinterest,sitesofarchaeologicalinterest,historic
andculturallandscapesandplaces,unregisteredparks
and gardens and public monuments and sculptures.
11.3Thecouncilwillsupportdevelopmentproposals
that enhance the significance of heritage assets and
their settings and add to their long term sustainability.
New development should seek to make a positive
contributiontolocalcharacteranddistinctiveness.This
will require an analytical approach informed by a
combination of historical information, such as historic
maps, research, detailed examination, architectural or
archaeologicalevidence. Conservationareaappraisals,
historic landscape assessments and the
Nottinghamshire Historic Environment Record are key
sources that may be used to inform this.11.4Ourpositivestrategyforthehistoricenvironment
will be achieved through:
supportingproposalswhichconserveandenhance
the historic environment;
keeping up-to-date conservation area appraisals
andmanagementplans,andusingsuchup-to-date
information in the determination of planning
applications;
identifying and considering new areas for
designation as conservation areas;
usingArticle4Directions(4)toprotectconservation
areasandtraditionalbuildingsoflocalsignificance;
developing a list of locally listed heritage assets;
working to reduce the number of heritage assets
ontheHeritageatRiskRegister,andencouraging
their sympathetic maintenance and restoration;
supportingproposalsforheritageledregeneration,
ensuring that heritage assets are conserved,
enhanced and their future secured;
seeking the input of local heritage expertise;
consideringimprovementstothepublicrealmand
the setting of heritage assets within it; and
providing guidance regarding the conservation of
heritage assets.
4 An Article 4 Direction restricts the scope of permitted development rights either in relation to a particular area or site, or a particular type
of development. Where an Article 4 Direction is in effect, a planning application may be required for development that would otherwise
have permitted development. Article 4 Directions are used to control works that could threaten the character of an area acknowledged
importance, such as conservation areas.
174Section Eleven
Historic environment11.1 Policy HE1: Historic environment
Policy HE1
Historic environment
1. AspartofensuringtheconservationandenhancementofMansfielddistrict’shistoricenvironment,where
a development proposal would affect the significance of a heritage asset (whether designated or
non-designated), including any contribution made to its setting, it should be informed by proportionate
historic environment assessments and evaluations (such as heritage impact assessments, desk-based
appraisals, field evaluation and historic building reports) that:
a. identify all heritage assets likely to be affected by the proposal;
b. explain the nature and degree of any effect on elements that contribute to their significance and
demonstrating how, in order of preference, any harm will be avoided, minimised or mitigated;
c. provide a clear explanation and justification for the proposal in order for the harm to be weighed
against public benefits; and
d. demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been made to sustain the existing use, find new uses
or mitigate the extent of the harm to the significance of the asset; and whether the works proposed
are the minimum required to secure the long term use of the asset.
2. Development proposals affecting conservation areas will be permitted where they make a positive
contribution to the character, distinctiveness and appearance of the conservation area and its setting,
and preserve or enhance its significance, including settlement patterns, important buildings, important
spaces, landscapes, walls, trees and significant views within, into and out of the conservation area.
3.Developmentproposalsaffectinglistedbuildings,scheduledmonumentsorregisteredparksandgardens
will be permitted where they conserve the heritage asset(s) and their settings.
4. Development affecting non-designated heritage assets (including those identified through the planning
process and archaeological sites) will be considered according to the significance of the asset and the
contribution that setting makes to the significance. A balanced judgement will be required having regard
tothescaleofanyharmorlossandthesignificanceoftheheritageasset.Wheredevelopmentproposals
are likely to affect non-designated archaeological sites, including sites with archaeological potential, the
developer should submit sufficient information to allow the significance of the potential archaeological
remains and the impacts of the proposals to be understood. Appropriate measures should be taken to
ensure the protection of archaeological sites in-situ.
Explanation
11.5The protection and enhancement of our historic
environmentisvitalifthecharacterofMansfielddistrict
istobemaintained.Populationgrowthanddevelopment
willplacegreaterdemandsonthehistoricenvironment
which is a finite and non-renewable resource. It is
therefore essential that development is managed to
maintainourheritageassetsforfuturegenerations,and
toensurethatdevelopmentproposalsarewelldesignedand do not detract from existing local characteristics
and built form that make a positive contribution to the
area.
11.6The council will seek to conserve the heritage
assets of the district for their historic, archaeological,
architectural and artistic significance as well as their
importantcontributiontolocaldistinctiveness,character,
culture, economy and sense of place .
175Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Eleven: Historic environment11.7The district's historic environment includes a
number of listed buildings, conservation areas,
scheduled monuments, a registered park and garden
andmanypropertieswhicharelocallyimportantfortheir
historic value. These heritage assets are irreplaceable
features which have helped to shape our environment
and contribute to the local character of the district.
11.8ThethreemainhistoricsettlementsofMansfield,
MansfieldWoodhouseandMarketWarsoparemedieval
settlements and contain early examples of distinctive
plot sizes and street layouts, such as crofts and tofts,
orburgageplots. Thetownanddistrictcentrescontain
asignificantnumberofthedistrict'slistedbuildings,and
include conservation areas, which demonstrate
vernaculardesignaswellasexamplesofnationalstyles
and the use of local materials.
11.9Anumberofbuildingsandstructuresthroughout
the district show a clear link to the area's industrial
heritage which has helped to shape its growth and
development. Some examples include the mills along
theMaunValley,therailwayviaductsinthetowncentre
and at Kings Mill Reservoir, and framework knitters
cottages.
11.10Thecouncilrecognisesthatsomechangemay
be needed to ensure heritage assets can continue to
be used in their current or alternative uses. Proposals
will need to be informed by proportionate historic
environmentassessmentsandevaluationsandwillneed
to demonstrate that any changes of use are justified
and that harm is avoided, minimised or mitigated.
11.11All proposals will be expected to identify all
heritageassetslikelytobeaffectedbytheproposaland
describe the significance of the asset(s) affected,
identifying the impact of works on the significance and
provideaclearjustificationforthework,including,where
relevant, identification of public benefits. To enable
planning decisions to be based on a full understanding
ofthesignificanceoftheheritageasset,thecouncilwill
also expect the following assessment to have been
carried out:
ananalysisoftheassettoestablishitssignificance
bothasawholeandspecificpartsaffectedbythe
proposal;
an assessment of the contribution made by the
setting of the asset to its significance; and
explanation of how the assessment has informed
the proposed development, including how the
proposeddetaileddesign,scale,layout,materials
and architectural features would be appropriate
and sympathetic.
11.12 The merits of an alternative  use may be 
considered  where  this would  retain the viability  of a 
heritage  asset, providing  that it would  not result in the 
loss of significance.  Where there is harm and loss of 
significance, the council will require clear and convincing 
demonstration  that the development  will be 
implemented,  proof that it is economically  viable  and 
this represents  the optimum viable  use.
11.13 Where planning  permission  is granted, 
appropriate conditions may be applied and / or planning 
obligations  may be secured  to ensure  that heritage  
assets are appropriately  conserved  and / or enhanced.
11.14 Should  the loss of a heritage  asset be agreed,  
the council  will need  to be satisfied that there are 
approved  and detailed  plans  and delivery  mechanisms  
in place  for the implementation  of the approved  
alternative proposal, including provision for the  recording 
of assets prior
 to commencement  of the work.
11.15 The setting of a heritage  asset often makes an 
important contribution  to its significance.  Proposals  for 
development  will be carefully  assessed  to ensure  that 
those elements  or aspects of setting which  make a 
positive  contribution  to the significance  of the asset are 
preserved; these may include important views, designed 
settings, meaningful  relationships  between  heritage  
assets
 or historic places  or social, historic, economic  or 
artistic relationships,  which  amplify the significance  or 
appreciation  of significance.
11.16 Non-designated  heritage  assets do not have 
statutory  protection  but still play an important role in the 
historic character of the district and have a degree  of 
significance,  meriting  consideration  in planning  
decisions.  They can include  locally  listed buildings,  
landscapes, settlements, non-scheduled archaeological 
remains  and those identified  through  local plan 
preparation  or
 through  the planning  process.
11.17 Where the proposal  would  result in harm or 
loss of a non-designated  heritage  asset, the council  will 
require  evidence  that there are considerable  public  
benefits to justify its loss or that there are no other 
mechanisms  for supporting  the retention  of the asset.
176are consistent with the special character as
described in the statement or appraisal for that
area; and
will preserve or enhance the special character of
the conservation area.
11.19Itisrecognisedthatwithinconservationareas,
not all buildings or spaces contribute to the area's
significanceas a designatedheritageasset.Proposals
whichresultinthelossofsuchbuildingsorspaces,and
replacement by development which preserves or
enhancestheconservationareawillbesupported.Any
proposal resulting in the alteration or loss of a building
or space which makes a positive contribution to the
conservation area would need to provide justification
that the public benefit outweighs the harm.
11.20The council is committed to improving the
management of the conservation areas in the district
throughthepreparationofconservationareaappraisals
andmanagementplans,itsdevelopmentmanagement
procedures and the use of Article 4 Directions, as
appropriate and where resources permit.
11.21Where heritage assets are found to be at risk,
orwheretheyareindangeroffallingintothiscategory,
the council will support proposals for the development
ofcreativeandsustainableusestosecurethefutureof
such assets, in a manner appropriate to their
significance.
11.22In exceptional circumstances, where the
conservation of a designated heritage asset can only
be secured through ‘enabling development’, uses will
be considered which may be contrary to the
development plan or which may cause harm to the
settingofadesignatedheritageasset. Ineitherevent,a
robust development appraisal, a condition survey and
a delivery plan will be required to identify that the
development is the optimum required to secure the
future of the heritage asset and to address
the‘conservationdeficit’ ,anddemonstratethatthereis
noalternativemeansofdeliveringthesameoutcome.A
Section 106 agreement and a phased programme of
repairs,which may need tobe executedin accordance
withhighconservationstandards,mayalsoberequired.11.23Inthecaseofarchaeologicalsites,applications
for planning permission will need to demonstrate:
that any development which may impact on
designated heritage assets has been sensitively
located and designed taking into account the
contribution its setting makes to its significance;
and
appropriateprovisionhasbeenmadeforensuring
the preservation in situ with on-going
management, conservation and protection of
(whether above or below ground) the heritage
asset.
11.24Satisfying this requirement includes the
submission of an appropriate desk-based assessment
of the heritage asset, and where necessary, a field
evaluation.
11.25Development proposals which may affect
archaeological sites (considered to be non-designated
heritage assets) shall be informed by an appropriate
desk-based assessment (and where necessary a field
evaluation), and the findings of this assessment will be
amaterialconsiderationwhichinformsthedetermination
of the planning application. Non-designated heritage
assetsofarchaeologicalinterestthataredemonstrably
ofequivalentsignificancetoscheduledmonuments,will
be treated as designated heritage assets for policy
purposes.
177Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Eleven: Historic environment11.18  Proposals  affecting  a conservation  area or its 
setting should  demonstrate  that they:Table 11.1 Policy HE1 - Supporting information
Policy HE1: The historic environment
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 9, 17, 126-141, 143, 156, and 169. Does it meet national planning policy?
Conservation area character appraisals and management plans; What evidence has informed this policy?
Planning Practice Guide – Conserving and enhancing the historic environment
List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest;
Mansfield Historic Buildings at Risk Register;
Nottinghamshire Historic Environment Record;
Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England
Nottinghamshire County list of Scheduled Monuments;
Adopted criteria for assessing local Heritage Assets;
Mansfield Heritage Impact Assessment (Part A and Part B), 2018;
List of Local Heritage Assets; and
Nottinghamshire Heritage Gateway.
This policy will be delivered through the development management system and the work of the council's
conservation officer in commenting on planning applications.How will it be delivered?
4 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
17811.2 Policy HE2: Pleasley Vale area
regeneration
Policy HE2
Pleasley Vale area regeneration
1. The council will support development proposals for the Pleasley Vale area which preserve and / or
enhancethespecialappearanceandcharacterofthearea,andprovidealongtermfuturefortheexisting
buildings, preferably featuring employment, commercial, and tourism uses.
2.Proposalsfordevelopmentinthisareawillneedtoshowhowtheyhavecarefullyconsideredandaddressed
issues related to:
a. access, highways and public transport improvements;
b. the environmental impact of any proposals on the nature conservation site and the wider area, in
particular the Pleasley Vale Railway SSSI;
c. listed buildings, conservation area and archaeological issues; and
d. flooding alongside the watercourse.
Explanation
11.26Pleasley Vale provides a high quality
environment, bisected by the district and county
administrative boundaries separating Bolsover and
Derbyshire to the north from Mansfield and
Nottinghamshire to the south.
11.27The strong character and identity of the Vale
was formally recognised with its designation as part of
thePleasleyParkandValeConservationAreathatwas
designatedinBolsoverdistrictin1987andinMansfield
district in 1992.
11.28ThePleasleyValepartoftheconservationarea
currently contains residential and employment uses,
but the long term future of the area, especially in
relation to the large mill buildings, is uncertain.
11.29Generally this should be seen as a brownfield
development opportunity involving the conversion and
re-use of brownfield land and heritage assets, where
thecouncilwouldsupportemployment,commercialand
tourist related uses.11.30Thesiteisinanareaoffloodrisk,withaportion
of the site in the highest category of flood risk (Flood
Zone 3B (1 in 20 year event)). Therefore, only water
compatible or essential infrastructure development
should exist at that particular location. The remainder
of the site lies within Flood Zone 3a and 2.
Consequently, if the development were to be classified
as anything other than Change of Use, the developer
would need to demonstrate compliance with the
sequential test. Any planning submission should be
accompanied by a NPPF compliant Flood Risk
Assessment.
11.31This policy mirrors Policy SS8 of the Bolsover
District Publication Local Plan, May 2018 and is
intended to ensure a coordinated approach to dealing
with planning applications for this area which straddles
the district administrative boundary.
179Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Eleven: Historic environmentFigure 11.1 Pleasley Vale
Table 11.2 Policy HE2 - Supporting information
Policy HE2: Pleasley Vale area regeneration
Yes - NPPF - Paragraphs 9, 17, 126 to 141 and 156. Does it meet national planning policy?
Pleasley Park and Vale Conservation Area: Appraisal and Management Plan - Draft 2016; and What evidence has informed this policy?
Bolsover District Publication Local Plan Policy SS8, 2018.
Through the development management process. The council will liaise closely with Bolsover District Council
on planning applications for the area.How will it be delivered?
1,2 and 4 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
18012.1Mitigatingandadaptingtoclimatechangeisone
of the most important challenges facing society today.
It requires commitment and action at a local level, but
within a national framework. The NPPF stresses that
planning has an important role to play in helping to
reduce CO2emissions, minimise vulnerability and
provide resilience to the impacts of climate change.
12.2The policies set out in this chapter are intended
to assist with the move towards a sustainable, low
carbonfutureandtohelpensurethatdevelopmentsare
designed to be resilient to flood risk, by:
promotingenergyefficiencyandrenewableenergy
technologies within developments and in
appropriate locations;
ensuring that new development is located and
designed to not be at risk of flooding, and to
adequately reduce and respond to the risks of
flooding, over its lifetime; and
protecting, restoring and enhancing the district’s
rivers and water bodies in order to help ensure
their overall health is safeguarded and improved,
includingallowingforbetterconnectionsforwildlife
and flood resilience.
12.3Designofnewdevelopmentinrelationtoclimate
change is addressed in Policy P5.
182Section Twelve
Climate change12.1PolicyCC1:Renewableandlowcarbon
energy generation
Policy CC1
Renewable and low carbon energy generation
1. Development proposals for renewable and low carbon energy development will be supported provided
there are no significant adverse impacts alone and in-combination, in terms of:
a. landscape character and visual effects when considered in conjunction with nearby developments
and permitted proposals within the district or adjoining local authority areas;
b. ecology, biodiversity (including bird flight paths), and geodiversity;
c. pollution and emissions;
d. amenity of nearby residential and non-residential uses ;
e. the built and natural environment resulting from the construction, operation and decommissioning
of any equipment/infrastructure;
f. loss of best and most versatile agricultural land;
g. flooding;
h. operation of telecommunication systems;
i. aircraft safety;
j. highway safety and traffic; and
k. heritage assets and their setting.
2. Conditions will be applied to ensure scheme decommissioning and reinstatement of the previous use of
land (if appropriate) when no longer in operation.
183Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Twelve: Climate changeExplanation
12.4 The UK has a target, that 15% of energy  must 
be from renewable sources by 2020. In  accordance with 
the NPPF (paragraph  97), this policy  sets out a positive  
approach  to encourage  renewable  and low carbon  
energy  development  while  ensuring  that adverse  
impacts are addressed satisfactorily. It provides  support 
to encourage  greater investment by the renewable  
energy industry and from community-led  energy projects  
within  the district.
12.5 The
 policy  applies  to various  types of renewable  
and low carbon energy infrastructure including biomass 
generators, anaerobic digestion plants, ground mounted 
solar farms  and wind turbines  and ensures  that such 
development  is well located  and designed  to 
satisfactorily address  potential  landscape,  biodiversity, 
traffic, and other impacts.
12.6 The impact of wind generation  projects on 
communities  has been  recognised  by the Government. 
Any proposals  for wind turbines  will be considered  
against the Planning Practice Guidance and the Written 
Ministerial  Statement made on 18 June 2015. This can 
be viewed  at https://www.parliament.uk/  documents/
commons-vote-office/June%202015/
18%20June/1-DCLG-Planning.pdf.
18412.7 Our evidence  base tells us that the key local 
energy opportunities  for the district  relate to the  potential  
for micro-generation,  including  heat pumps and solar 
panels.
12.8 Commercial  renewable  energy  developments  
are expected  to be accompanied  by an environmental  
impact assessment and to  ensure that important animal  
and
 bird species  are properly  safeguarded.  RSPB and 
Natural  England  bird sensitivity data (see Table 12.1) 
for wind energy  developments  and site-based  surveys 
should  inform the location  of turbines  and avoidance  
and mitigation measures. Habitat areas likely to support  
nightjar  and woodlark  are likely  to be more sensitive  to 
impacts from development,  especially  including  areas 
adjacent  to and within  woodland  clearings.  These are 
located  primarily  within  the eastern part of the district 
(see Figure 12.1). Additionall y, there may also  be other  
areas where  birds may be affected.
12.9 Community  owned  energy  projects which  meet 
the requirements  of Policy CC1 will be supported  within  
the district .
Table 12.1 Policy CC1 - Supporting information
Policy CC1: Renewable and low carbon energy generation
Yes - NPPF Paragraph 17, 93 - 98 and 156. Does it meet national planning policy?
What evidence has informed this policy? Mansfield Low Carbon Energy Opportunities and Heat Mapping for Local Planning Areas Across the East
Midlands, 2011;
Mapped and written guidance in relation to birds and onshore wind energy development in England, RSPB
Research Report No 35 (2009); and
House of Commons: Written Statement (HCWS42), Department for Communities and Local Government , 18
June 2015.
Throughprivateandpublicsectorinvestmentauthorisedasappropriatethroughthedevelopmentmanagement
process.How will it be delivered?
8 Which local plan objectives will it meet?12.2 Policy CC2: Flood risk
Policy CC2
Flood risk
1. Development proposals in areas at risk of flooding will only be supported where it is satisfactorily
demonstrated, through a site specific flood risk assessment, that:
a. the sequential test and ,if required, the exception test have been met;
b. thedevelopmentwillremainfloodresistant,resilientandsafethroughoutitslifetime,takingaccount
of increases in flood levels due to climate change;
c. it will not increase flood risk on site or elsewhere and where possible reduce it;
d. water management measures are incorporated, on and / or off-site to reduce and manage flood
risk in accordance with Policy CC3;
e. open access to flood defences are retained; and
f. whereapplicable,thefunctioningandintegrityofnaturalsystemsorareasthatbenefitfromflooding
are not prejudiced.
Explanation
12.10 The Mansfield Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment,2008(SFRA)indicatesthataround3%of
the district is at risk of river-related flooding, which is
considered overall, a low risk. Areas historically and
currently prone to river flooding are generally located
around the central areas of Mansfield, in and around
thetowncentre,andMarketWarsop. Othersourcesof
flooding include ground water, surface water and
sewage water flooding. Surface water flooding is the
primary source of flooding in the district. The
NottinghamshireLocalFloodRiskManagementStrategy
(2016) indicates that the majority of residential
properties fall within the low risk category for surface
water flooding.12.11InaccordancewiththeNPPF(paragraphs100
to 103), Policy CC2 requires that new development
avoids risk by prioritising the location of development
outsideofareaswiththegreatestfloodrisk,asinformed
by the sequential test, and where required, the
exceptions test. This may include safeguarding or
creatingopenspaceorlandscapednaturalareaswithin
areaspronetoflooding,whilstlocatingmorevulnerable
development uses outside flood zones. Trees,
hedgerowsandwoodland,plantedintherightlocations
play positive flood alleviation and pollution prevention
roles. TheNationalPlanningPracticeGuidance(PPG)
sets out how the tests should be applied, including
assigning vulnerability levels to different types of
development,andthusshouldinformtheapplicationof
and compliance with the tests.
185Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Twelve: Climate change'Safe' also concerns the safety and vulnerability of the
users and not increasing the burden on emergency
services through the design of appropriate access and
egress routes and maintaining open access to flood
defences within the development’s design and layout.
12.15ThesourcesofinformationshowninTable12.2
should be used to identity sources of flooding as
relevanttothedevelopment,butmaynotbeexhaustive.
12.16 This policy should be read alongside Policy
CC3regardingSuDSandCC4regardingtheprotection,
restoration and enhancement of river and waterbody
corridors.12.12 Compliance  with Policy CC2 should be 
satisfactory demonstrated  through  a separate  flood risk 
assessment in accordance  with national  guidance.  It is 
important that the location,  type,  design  and layout of 
the development  are carefully  considered  so that the 
council  can be confident  that the development  will 
remain  flood resistant, resilient,  safe and not increase  
risk throughout its lifetime. This includes taking account 
of flooding from all sources, consistent with river flooding  
in mapping  probability  and
 assessing  vulnerability  and 
potential  increases  in flood risk due to climate change.
12.13 A formal flood risk assessment is not 
necessarily  required  for minor development  but the 
council  must still be satisfied that flood risk has been  
appropriately  avoided and managed,  through supporting  
information.
Table 12.2
 Policy CC2 - Supporting  information
Policy CC2: Managing flood risk
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 17, 94, 99 to 104, 156, 162, 165, and 166. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2008 and Addendum, 2018; What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Central Area Flood Risk Review, 2018;
Nottinghamshire Local Flood Risk Management Strategy, 2016;
Water Cycle Scoping Report, 2009; and
Environment Agency flood maps.
Through the development management process in association with evidence and guidance provided by: How will it be delivered?
Mansfield District Council Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2008 and Addendum, 2018;
Mansfield Central Area Flood Risk Review, 2017; and
Up-to-date Climate Change Allowances.
8 and 13 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
18612.14 Making  a development  safe from flood risk 
refers
 to designing  buildings  and developments  such 
that they are resilient  and flood risk infrastructure will 
be adequately  managed  and maintained  through  the 
development’s  lifetime.12.3 Policy CC3: Sustainable drainage
systems
Policy CC3
Sustainable drainage systems
1. Alldevelopmentproposalsshould,whereverpossible,includemeasurestoreduceandmanagesurface
waterthroughappropriatesustainabledrainagesystems(SuDS)soastominimiseandmanageflooding,
improvewaterquality,complementwaterefficiency,andenhancebiodiversity,placeshaping andamenity.
Tobesupported,proposalsarerequiredtosatisfactorilydemonstrateallofthefollowing:
a. thatsustainabledrainagesystemshavebeenincorporatedinthedevelopmentdesignunless:
i.formajordevelopments,aSuDSisinappropriateandsurfacewaterrun-offcanbealternatively
managedinanappropriatemanner;or
ii. forminordevelopmentsaSuDSisnotviableortechnicallyfeasibleandsurfacewaterrun-off
canbealternativelymanagedinanappropriatemanner;and
b. thatadequatearrangementshavebeenmadefortheadoption,managementandmaintenanceof
anySuDSprovidedoverthelifetimeofthedevelopment;and
c. thatthedischargeofsurfacerun-offisashighuptheSuDShierarchyofdrainageaspossible.
2. Proposalsforretrofittingofsustainabledrainagesystemswillbesupported.
Explanation
12.17Inordertoeffectivelyaddressandreduceflood
riskandensureresiliencetofloodingthroughouta
development'slifetime,developmentproposalsare
expectedtoactivelypursuetheuseofsustainable
drainagesystems(SuDS).SuDSshouldalsobe
designedtoaddresswaterquality,benefitbiodiversity
andcomplementamenity,placeshapingandwater
efficiency.
12.18Thedischargeofsurfacerun-offshouldbe
providedashighupthefollowingSuDShierarchyof
drainageoptionsasreasonablypracticable(highestto
lowestpriority):
1. intotheground(infiltration);
2. toasurfacewaterbody;
3. toasurfacewatersewer;4. highwaydrain,oranotherdrainagesystem;and
then
5. toacombinedsewer.
Inorderforsurfacewaterneedstobemanaged
sustainably,thedesignofSuDSshouldtakeinto
accountimpactsfromclimatechange,including
consequencesofextremerainfall,sothatnew
developmentscansafelyaccommodatefloodswhich
exceedthedesigncapacityofthesewers. TheNatural
drainagepathsareimportantforinformingthelocation
ofSuDS.
187MansfieldDistrictLocalPlan2013-2033
Twelve: Climate change12.19 As SuDS take on a variety of forms, it is likely
that there will be some form of SuDS which will be
appropriate, viable and deliverable. In addition,
considerationmustbegiventousingSuDStoenhance
waterquality,biodiversity,greeninfrastructure,amenity,
placeshaping,andwaterefficiency,whereappropriate.
12.20Workingwithretainednaturalfeaturessuchas
ditches or ponds, can form an integral part of hard and
softlandscapedareas,contributingtotheattractiveness
of an area. SuDS should not be considered as part of
usableopenspacerequirements,butratherasafeature
complementing open space. Where SuDS are within
public areas, safety measures should also be
considered(5).12.21 A SuDS design and management plan should
be provided as part of the application. Impacts from
climatechangeandcleararrangementsfortheadoption
andon-goingmaintenanceshouldbeincorporatedinto
the design plans for SuDS. Information sought should
haveregardtothenatureandscaleofthedevelopment
concerned, when determining the level of information
provided.
12.22 SuDS may also complement environmental
gainsbyimprovinglowflowsoravoiding/controllingthe
release of suspended solids (e.g. silt) into rivers and
other water bodies. This is covered by Policy CC4.
Table 12.3 Policy CC3 - Supporting information
Policy CC3: Sustainable drainage systems
Yes - NPPF Paragraph 17, 99, 100, and 103. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2008 and Addendum, 2018; What evidence has informed this policy?
HouseofCommons:WrittenStatement(HCWS161)DepartmentforCommunitiesandLocalGovernmentWritten
Statement made by the the Secretary of State for Communities and Local Government, 18 Dec 2014; and
Environment Agency Sustainable Drainage Systems: A guide for developers.
ThroughthedevelopmentmanagementprocessinconsultationwiththeEnvironmentAgencyandtheleadlocal
flood authorityHow will it be delivered?
8 and 13 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
5 (Health and Safety Principles for SuDS: framework and checklists, Ciria 2013)
18812.4 Policy CC4: River and waterbody
corridors
Policy CC4
River and waterbody corridors
1. Development proposals will be supported where they:
a. lead to the de-culverting and naturalising of watercourses which improves the overall connectivity
for wildlife;
b. avoid the culverting of watercourses and not prejudicing future opportunities for de-culverting;
c. provideorretainaminimum8mnaturalorsemi-naturalhabitatbuffertoawatercourse,andinclude
a long term landscape and ecological management plan for this buffer; and
d. contribute to the creation and / or enhancement of green SuDS priority areas and low water flow
areas.
2. Development proposals which would have a significant adverse impact on the water quality, functions
and setting of any watercourse and its associated corridor will not be supported.
Explanation
12.23 The council seeks to ensure that the overall
condition of rivers and other water bodies in the district
is improved. In doing so, the biodiversity, landscape
and recreational value of watercourses and their
corridors should be conserved and enhanced through
well-designed development.
12.24 Watercourses and their associated corridors
are a vital element of the green infrastructure of the
district.
12.25 Policy CC4 aims to support the protection and
enhancementoftheriver'soverallhealthandimproved
status under the Water Framework Directive. This can
be supported through the following:
Restoring heavily modified sections and
supportingnaturalisation: thisshouldbeactively
pursued for development which includes or is
locatedwithincloseproximitytomodifiedsections,
including culverts, weirs, redundant flood
structures and artificially straightened sections.
Theaimistoseekdesignsolutionstore-naturalise
water courses where barriers exist, including
measures to allow for the natural movement of
wildlife within the watercourse.
Enhancements that restore, as far as possible,
natural flows and ecology of the watercourse,
improving habitat connectivity and / or reducing
barriers to movement for all related species (e.g.
water voles, eels and fish) should also be
prioritised.
189Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Twelve: Climate changeEnsuringnewdevelopmentdoesnotprejudice
future opportunities for de-culverting : this is
especially important for the River Maun, as its
ecologicalhealthisnegativelyimpactedbyculverts
and other barriers and sections where the river
channel has been artificially altered.
Buffering watercourses: development adjacent
to a watercourse should ensure that a minimum
8mbufferisretained.Thiswidthofbufferprovides
the minimum width of habitat needed to ensure
thefunctioningofwildlifehabitats,whilebeingable
to facilitate informal access for enjoyment of the
river. This width also ensures that the river is
buffered from land-based activities, reducing the
levels of diffuse pollution reaching the
watercourse.
Priority areas for green SuDS and restoring
lowflows: theMansfieldDistrictCouncilStrategic
FloodRiskAssessment,2008identifieskeyareas
forrestoringhabitatsandenhancingwaterquality,
knownasgreenSuDSpriorityareas.Thisincludes
improving the ecological conditions to support
protected species. Low flow areas can result in
higher pollution levels and less water to support
biodiversity. Development within these areas can
help improve flows by safely directing surface
water run-off to support their enhancement.12.26 Figure 12.2 (Opportunity areas to enhance
rivers and waterbody corridors) illustrateswhere green
SuDS priority areas, low flow restoration areas and
important culverts identified for restoration, including
opportunities for removal, are located in the district.
The Mansfield District Council Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment,2008andAddendum,2018andMansfield
Central Area Flood Risk Review, 2018 provide more
detailed guidance on the above considerations.
12.27ConsultationwiththeEnvironmentAgencyand
Mansfield District Council should be sought early on in
the design process. Enhancements sought are likely
to inform the layout and orientation of development.
Developmentproposalsaffectingwatercoursesclassed
as ‘main river’ will also be considered by the
Environment Agency under separate legislation.
Table 12.4 Policy CC4 - Supporting information
Policy CC4: Protection, conservation and enhancement of river and water bodies
Yes - NPPF Paragraphs 9, 17, 102, 109, 110, 114, 117, 118, 156, 157, and 165. Does it meet national planning policy?
Mansfield Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2008 and Addendum, 2018; What evidence has informed this policy?
Mansfield Central Area Flood Risk Review, 2018;
Humber River Basin District River Basin Management Plan, 2015;
Environment Agency Catchment Data, 2017;
Idle and Torne Management Catchment, 2014 - published by the Environment Agency; and
River Idle Sub-Catchment Action Plan, 2018.
Through the development management process in consultation with the Environment agency and reference to
appropriate guidance.How will it be delivered?
8 and 13 Which local plan objectives will it meet?
190Figure 12.1 Opportunity areas to enhance rivers and waterbody corridors
191Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Twelve: Climate change13.1It is important that this Local Plan is capable of
being implemented and that the delivery and
effectiveness of its policies against objectives and
timescales are monitored.
13.2The supporting information under each policy
sets out how it will be delivered. Most policies will be
delivered through the development management
process, and the council will ensure that it continues to
offerahighqualityandefficientservicetoallapplicants,
whether they be householders or major developers, to
assistinthetimelydeliveryofsustainabledevelopment.13.3Where required supplementary planning
documents,suchasdevelopmentbriefsormasterplans,
may be prepared, potentially in partnership with other
organisations in order to support the development of
specificsitesortoprovideclarityontheimplementation
and delivery of policies.
13.4The council will ensure that new development
in the district contributes towards the provision of
infrastructure needed to support sustainable growth,
and that this infrastructure is provided when needed to
enable development to take place in accordance with
the plan proposals.
192Section Thirteen
Implementation and monitoring13.1 Policy IM1: Monitoring and Review of
the Local Plan
Policy IM1
Monitoring and review of the Local Plan
1. The council will monitor the delivery and effectiveness of policies of this Local Plan against specific
performance indicators and targets set out in the Local Plan monitoring framework.
2. The c ouncil will commence a review of the Local Plan no later than five years from the date of adoption.
The council will also consider a partial review of the Local Plan, or other actions considered necessary
in the following circumstances:
a.thenumberofhomesbuiltfallsbelow50%oftheannualrequirementonathreeyearrollingaverage;
b. the supply of deliverable housing sites is below four years for three years in a row;
c. significant new evidence becomes available; or
d. significantimplementationdelaysorissuesareidentifiedaspartoftheAuthorityMonitoringReport.
Explanation
Delivery
13.5Thecouncilrecognisesthesignificantchallenges
to delivering housing and economic growth together
with provision of essential infrastructure in the district.
IthasestablishedaGrowthBoardwhichwillkeepunder
review the delivery of housing, employment, retail and
key regeneration sites. It will seek to work with key
partners including, for example, the development
industry, adjoining local authorities, the county council,
Homes England and the Local Enterprise Partnership
to identify and resolve issues affecting delivery. The
councilhasalsoestablisheddeveloperforumsintended
to improve the understanding of the local housing and
employment markets and constraints to delivery.
13.6Where necessary, the council will promote
developmentinaccordancewithLocalPlanpoliciesby
producingfurtherguidanceintheformofsupplementary
planningdocuments,developmentbriefsormasterplans.Monitoring
13.7Monitoring will be based on the performance
monitoring framework as set out in Appendix 13 which
summarisesthekeyindicatorsidentifiedforeachpolicy
that will be used to monitor the delivery of the Local
Plan objectives. The council's Authority Monitoring
Report (AMR) will set out:
how well policies are achieving their objectives;
whether the targets in the Local Plan are being
met; and
whether there have been any unintended
consequences.
13.8The council will also keep under regular review
the evidence base of the Local Plan, in particular
housingandemploymentneedsassessmentsandland
availability as well as the wider social, economic and
environmental context. Significant changes to the
context of the Plan, revealed through updates to key
evidence, will inform the need to undertake a formal
review.
193Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Thirteen: Implementation and monitoring13.9A key aim of the Local Plan is to ensure that
sufficienthomesarebeingbuiltorinthepipelinetomeet
the identified need. The Government has introduced
two tests related to the delivery of new homes; the
Housing Delivery Test and the Five Year Land Supply
Assessment. The Housing Delivery Test looks at
completions over a three year rolling average. If this
falls below the Local Housing Need (LHN), produced
bythestandardisedhousingmethodology,thencertain
actionshave tobe takendepending on thescale ofthe
shortfall.TheFiveYearLandSupplyAssessmentlooks
at the supply of housing sites that could be built in the
next five years. To form part of this supply, the sites
must be suitable, available and achievable. The vast
majority of such sites are likely to be those with extant
planning permission.
13.10 Both the Housing Delivery Test and the Five
Year Housing Land Supply, along with the other
indicators identified in the Local Plan, will be reported
in the AMR.Review actions
13.11Where the indicators in the monitoring
framework, as presented in the AMR, show that the
Local Plan is no longer delivering the vision and
objectives, action will need to be taken. This could
include the following:
reviewing specific policies in the Local Plan to
identify if they should be altered;
reviewing the whole Local Plan;
issuing additional guidance;
working with the development industry to identify
the reasons for non-delivery; and
workingwithneighbouringauthoritiesthroughthe
Duty to Cooperate.
13.12 Regardless of whether the indicators and
targetsarebeingmet,theGovernmentrequireareview
of the Local Plan every five years.
Table 13.1 Policy IM1 - Supporting information
Policy IM1: Review of the Local Plan
Yes - NPPF paragraph 14 Does it meet national planning policy?
See also 'Fixing our broken housing market', the Housing White Paper (DCLG February 2017)
Mansfield Nottingham Outer Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA), 2015; What evidence has informed this policy?
Ongoing Duty to Cooperate engagement; and
Whole Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment, 2018.
Partial or total review of the plan could be triggered if no justifiable reason for recorded, or anticipated, poor
performance against indicators of Plan's objectives identified during monitoring of key performance measures
in the annual Authority Monitoring Report.How will it be delivered?
All objectives will be met through ensuring that, through monitoring and, where necessary, review, the plan will
achieve its stated objectivesWhich Local Plan objectives will it meet?
194Appendix1-SavedpoliciesoftheMansfieldLocalPlan1998supersededbytheMansfield
Local Plan 2013 to 2033
A1.1The Town and Country Planning (Local Development) (England) Regulations 2004 (and amends) states
that where a Development Plan Document contains a policy that is intended to supersede another policy, it must
state the fact and identify the superseded policy.
A1.2TheMansfieldDistrictLocalPlan1998canbeviewedelectronicallyat: www.mansfield.gov .uk/localplan1998 .
TableA1.1SavedpoliciesoftheMansfieldDistrictLocalPlan1998supersededbytheMansfieldLocalPlan
2013-2033
SupersededbyLocalPlan2013
to 33 policy refPolicy Name / Description Saved Policy
S2 ECOMONIC DEVELOPMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION DPS1:
S2 DISTRIBUTION OF DEVELOPMENT DPS2:
S5, E5 EMPLOYMENT USES OUTSIDE THE URBAN BOUNDARY E2:
E1, E5 EMPLOYMENT USES WITHIN THE URBAN BOUNDARY E3
E4 PROTECTION OF EMPLOYMENT LAND E4:
E1, E2 EMPLOYMENT PROPOSALS E5:
Lapsed PROPOSED BUSINESS PARK ALLOCATIONS E6:
Lapsed EXCEPTIONAL EMPLOYMENT PROPOSAL – LAND OFF ABBOTT ROAD E7:
Lapsed PROPOSED EMPLOYMENT SITE - COMMERCIAL GATE E8:
Lapsed PROPOSED EMPLOYMENT SITE - SHERWOOD STREET E10:
Lapsed OPTIONAL EMPLOYMENT PROPOSAL - DEBDALE LANE E12:
Lapsed EMPLOYMENT CONSOLIDATION AREAS E14:
Lapsed EMPLOYMENT CONSOLIDATION AREAS - LAND OFF NEWGATE LANE E15:
Lapsed OFFICE CONSOLIDATION AREAS E16:
P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8 DESIGN OF NEW DEVELOPMENT BE1:
HE1 LISTED BUILDINGS BE2:
HE1 LISTED BUILDINGS BE3:
HE1 LISTED BUILDINGS BE4:
HE1 LISTED BUILDINGS BE5:
HE1 CONSERVATION AREAS BE6:
HE1 CONSERVATION AREAS BE7:
HE1 CONSERVATION AREAS BE8:
HE1 CONSERVATION AREAS BE9:
HE1 CONSERVATION AREAS BE10:
HE1 DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING SCHEDULED ANCIENT MONUMENTS BE11:
196SupersededbyLocalPlan2013
to 33 policy refPolicy Name / Description Saved Policy
HE1 SITES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL INTEREST BE12:
HE1 SITES OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE BE13:
P8 NEW SHOP FRONTS and ADVERTISEMENTS BE14:
Lapsed POSTER ADVERTISEMENT HOARDINGS BE15:
Lapsed ENVIRONMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS BE16:
S5 DEVELOPMENT IN THE COUNTRYSIDE NE1:
S5, IN11, CC1 PROTECTION OF AGRICULTURAL LAND NE2:
S5 NEW AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS NE3:
S5 PROTECTION OF SENSITIVE GAPS NE4:
Lapsed PROTECTION OF GREEN WEDGES NE5:
Lapsed SHERWOOD HERITAGE AREA NE6:
NE1 SHERWOOD SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA NE7:
NE1, IN2 PROTECTION OF MATURE LANDSCAPE AREAS NE8:
NE2 DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING WOODLANDS NE9:
NE2 DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING ANCIENT WOODLANDS NE10:
Lapsed GREENWOOD COMMUNITY FOREST PLAN NE11:
NE2 DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING SITES OF SPECIAL SCIENTIFIC INTEREST NE12:
NE2 DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING LOCAL NATURE RESERV: ES NE13:
NE2 DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING NATURE CONSERVATION INTERESTS NE14:
NE2 DEVELOPMENT AFFECTING HEATHLAND SITES NE15:
NE2 SAFEGUARDING PROTECTED SPECIES NE16:
NE3, S5, IN11, CC1 PROTECTION OF ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCES NE17:
IN8 MAJOR HIGHWAY SCHEMES M1:
IN8 ROAD IMPROVEMENT SCHEMES M2:
IN9 TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT SCHEMES M6:
IN8, IN9 SAFEGUARDING ROUTE OF ROBIN HOOD LINE M7:
IN8 PROVISION FOR BUSES M9
Lapsed REDEVELOPMENT OF MANSFIELD CENTRAL BUS STATION M10:
IN8 SAFEGUARDINGEXISTINGFOOTPATHS,BRIDLEWAYS,BYWAYSandCYCLEROUTES M11:
IN2, IN8 STRATEGIC RECREATIONAL ROUTES M12:
P1, P2, P3, RT5 and IN8 PROVISION FOR PEDESTRIANS M13:
Lapsed SAFEGUARDING RECREATIONAL ROUTES FOR HORSE RIDERS M14:
IN8 NEW CYCLE ROUTES M15:
197Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 1 - Saved policies of the Mansfield Local Plan 1998 superseded by the Mansfield Local Plan 2013 to 2033SupersededbyLocalPlan2013
to 33 policy refPolicy Name / Description Saved Policy
S2, IN8, IN9, P1, P2, P3 INTEGRATION OF TRANSPORT IN NEW DEVELOPMENT M16:
Lapsed LOSS OF OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES M17:
Lapsed NEW PARKING AND ROADSIDE SERVICES M18:
Lapsed PARK AND RIDE M19:
H1, S2 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE URBAN AREA H2:
H1, S2 HOUSING DEVELOPMENT OUTSIDE THE URBAN AREA H3:
S5 TEMPORARY AGRICULTURAL WORKERS DWELLINGS H4:
H1 PROPOSED HOUSING SITES H5:
Lapsed OPTIONAL HOUSING PROPOSALS H6:
Lapsed RESIDENTIAL CONSOLIDATION AREAS H7:
Lapsed LOSS OF EXISTING HOUSING DEVELOPMENT H10:
Lapsed CONVERSION OF EXISTING HOUSING H11:
Lapsed FLATS ABOVE SHOPS H12:
P6 EXTENSIONS TO EXISTING DWELLINGS H13:
H4 AFFORDABLE HOUSING H14:
H6 SPECIAL NEEDS HOUSING H15:
H6 SHELTERED HOUSING, RESIDENTIAL CARE AND NURSING HOMES H16:
IN3 OPEN SPACE PROTECTION LT1:
IN3 OPEN SPACE PROTECTION LT2:
IN3 OPEN SPACE PROTECTION LT3:
IN3 OPEN SPACE PROTECTION LT4:
Lapsed RE-DEVELOPMENT OF MANSFIELD TOWN FOOTBALL STADIUM LT5:
IN5 OPEN SPACE PROTECTION LT6:
IN3 OPEN SPACE PROTECTION LT7:
Lapsed PROPOSED SPORTS PITCHES LT8:
Lapsed PROPOSED PUBLIC OPEN SPACES LT9:
IN3 OPEN SPACE PROTECTION LT10:
IN3 PROPOSED COUNTRY PARK AT MANOR PARK/PARK HALL LT11:
IN3 PROPOSED MAJOR RECREATIONAL AREAS AT FORMER COLLIERIES LT12:
Lapsed NEW BUILT LEISURE FACILITIES LT13:
Lapsed PROPOSED SPORTS HALLS LT14:
Lapsed MOTORISED SPORTS LT17:
RT12 NEW TOURIST FACILITIES LT18:
198SupersededbyLocalPlan2013
to 33 policy refPolicy Name / Description Saved Policy
HE2 PROPOSED TOURIST/LEISURE FACILITY AT PLEASLEY MILLS LT19:
RT12 HOTEL AND OTHER TOURIST ACCOMMODATION LT20:
Lapsed PROPOSED HOTEL SITES LT21:
Lapsed OPTIONAL HOTEL PROPOSAL LT22:
Lapsed CARAVAN AND CAMPING SITES LT23:
IN7 NEW COMMUNITY FACILITIES ECH1:
IN3 PROTECTIONOFEXISTINGCOALINDUSTRYSOCIALANDWELFAREORGANISATION
FACILITIESECH3:
CC1 RENEWABLE ENERGY U1:
NE3, CC3, CC4 PROTECTION OF GROUNDWATER U2:
IN1 SEWERAGE INFRASTRUCTURE U3:
NE3 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN A CORDON SANITAIRE U4:
CC2, CC3 SURFACE WATER RUN-OFF U5:
IN1, P7 NEW UTILITY FACILITIES U7:
IN11 TELECOMMUNICATION U8:
NE3 DERELICT, DESPOILED AND CONTAMINATED LAND DWM1:
RT1, RT2, RT3 MANSFIELD SUB-REGIONAL CENTRE R1:
RT8 DESIGNATED DISTRICT CENTRES R2:
RT8 DESIGNATED LOCAL CENTRES R3:
RT9 DESIGNATED NEIGHBOURHOOD PARADES R4:
Lapsed RETAIL WAREHOUSING R5:
RT1, RT2 LOCATION OF NEW RETAIL DEVELOPMENT R6:
RT4, P1, P2, P7 NEW RETAIL DEVELOPMENT R7:
RT2 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT R8:
IN7 PROTECTION OF SMALL RETAIL UNITS R9:
IN7 EXTENSION OF EXISTING SHOPS R10:
E4 FACTORY SHOPS R11:
S5 FARM SHOPS R12:
Lapsed OPTIONAL LAND USE PROPOSALS R15:
Lapsed OPTIONAL LAND USE PROPOSALS R16:
Lapsed OFFICE CONSOLIDATION AREA- ST JOHN STREET MTC1:
LRT4 OFFICES ON UPPER FLOORS WITHIN MANSFIELD TOWN CENTRE MTC2:
P2 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN MANSFIELD SUB-REGIONAL CENTRE MTC3
199Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 1 - Saved policies of the Mansfield Local Plan 1998 superseded by the Mansfield Local Plan 2013 to 2033SupersededbyLocalPlan2013
to 33 policy refPolicy Name / Description Saved Policy
IN7 SAFEGUARDING THE PALACE THEATRE/MUSEUM COMPLEX MTC4
RT3 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN MANSFIELD TOWN CENTRE MTC5
RT3 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN MANSFIELD TOWN CENTRE MTC6
RT1, RT2 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN MANSFIELD TOWN CENTRE MTC7
RT1, RT2, RT4 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN MANSFIELD TOWN CENTRE MTC8
RT6 PROPOSED RETAIL SITES MTC9
Lapsed OPTIONAL RETAIL SITES - INDOOR MARKET HALL MTC10
Lapsed OPTIONAL RETAIL SITES - LAND OFF CLUMBER STREET MTC11
Lapsed OPTIONAL RETAIL SITES - LAND OFF TOOTHILL ROAD MTC12
Lapsed OPTIONAL RETAIL SITES - LAND OFF TOOTHILL LANE MTC13
S4 WHITE HART STREET ACTION AREA MTC14
S4 PROPOSED MIXED USE REDEVELOPMENT-WHITE HART STREET AREA MTC15
Lapsed ROCK VALLEY/BRIDGE STREET ACTION AREA DESIGNATION MTC18
Lapsed PROPOSED HOUSING SITES MTC19
Lapsed STATION STREET ACTION AREA DESIGNATION MTC20
RT8 OPTIONAL USE REDEVELOPMENT SITE – LAND OFF STATION ROAD/BELVEDERE
STREETMTC24
RT8 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN MANSFIELD WOODHOUSE CENTRE MW1
HE1 DEVELOPMENT WITHIN MANSFIELD WOODHOUSE CONSERVATION AREA MW2
IN6 SAFEGUARDING LAND SOUTH OF WELBECK ROAD MW3
Lapsed EMPLOYMENT CONSOLIDATION AREA – LAND BOUNDED BY STATION STREET,
SWAN LANE, OXCLOSE LANE and THE RAILWAY LINEMW4
Lapsed OPTIONAL USE DEVELOPMENT SITE - LAND OFF VALE ROAD/OXCLOSE LANE MW6:
Lapsed HIGH STREET ACTION AREA MW12:
Lapsed OPTIONAL USE DEVELOPMENT SITE – LAND WEST OF PORTLAND STREET MW14:
Lapsed OPTIONAL USE DEVELOPMENT SITE – LAND OFF ROSE LANE MW15:
RT8 DEVELOPMENT AT MARKET WARSOP CENTRE WC1:
Lapsed EMPLOYMENT CONSOLIDATION AREA – BURNS LANE WC2:
Lapsed PROTECTION OF CAR PARKING WITHIN WARSOP CENTRAL AREA WC3:
Lapsed HIGH STREET ACTION AREA DESIGNATION WC5:
Lapsed EXTENSION TO EXISTING HIGH STREET CAR PARK WC6:
Lapsed EXTENSION TO EXISTING WARSOP WORKING MEN’S CLUB CAR PARK WC7:
Lapsed OPTIONAL DEVELOPMENT SITE-LAND TO THE REAR OF NO 31 HIGH STREET WC9:
Lapsed PROPOSED HOUSING SITE - LAND OFF YORK TERRACE WC10:
200Appendix 2 - Glossary of terms
DISCLAIMER:Theinformationbelowisnotastatement
of the law. While every effort has been taken to check
the accuracy of the information below, we cannot be
held liable for any financial loss resulting from the
professional advice contained herein. Readers are
advisedtoseekadvicebeforeproceedingonanymatter.
Affordable housing
Housing, whether for sale, rent or shared ownership,
for those whose needs are not met by the market
(including housing that provides a subsidised route to
home ownership and / or is for essential local
workers). Eligibility is determined with regard to local
incomes and local house prices. The NPPF defines
affordable housing as follows:
Affordablehousingforrent: meetsallofthefollowing
conditions:
15.1a. the rent is set in accordance with the
Government’s rent policy for Social Rent or Affordable
Rent, or is at least 20% below local market rents
(including service charges where applicable);
15.2b. the landlord is a registered provider, except
where it is included as part of a Build to Rent scheme
(in which case the landlord need not be a registered
provider); and
15.3c. it includes provisions to remain at an
affordablepriceforfutureeligiblehouseholds,orforthe
subsidytoberecycledforalternativeaffordablehousing
provision.ForBuildtoRentschemes,affordablehousing
for rent (i.e. Affordable Private Rent) is expected to be
the normal form of affordable housing provision.
15.4Starterhomes: ishousingasdefinedinSections
2 and 3 of the Housing and Planning Act 2016 and any
subsequent secondary legislation made under these
sections.
Discounted market sales housing: is that sold at a
discount of at least 20% below local market value.
Eligibilityisdeterminedwithregardtolocalincomesand
local house prices. Provisions should be in place to
ensurehousingremainsatadiscountforfutureeligible
households.
Other affordable routes to home ownership: is
housing provided for sale that provides a route to
ownership for those who could not achieve home
ownership through the market. It includes shared
ownership,relevantequityloans,otherlowcosthomesforsale(atapriceequivalenttoatleast20%belowlocal
market value) and rent to buy (which includes a period
of intermediate rent).
Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA)
Areasdesignatedbylocalauthoritiesbecausetheyare
not likely to achieve national air quality objectives by
the relevant deadlines.
Ancient woodland
Anareaofwoodlandthathasbeenwoodedconsistently
since at least 1600 AD.
Authority Monitoring Report (AMR)
A report by the local planning authorities assessing
progress with and the effectiveness of a Local Plan.
Best and most versatile agricultural
Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural Land
Classification. Mansfield does not have any grade 1
agricultural land.
Biodiversity
Biodiversity is a term commonly used to describe the
variety of life on earth which encompasses the whole
ofthenaturalworldandalllivingthingswhichsharethe
planet. It includes plants, animals even invisible
micro-organisms and bacteria which, together, interact
in complex ways with the inanimate environment to
create ecosystems.
Brownfield land
See previously developed land below.
Building control/regulation
Control exercised through local authorities over the
details and means of construction to secure health,
safety, energy conservation and access.
Building for Life 12 (BfL)
Building for Life 12 is the industry standard, endorsed
by Government, for well-designed homes and
neighbourhoods so that new development can be
attractive, functional and be a sustainable place.
202Coal mining development referral area
Anareawhichcontainsarangeofspecificmininglegacy
riskstothesurfaceandaCoalMiningRiskAssessment
is required for non-householder planning applications.
The Coal Authority will be consulted on all planning
applications in these areas.
Change of use
Achangeinthewaythatlandorbuildingsareused(see
use class order). Planning permission is usually
necessary in order to change a 'use class'.
Character
Atermrelatingtoconservationareasorlistedbuildings,
butalsototheappearanceofanyruralorurbanlocation
in terms of its landscape or the layout of streets and
open spaces, often giving places their own distinct
identity.
Climate change
A changing climate, which can be attributed directly or
indirectlytohumanactivity,whichaltersthecomposition
of the global atmosphere.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)
A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from
ownersordevelopersoflandundertakingnewbuilding
in their area. The Community CIL Infrastructure
Levy money can be used to fund the infrastructure
needed as a result of development.
Community open space
A term relating to formal or informal open space that is
publicly accessible, or provides community benefits.
Includes sport, play, leisure and recreational land.
Community and cultural facilities
A building or space where community led facilities for
communitybenefitistheprimaryuse.Theycanprovide
forthehealthandwellbeing,socialeducation,spiritual,
recreational, leisure and cultural needs of the
community.Forexample,publiclibraries,museumsand
places of worship.
Conditions (on a planning permission)
Requirementsattachedtoaplanningpermissiontolimit
or direct the manner in which development is carried
out.Conservation areas
Areas of special architectural or historic interest, the
character,appearanceorsettingofwhichitisdesirable
to preserve or enhance; permitted development rights
may be restricted in these areas.
County councils
Responsible for the preparation of Waste and Minerals
development plans, and dealing with applications for
their own development for example, schools and
libraries.
Curtilage
Land surrounding, and ancillary to, to a building which
isnecessaryforitsfunctionandenjoyment,forexample,
the domestic garden of a dwelling or the storage yard
of a factory.
Derelict Land
There is no statutory definition of derelict land, but it is
defined administratively as 'land so damaged by
industrial or other development that it is incapable of
beneficial use without treatment'.
Design and Access Statement
Ashortreportaccompanyingandsupportingaplanning
application to illustrate the process that has led to the
development proposal, and to explain and justify the
proposal in a structured way.
15.5Development
The legal definition of development is "the carrying out
of building, mining, engineering or other operations in,
on, under or over land, and the making of any material
changeintheuseofbuildingsorotherland"(Sec55of
1990 Town and Country Planning Act); this covers
virtually all construction activities and changes of use.
Dwelling
A self-contained building or part of a building used as
residentialaccommodation,andusuallyhousingasingle
household. A dwelling may be a house, bungalow, flat,
maisonette or converted farm building.
203Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 2 - Glossary of termsDevelopment management
Theprocesswherebyalocalplanningauthorityreceives
and considers the merits of a planning application and
whetheritshouldbegivenpermissionhavingregardto
the development plan and all other material
considerations.
Development Plan Document (DPD)
Documents prepared by the local planning authority
(including the Local Plan) setting out the main spatial
planning strategy, policies and proposals for the area.
These documents will be statutory documents and
subjecttoanindependentexaminationbyaninspector.
DPDs must be consistent with and have regard to
national planning policy.
Duty to Cooperate (DtC)
Introduced by the Localism Act 2011. It places a legal
duty on all local planning authorities to engage
constructively, actively and on an ongoing basis with
certain specified bodies to maximize the effectiveness
of Local Plan preparation relating to strategic cross
boundary issues.
Edge of centre
Forretailpurposes,alocationthatiswellconnectedto,
and up to 300 metres from, the primary shopping area.
For all other main town centre uses, a location within
300 metres of a town centre boundary. For office
development, this includes locations outside the town
centre but within 500 metres of a public transport
interchange. In determining whether a site falls within
thedefinitionofedgeofcentre,accountshouldbetaken
of local circumstances.
Enforcement action
Proceduresby a local planning authoritytoensure that
the terms and conditions of a planning decision are
carried out, or that development carried out without
planning permission is brought under control.
Examination
Thisisdesignedtotestthesoundnessofthedocuments
produced to form the development plan for the area.
The Examination in Public ( EiP) is overseen by an
independently appointed Planning Inspector and held
in public.Flood risk assessment (FRA)
An assessment of the likelihood of flooding and
associatedrisksinaparticularareafromallsources,in
order that the development needs and mitigation
measures can be carefully considered. This is defined
in more detail in National Planning Policy Guidance.
Flood zones
All land is split into different flood zones to indicate the
likelihood of flooding occurring. Flood Zone 1 indicates
areasofsurfacewaterflooding.FloodZone2indicates
medium risk with a 1% to 0.1% risk of river flooding.
Flood Zone 3 indicates a high risk of river flooding
(greater than 1%). Flood Zone 3b is the Functional
Floodplain.
Functional Economic Market Area (FEMA)
Thegeographyofcommercialpropertymarketsshould
bethoughtofintermsoftherequirementsofthemarket
in terms of the location of premises, and the spatial
factors used in analysing demand and supply - often
referred to as the functional economic market area.
General employment areas
Sites identified within the Employment Land Review
2017 as good quality employment sites worthy of
protection from alternatives uses.
Geodiversity
The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and
landforms.
Green belt
A designation for land around certain cities and large
built-upareas,whichaimstokeepthislandpermanently
openorlargelyundeveloped.Thepurposesofthegreen
belt are to:
check the unrestricted sprawl of large built up
areastopreventneighbouringtownsfrommerging
safeguard the countryside from encroachment
preserve the setting and special character of
historic towns
assist urban regeneration by encouraging the
recycling of derelict and other urban land
Green belts are defined in a local planning authority's
development plan. There is no green belt in Mansfield.
204Greenfield land
Land that has never had any built development on it.
Green Infrastructure (GI)
Thephysicalenvironmentwithinandbetweenourcities,
towns and villages. It is a network of multi-functional
green spaces, including formal parks, gardens,
woodlands, green corridors, waterways, street trees
and open countryside. This green space can be either
urbanorrural,andiscapableofdeliveringawiderange
of environmental and quality of life benefits for local
communities.
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Needs
Assessment (GTANA)
An assessment of gypsy and traveller accommodation
needs of the Gypsy and Traveller communities.
Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA)
Anassessment,asdefinedbytheHabitatRegulations,
2017, of any proposals in an emerging plan on their
likely significant effect on sites designated as being of
EuropeanHabitatsimportancefortheirwildlifehabitats
and ecological value.
Habitable room
Any room used for sleeping, cooking, living or eating
purposes. Enclosed spaces such as bath or toilet
facilities, service rooms, corridors, laundries, hallways,
utility rooms or similar spaces are excluded from this
definition
Highway Authority
An organisation responsible for the maintenance and
safety of public roads as defined in the Highways Act
1980. Highways England is responsible for main trunk
roads (e.g. motorways). In Mansfield district,
Nottinghamshire County Council is the local highways
authorityresponsibleforallotherroadsandpublicrights
of way. Duties include, for example: maintaining the
safety and usability of highways, highway drainage,
maintaining records and providing comments on
planning applications.Historic England
The public body that looks after England's historic
environment. They are the Government advisors with
responsibilityforallaspectsofprotectingandpromoting
the historic environment, especially in relation to
advising on the listing of historic buildings.
Housing land availability
The total amount of land reserved for residential use
awaiting development.
Housing needs assessment
Asurveythatestimatesthenumberofhouseholdswithin
an area that are in need of affordable housing and/or
housing that meets their specific requirements.
Housing and Economic Land Availability
Assessment (HELAA)
An assessment of land availability which identifies a
future supply of land which is suitable, available and
achievableforhousingandeconomicdevelopmentuses
overtheplanperiod.Theassessmentoflandavailability
is an important step in the preparation of Local Plans.
Infrastructure
Thebasicrequirementsforthesatisfactorydevelopment
of an area and includes roads, footpaths, sewers,
schools, open space and other community facilities.
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP)
TheIDPisasupportingdocumenttotheLocalPlan.Its
purpose is to provide background evidence regarding
thephysicalandInfrastructureIDPDeliveryPlansocial
infrastructure likely to be needed to support identified
development in the distirct over the plan period. It sets
out a baseline assessment of existing infrastructure
provision and provides an indication of the existing
capacityandshortfallsofalltypesofinfrastructure.The
document will be updated and monitored regularly and
will assist in future delivery of infrastructure
requirements.
Key employment areas
Sites identified within the Employment Land Review,
2017 as good quality employment sites worthy of
protection from alternatives uses.
205Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 2 - Glossary of termsListed buildings
A building of special architectural or historic interest.
Listed buildings are graded I, II* or II with grade I being
the highest. Listing includes the interior as well as the
exteriorofthebuilding,andanybuildingsorpermanent
structures (e.g. wells within its curtilage). Historic
England is responsible for designating buildings for
listing in England.
Local Development Scheme (LDS)
The Local Development Scheme is a document which
sets out the local planning authority's programme for
the production of Local Development Documents.
Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP)
A body of designated by the Government established
for the purpose of creating or improving the conditions
for economic growth in an area. In our area, this is the
Local Enterprise Partnership for Derby, Derbyshire,
Nottingham and Nottinghamshire (D2N2). The Derby
and Nottingham Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP)
covers Mansfield district.
Local Nature Partnership (LNP)
Designatedby theGovernment,thisis a partnershipof
individuals, businesses and organisations working
together to better understand, appreciate, value and
enhance the local natural environment. The Lowland
Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Local Nature
Partnership (LDNLNP) covers Mansfield district.
Local planning authority (LPA)
Thelocalauthorityorcouncilthatisempoweredbylaw
to exercise planning functions, often the local borough
or district council. National parks and The Broads
authority are also considered to be local planning
authorities. County councils are the authority for waste
and minerals matters.
Local Plan
Adevelopmentplanpreparedbydistrictandotherlocal
planningauthorities.Theplanforthefuturedevelopment
of the local area, drawn up by the local planning
authorityinconsultationwiththecommunity.Inlawthis
is described as development plan documents adopted
underthePlanningandCompulsoryPurchaseAct2004.Local transport plan
Local  transport plans, divided  into full local transport 
plans  and local implementation  plans  for transport, are 
an important part of transport planning  in England. They 
are prepared  by strategic transport authorities,  in our 
case Nottinghamshire  County Council.
Local wildlife sites (LWS)
Local  wildlife  sites are defined  areas identified  and 
designated  locally  for their nature conservation  value.
Major Development
Includes  applications  for minerals  and waste. It also 
includes housing development where 10 or more homes 
will be provided,  or
 the site has an area of 0.5 hectares 
or more and number of dwellings is unknown. It includes 
non-residential
 development with
 floorspace of 1,000m2 
or
 more, or a site of 1 hectare or more, or as otherwise  
defined in the Town and Country Planning (Development 
Management  Procedure)  (England)  Order 2015.
Mansfield urban
 area
Mansfield  Urban  Area is the main built up settlement 
within  the district comprising,  Mansfield,  Mansfield  
Woodhouse,  Forest  Town and parts of Rainworth  and 
Clipstone  that fall within  Mansfield  District.
Masterplan
A strategic plan setting out the overall  framework and 
key principles  for the development  of a site.
Material considerations
A matter  that should  be taken into account in deciding  
a planning  application  or on an appeal  against  a 
planning  decision.
Minor Development
Includes development that falls below the thresholds 
for major development, or as otherwise defined in the 
Town and Country Planning (Development 
Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015. This 
may include, for example, householder applications, 
change of use
206.15.6 National character areas (NCA)
National character areas are defined by Natural England  
and they are a natural  subdivision  of England  based  on 
a combination  of landscape,  biodiversity, geodiversity  
and economic  activity. They follow  natural, rather than 
administrative  boundaries.
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)
Designed  to consolidate  all policy  statements (Except 
National  Policy Statements referring  to Nationally  
Strategic Infrastructure Projects). This provides  a 
national  policy  overview  that is implemented  in 
Development  Plans.
Neighbourhood parade
Small shopping  parades  of purely  neighbourhood  
significance.
Neighbourhood plans
A plan prepared  by a Parish Council  or Neighbourhood  
Forum for a particular neighbourhood area (made under  
the Planning  and Compulsory  Purchase  Act 2004).
Nottinghamshire County Council Highway Design 
Guide
Sets out the general  principles  and minimum  standards  
for the layout and dimensions of roads and paved areas  
in residential  and industrial  developments
http://www.nottinghamshire.gov.uk/transport/roads/
highway-design-guide.
Out of
 centre
A location  which  is not in or on the edge  of a centre, but 
not necessarily  outside  of the urban  area. (See Town 
centre and Edge of centre.)
Parish council
Where an area is designated  as a civil parish, the 
community it contains  may be represented  by a parish  
council which is an elected local  government bod y. This 
provides  a limited  range  of local public  services and 
makes representations  on behalf  of the community to 
other organisations;  particularly  significant  to planning  
in that it can make submissions  on behalf  of its 
community when  development  plan documents  arePermitted development
Permission  to carry out certain limited  forms  of 
development  without the need  to make an application  
to a local planning authority, as granted under the terms  
of the Town and Country Planning  (General  Permitted 
Development)  Order.
Planning Aid
Planning  Aid is an organisation  that provides  free 
independent  and professional  advice  on town and 
country planning issues to  all callers. Community groups  
and individuals
 who are then  eligible may receive further  
professional  advice  through  a network of professional  
volunteers.  It works with communities  to help them 
understand,  and play a role in, the planning  process 
and Neighbourhood  Planning.  Planning  Aid is an 
independent  source of information.
Planning condition
A condition  imposed  on a grant of planning  permission,  
for example,  restricting what can be done  on the 
premises, or requiring  you get specific approval  for 
aspects of the development,  such as the materials  to 
be used, before the development  can proceed.
Planning Inspectorate
Is an executive  agency  of the Ministry of
Housing,  Communities  and Local  Government of the 
United  Kingdom  Government. It is responsible  for 
determining final outcomes of planning and enforcement  
appeals  and public  examinations  of local development  
plans.
Planning obligations
A legally  enforceable  obligation  entered  into under  
section 106 of the Town and Country Planning  Act 1990  
to mitigate the impacts of a development  proposal.
Policies Map
A map to illustrate  specific policies  such as 
development  sites for housing,  employment,  retail, etc.
Planning Practice Guidance (PPG)
An online  resource  and tool that sets out the 
governments  planning  guidance  on a range  of issues.
207Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 2 - Glossary of terms
being  prepared  and on planning  applications  submitted 
within  the Parish. An increasingly  important role is in 
being  proactive  in the preparation  of Parish Plans and 
Neighbourhood  Planning.Previously developed land (brownfield land)
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent
structure, including the curtilage of the developed land
(although it should not be assumed that the whole of
thecurtilageshouldbedeveloped)andanyassociated
fixed surface infrastructure. This excludes: land that is
or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry
buildings; land that has been developed for minerals
extractionorwastedisposalbylandfillpurposeswhere
provision for restoration has been made through
developmentcontrolprocedures;land in built-upareas
such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation
grounds and allotments; and land that was
previously-developed but where the remains of the
permanent structure or fixed surface structure have
blended into the landscape in the process of time.
Primary shopping area
Defined area within a town centre where retail
development is concentrated. Generally comprise the
primary and secondary shopping frontages.
Primary and secondary shopping frontages
Primaryfrontagesarelikelytoincludeahighproportion
of retail uses which may include food, drinks, clothing
and household goods. Secondary frontages provide
greater opportunities for a diversity of uses such as
restaurants, cinemas and businesses.
Public consultation
A process by which the public's opinion on matters
affecting them is sought.
Renewable energy
Renewable energy is energy flows that occur naturally
and repeatedly in the environment, for example from
the wind, water flow or the sun.
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)
Sites of national importance designated by Natural
England under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981.
SSSIsarethecountry'sverybestwildlifeandgeological
sites.
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI)
This sets out the processes to be used by the local
authorityininvolvingthecommunityinthepreparation,
alterationandcontinuingreviewofalllocaldevelopment
documents and development management decisions.Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)
A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) provides
information on the probability of flooding, such as that
from rivers, surface run-off, groundwater sources and
sewers.
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD)
Documents which add further detail to the policies in
the Local Plan. They can be used to provide further
guidance for development on specific sites, or on
particular issues, such as design. Supplementary
planning documents are capable of being a material
consideration in planning decisions but are not part of
the development plan.
Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS)
Surface water drainage methods that take account of
water quantity, water quality and amenity issues are
collectivelyreferredtoasSustainableDrainageSystems
(SuDS).
Statutory undertakers
Organisations which have powers derived from statute
to develop and operate utility services, including gas,
water supply, electricity, and telecommunications.
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)
Aprocedure(setoutintheEnvironmentalAssessment
of Plans and Programmes Regulations 2004) which
requirestheformalenvironmentalassessmentofcertain
plans and programmes which are likely to have
significant effects on the environment.
Surplus Land
Land or buildings which are not required for their
current or previous use.
Sustainability Appraisal (including Environmental
Appraisal) (SA)
Anappraisaloftheeconomic,environmentalandsocial
effects of a plan from the outset of the preparation
process to allow decisions to be made that accord with
sustainable development. Usually includes the
requirement to undertake SEA.
Town centre
Area defined on the local authority’s policies map,
including the primary shopping area and areas
predominantlyoccupiedbymaintowncentreuseswithin
208or adjacent  to the primary shopping  area. References  
to town centres or centres apply  to city centres, town 
centres, district centres and local centres, but exclude  
small parades  of shops of purely  neighbourhood  
significance. Unless they are identified as centres in  the 
development plan,
 existing out-of-centre developments,  
comprising  or
 including  main town centre
 uses, do not 
constitute town centres.
Town centre boundary
Boundary  on the policies  map showing  land which  is 
designated  as a town centre. (Also see Edge of centre.)
Town centre uses (main)
Retail  development  (including  warehouse  clubs and 
factory outlet centres); leisure,  entertainment  and more 
intensive  sport and recreation  uses (including  cinemas, 
restaurants, drive-through  restaurants, bars and pubs, 
nightclubs,  casinos, health  and fitness centres, indoor  
bowling  centres and bingo  halls); offices; and arts, 
culture and tourism development  (including  theatres, 
museums, galleries  and concert halls, hotels and 
conference  facilities).
Town centre uses (local)
Primarily  convenience  shopping  uses. District centres 
often contain  at least one supermarket  or superstore, 
with some comparison  shopping  and a range  of non-
retail services, such as banks, building  societies, 
restaurants and takeaways, as well as local public  
facilities  such as a doctor's surgery, dentist, opticians,  
post office and library  for the settlement and the 
surrounding  communities.
Local  centres often include  a range  of small shops of a 
local nature, serving  a small catchment. Typically, local 
centres might include,  amongst other shops, a small 
supermarket, a newsagent,  a sub-post office and a 
pharmacy. Other facilities  could  include  a hot-food 
takeaway  and launderette.
Transport  Assessment
A transport assessment (TA) will normally  be required  
for larger  developments  likely  to have impacts over a 
wide area
http://www.nottinghamshire.gov.uk/media/131232/4_part_2_0.pdf.
Transport  Statement
A Transport statement (TS) should  set out the transport 
issues relating to a proposed  development site (existing  
conditions)  and details  of
 the development  proposals(proposed  development.  A TS will be normally  be 
required  for the following  types and scale of 
development  http://www.nottinghamshire.gov.uk/
media/131232/4_part_2_0.pdf .
Travel plans
A travel plan aims to  promote sustainable  travel choices  
(for example  cycling)  as an alternative  to single  
occupancy  car journeys  that may impact negatively  on 
the environment,  congestion  and road safety. Travel 
plans  can be required  when  granting  planning  
permission  for new developments.
Tree Preservation  Order (TPO)
A mechanism  for securing  the preservation  of single  or 
groups  of trees of acknowledged  amenity value. A tree 
subject to a tree preservation  order may not normally  
be topped, lopped  or felled  without the consent of the 
local planning  authority.
Use Classes  Order
The Town and Country Planning  (Use classes) Order 
1987  puts uses of land and buildings  into various  
categories.  Planning  permission  is not needed  for 
changes  of use within  the same use class. For further 
information  please
see https://www .planningportal.co.uk/info/
200130/common_projects/9/change_of_use
Waste
Is any material  or object that is no longer  wanted  and 
requires  disposal.  If a material  or object is re-usable,  it 
is still classed  as waste if it has first been  discarded.
Windfall  sites
Sites which  have not been  specifically  identified  as 
available  in the Local  Plan process.
209Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 2 - Glossary of termsAppendix 3 - Objective and policy links
Table A3.1 Objective and policy links
Related strategic
prioritiesPolicies which
address this
objectiveObjective
Objective 1
SP1, SP3, SP7,
SP11S1, S2, S3, S4, S5,
P4, H1, H2, H7, E1,
E2, E3, E4, RT1,Supporteconomic growthandprosperityby promoting the regeneration of previously developed land and existing
buildings, as well as identifying other sustainable areas, for job growth, services and new homes. In doing so,
directmostdevelopmenttotheMansfieldurbanarea,includingMansfieldWoodhouse,ForestTownandRainworth,
followed by Market Warsop, whilst seeking to mitigate against any significant adverse social, environmentaland RT2,RT3,RT6,RT7,
RT11, SUE1, SUE2,
SUE3, HE2, IM1infrastructure impacts of development.
Objective 2
SP3 S1,S2, S3, S4, S5,
P4, H6, E1, E2, E3,
E4,E5,SUE1,SUE2,
SUE3, HE2, IM1Contribute to creating a stronger, more resilient local economy by bringing forward a diverse range of
employmentsitestoreflectthechangingeconomyandensuringthatresidentialareasareaccessibletoemployment,
education and trainingopportunities.
Objective 3
SP1, SP2 S1, S2, S3, H1, H2,
H3, H4, H5, H6, H7,
H8, SUE1, SUE2,
SUE3, IM1Increase the range and choice of housing throughout theurban areasandvillagestobettermeettheneeds
ofthewholecommunity,throughtheprovisionofmorediversemarket,affordable,andspecialisthousingsocreating
inclusive, mixedneighbourhoods.
Objective 4
SP9, SP15 S1, S2, S3, P1, P2,
P8, RT4, HE1, HE2,
IM1Conserve and enhance the identity, character and diversity of the district’s historic and cultural heritage assets
and their settings.
Objective 5
SP15 S1, S2, P1, P2, P3,
P4, P5, P6, P7, H3,
H5, H7, RT4, RT10,
IM1Ensure that all new development achieves a high standard of design and amenity which reflects local context,
circumstances and opportunities to create healthy, safe and attractive neighbourhoods.
Objective 6
SP4 S1, S2, S5, P1, P2,
RT1,RT2,RT3,RT4,
RT5,RT6,RT7,RT8,
RT9, , RT11, IM1Safeguardandenhance thevitalityandviabilityofthe district’s town, district and local centres particularly through
regeneration opportunities, in ways that help meettheconsumers’ needs.Attractingnewandvaried uses to bring
increased activity, footfall and vibrancy intotheselocations,withafocuson cultural,residential and leisure activities
to complement the retail and service role of thesecentres.
Objective 7
SP8, SP12, SP13,
SP15S1 S2, S3, P1, P2,
P3, P5, P7, H3, RT9,
RT10,IN2, IN3, IN4,
IN5, IN6, IN7, IM1Improve the health and wellbeing of the district’s populationandreducehealthinequalitiesbyensuring
residentsandvisitorshavebetteropportunitiestotake exercisethroughconvenientaccess toarangeofgood
qualitygreenspace,green corridors,trails,leisureand community facilities and the countryside through
appropriatelydesignedplaces andwellplannedgreen infrastructure.
Objective 8
SP7 S1, S2, P1, P2, P5,
IN1,NE2,CC1,CC2,
CC3, CC4, IM1Ensure new development minimises, and is resilient to, the adverse impacts of climate change by adopting
measures to appropriately address renewable and low carbon energy generation, flood mitigation, green
infrastructure, resource and waste management.
Objective 9
SP5 S1, S2,S3, P1, P2,
P3,P4,P5,RT5,IN1,
IN2,IN8, IN9, IN10,
IM1Reducetheneedtotravelandsupportimprovementstotransportaccessibilitysothatpeoplecanmovearound,
acrossandbeyondthedistricteasilyandsustainably,includingbypublictransport,walkingandcycling.Locating
newdevelopmenttakingaccountofthoseareasofthehighwaynetworkthatareidentifiedasbeingverycongested
with little capacity for expansion and managing impacts on air quality. Providing parking for vehicles to meet
appropriate local needs and avoiding impacts on local highway safety.
210Related strategic
prioritiesPolicies which
address this
objectiveObjective
Objective 1
Objective 10
SP6, SP8, SP13,
SP14, SP15S1,S2, P5,IN1, IN2,
IN3, IN4, IN5, IN7,
IN8, IN9, IN10, IN11,
IM1Delivertheinfrastructurerequirementsofthedistrict'sfuturepopulationincludingaccesstohighspeedbroadband.
Objective 11
SP11 S1, S2, S3, RT9,
IN2, IN5, IN7, NE1,
IM1Protectthevitality,identityandsettingofthevillagesbysafeguardingimportantareasofopenlandandenabling
access to key community facilities and services.
Objective 12
SP12, SP14, SP10 S1, S2,IN2, NE2,
NE3, NE4, IM1Protect, enhance, restore and maintain important naturalresources,inand adjoiningthedistrictincluding
wildlife,soil,air qualityand geologicalresources,and the network of habitats and designatedsites.
Objective 13
SP6 S1,S2,CC2, CC3,
CC4,IM1Encouragenewdevelopmenttobewatersensitivebyaddressingwaterefficiency,protectingandenhancingthenatural
environmentandreducing
floodriskandpollution,whilstatthesametimeensuring theeffectivedesignandlocation
of sustainable urban drainage systems(SuDS)and naturalisingtheriverenvironment to create a more attractive
healthy environmentfor residents.
Objective 14
SP11 S1, S2, S3, NE1,
IM1Conserveandenhancethequalityofthedistrict’slandscapecharacterandkeylandscapefeaturesbypositively
addressing National Character area profiles and landscape policy actions with the Sherwood and Magnesian
Limestone landscape areas through the design and location of new developments.
211Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 3 - Objective and policy linksAppendix 4 - Health Impact Assessment checklist
Table
Recommendedamendments
or enhancement actions to
the proposal under
considerationPotential
health
impact?Details/evidence Relevant? Assessment criteria
1. Housing quality and design
Positive Yes 1. Does the proposal seek to address the housing needs of the wider
community by requiring provision of variation of house type that will
meet the needs of older or disabled people? [For example does it meet
all Lifetime Homes Standards, Building for Life etc?]Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 2. Does the proposal promote development that will reduce energy
requirementsandlivingcostsandensurethathomesarewarmanddry
in winter and cool in summer Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
2. Access to healthcare services and other social infrastructure
Positive Yes 3.Doestheproposalseektoretain,replaceorprovidehealthandsocial
care related infrastructure?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 4. Does the proposal address the proposed growth/ assess the impact
on healthcare services?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 5. Does the proposal explore/allow for opportunities for shared
community use and co-location of services?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
3. Access to open space and nature
Positive Yes 6. Does the proposal seek to retain and enhance existing and provide
new open and natural spaces to support healthy living and physical
activity? Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
212Recommendedamendments
or enhancement actions to
the proposal under
considerationPotential
health
impact?Details/evidence Relevant? Assessment criteria
Positive Yes 7. Does the proposal promote links between open and natural spaces
and areas of residence, employment and commerce?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 8. Does the proposal seek to ensure that open and natural spaces are
welcoming, safe and accessible to all?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 9.Doestheproposalseektoprovidearangeofplayspacesforchildren
andyoungpeople(e.g.playpitches,playareasetc.)includingprovision
for those that are disabled? Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
4. Air quality, noise and neighbourhood amenity
Positive Yes 10. Does the proposal seek to minimise construction impacts such as
dust, noise, vibration and odours?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 11. Does the proposal seek to minimise air pollution caused by traffic
and employment/ commercial facilities?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 12.Doestheproposalseektominimisenoisepollutioncausedbytraffic
and employment/ commercial facilities?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
5. Accessibility and active transport
Positive Yes 13.Doestheproposalprioritiseandencouragewalking(suchasthrough
shared spaces) connecting to local walking networks?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
213Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 4 - Health impact assessment checklistRecommendedamendments
or enhancement actions to
the proposal under
considerationPotential
health
impact?Details/evidence Relevant? Assessment criteria
Positive Yes 14. Does the proposal prioritise and encourage cycling (for example by
providingsecurecycleparking,showersandcyclelanes)connectingto
local and strategic cycle networks? Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 15.Doestheproposalsupporttrafficmanagementandcalmingmeasures
to help reduce and minimise road injuries?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 16.Doestheproposalpromoteaccessiblebuildingsandplacestoenable
access to people with mobility problems or a disability?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
6. Crime reduction and community safety
Positive Yes 17.Doestheproposalcreateenvironments&buildingsthatmakepeople
feel safe, secure and free from crime?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
7. Access to healthy food
Positive Yes 18.Doestheproposalsupporttheretentionandcreationoffoodgrowing
areas, allotments and community gardens in order to support a healthy
diet and physical activity? Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 19. Does the proposal seek to restrict the development of hot food
takeaways (A5) in specific areas?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
8. Access to work and training
Positive Yes 20. Does the proposal seek to provide new employment opportunities
and encourage local employment and training?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
214Recommendedamendments
or enhancement actions to
the proposal under
considerationPotential
health
impact?Details/evidence Relevant? Assessment criteria
9. Social cohesion and lifetime neighbourhoods
Positive Yes 21. Does the proposal connect with existing communities where the
layout and movement avoids physical barriers and severance and
encourages social interaction? [For example does it address the
components of Lifetime Neighbourhoods?]Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
10. Minimising the use of resources
Positive Yes 22. Does the proposal seek to incorporate sustainable design and
construction techniques?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
11. Climate change
Positive Yes 23. Does the proposal incorporate renewable energy and ensure that
buildings and public spaces are designed to respond to winter and
summer temperatures, i.e. ventilation, shading and landscaping? Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Positive Yes 24. Does the proposal maintain or enhance biodiversity
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
12. Health inequalities
Positive Yes 25. Does the proposal consider health inequalities and encourage
engagement by underserved communities?
Negative Partial
Neutral No
Uncertain
Any other comments
Name of assessor and organisation
Date of assessment
215Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 4 - Health impact assessment checklistAppendix 5- Housing trajectory
Table
Next five years Completions
20 19181716151413121110987654321Year
TotalPost
planPlan
period32/33 31/3230/3129/3028/2927/2826/2725/2624/2523/2422/2321/2220/2119/2018/1917/1816/1715/16 13/1414/15
254 254 8359112 Large Site Completions - Sites not 
included  in HELAA
453 453 363535 815592652727 Small Sites – Sites below HELAA threshold (5 
dwellings)
380 38038 383838383838383838 Windfall Allowance
78107810 000000000000012961205152130104 Mansfield Urban Area – Completed
3614346325085 8511514515515520723220925528833035229218196353300 Mansfield Urban Area – Permission  
Granted
46604665 345050575668974900000000000 Mansfield Urban Area - Pending  Decision
29415552386125 1562853142983002982552507035000000000 Mansfield Urban Area - Proposed  
Allocations
21902190 000000000000002641593954 Warsop Parish – Completed
48904890 0104040404060714040533810700000 Warsop Parish - Permission  Granted
820820 7101010 10101500000000000 Warsop Parish - Pending  Decision
490490 00111510013000000000000 Warsop Parish - Proposed  Allocations
97289198809253 320508608613609661705632403363419425337398238373392255297 Gross Completions
83083 38 126716112 Losses
96459198726253 320508608613609661705594403363419424311391237367391254295 Net Completions
8726 8473815376457037642458155154444938553452308926702246193515441307940549295 Cumulative Net Completions
6500325 325325325325325325325325325325325325325325325325325325325 Annual Requirement
6500 6175585055255200487545504225390035753250292526002275195016251300975650325 Cumulative Requirement
-72 -518328328828433638026978389499-1466-884266-71-30 Monitor - no of dwellings  above  or below  
annual  requirement
-1973 -827-382-13415114192256294305310319327326330325327331327325 Manage - Annual  requirement  taking  
account of cumulative  net completions
216Appendix 6 - Affordable housing zones
Figure A6.1 Affordable housing zones in Mansfield as on October 2017
217MansfieldDistrictLocalPlan2013-2033
Appendix  6 - Affordable housing zonesAppendix 7 - Employment sites within key and general employment areas
Figure A7.1 Sherwood Oaks Business Park employment area
218Figure A7.2 Millenium Business Park employment area
219Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 7 - Plans of employment sites within key employment areasFigure A7.3 Crown Farm Industrial Estate employment area
220Figure A7.4 Ransom Wood Business Park employment area
221Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 7 - Plans of employment sites within key employment areasFigure A7.5 Bellamy Road Industrial Estate employment area
222Figure A7.6 Sherwood Business Park (adj. Ransom Wood Business Park)
223Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 7 - Plans of employment sites within key employment areasAppendix 8 - Masterplanning requirements
Developmentofhousingandemploymentsitesidentified
in the Local Plan will be planned through a
comprehensive masterplanning process proportionate
tothescaleofdevelopment.Preparationofmasterplans
will need to be informed by detailed discussions with
the Highways Authority and relevant evidence taking
into account any historic and natural environment
constraintsandtakingtheopportunitytoenhancewhere
possible these environments. Preparation will involve
the active participation and input from all relevant
stakeholders including the council, landowners,
developers, the local community, service providers,
relevant statutory consultees and other interested
parties. Masterplans will be developed in consultation
with the council prior to the submission of a planning
application. Where appropriate they may be adopted
as Supplementary Planning Documents. The
masterplans are for indicative purposes only and are
expected to be subject to alteration following a full
detailedassessmentofsiteopportunitiesandconstraints
(including archaeological evaluation).
Masterplanswillbeexpected(proportionatetothescale
of development) to:
1. create a strong sense of place, ensuring the
proposed development makes a positive
contributiontolocalcharacteranddistinctiveness
by addressing the following principles;
Connecting within:
Creating well-connected street and footpath
networks,withmajorsitesexpectedtoexplorethe
potential to integrate protected cycle ways into
new primary streets. Perimeter edges must
comprise of adopted and continuous streets. Cul
de sacs must be used sparingly within a wider
connected street network. Cul de sacs must not
impede pedestrian and cycle connectivity;
connections between cul de sacs must be
provided.
The use of private and shared drives must not
compromise ease of pedestrian and cycle
movement.
Existing footpaths, desire lines and anticipated
desirelinesmustbeintegratedintonewstreetand
path networks.Connecting beyond:
Opportunities to connect developments to their
wider surroundings must be explored and
integrated into development proposals.
Development must connect visually to places
beyond the site through the framing of key views
and the position and alignment of streets and
spaces.
Neighbourly:
Interfacesbetweennewandexistingdevelopment
requiresensitiveconsiderationandcarefuldesign
thought. Where possible, new back gardens
should back onto existing back gardens to create
strongperimeterblocks.Therelationshipbetween
new and existing can be improved by respecting
building heights, plot characteristics, building
typologies and spaces between buildings, in
particular spaces to the rears and the sides of
homes.
Streets:
Developments must create a legible network of
streetsthataremeaningfulanddistinctfromeach
other. For instance, primary streets should be
visuallyandspatiallydistincttolowerorderstreets
byvirtueoftheirwidth(enclosure),buildingheights
andtypologies,parkingarrangementsandtheuse
of structural landscaping (e.g. formal versus
informal).
Streets must prioritise pedestrian and cycle
movementabovevehiclemovementinaccordance
withManualforStreets.Streetdesignshouldseek
to manage vehicle speeds without resorting to
horizontal changes in street alignment (bends).
The use of the horizontal calming approach
contributes to creating places that are difficult to
navigate whilst also wasting land.
Character:
Strong structural landscaping, in the form of
individualtrees,urbanwoodlandandhedgerows,
will be required to create Forest inspired
developments. These landscape features must
be protected in perpetuity, i.e. not in private
ownership but either adopted by a public agency
or management company.
224Spatial definition:
Buildingsmustaddressthestreetwithfrontdoors
facing onto them. Buildings must be arranged to
form a perimeter block structure, with building
frontages forming the outward facing edges and
gardens spaces within the centre of the block.
Careful attention must be afforded to buildings
locatedonstreetcornersandthoselocatedwhere
streets change alignment.
Apartment buildings must be designed to have a
positive relationship with the street through the
provision of private front doors for ground floor
apartments. Land around the base of apartment
mustbeassignedtoindividualapartmentsthrough
the creation of semi-private terraces and garden
spaces.
Cycle and car parking:
To encourage modal shift from car to cycle,
developments will be encouraged to provide
households with convenient and secure cycle
storage close to people's front doors; and ideally
locatedclosertofrontdoorsthanwhereresidents
park their cars.
Car parking must be integrated into the street
scene through the careful balance of driveways
and soft landscaping.
Where courtyard parking is used, these must be
limitedinsizetotenspacesservingnomorethan
five homes. Courtyards must benefit from strong
naturalsurveillanceopportunitiesatgroundfloors
from habitable rooms. A property must overlook
theentrancetothecourtyardandapropertymust
belocatedwithinthecourtyard.Goodqualityhard
andsoftlandscapingwillberequired,lightingmust
provide continuous illumination after dark.
Public open spaces and water management:
Publicopenspacesincludingpedestrianandcycle
paths must benefit from strong levels of natural
surveillance opportunity.
Publicopenspacesmustbeconnectedandallow
people to move through them with ease.
Surfacewaterattenuationmustbedesignedtobe
usable,attractiveandaccessiblepartofthepublic
open space provision provided as part of new
development. Deep sided and enclosed basinswill not be included as part of the open space
provision. Side profiles should not exceed 1 in 3
and will ideally be 1 in 4.
Waste management:
Bins and recycling container storage must be
integrated into the design of development
proposalstoguardagainst'binblight'.Integrated
and discrete waste storage to the front of homes
must be provided for mid-terraced properties.
2. include a phasing and implementation plan;
Indicative masterplans:
In order to help guide the development of the
district’ssevenlargesthousingallocationslocated
ontheurbanedge,includingtwostrategicurban
extensions (SUEs), within the local plan, the
council has created indicative master plans for
each site. These master plans complement the
H1, SUE1 and SUE2 policy wording and are
intended to illustrate to potential developers and
neighbouringresidentsthekeycharacteristicsof
the site and how these should be positively
utilised and enhanced through future
development.
Themasterplansareforindicativepurposesonly
and are expected to be subject to alteration
following a full detailed assessment of site
opportunities and constraints (including
archaeological evaluation).
Theydonotprovidedetaileddesignrequirements
or illustrate a definitive layout. Rather, the
information provided is intended to inform this
process,togetherwithdiscussionswithMansfield
District Council and key stakeholders; and
through the application of other relevant policies
andguidance.Themasterplanswillbekeptunder
review as further detailed technical work is
undertaken. Assuchtheymaychangeinfuture.
Thesemasterplansshouldbereadinconjunction
withotherrelevantpoliciesintheLocalPlanand
evidencedocumentsinformingthelocalplan,as
well as any additional supplementary planning
documents.
The location of vehicular access points are
indicative, informed by ‘in-principle’ discussions
with the Highway Authority. On some sites the
225Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 8 - Masterplanning requirements‘in-principle’ view has merely illustrated which
existing road(s), access should be taken from.
Further detailed discussions with the Highways
Authority should be undertaken at the early
design stage of any future proposals.
Anumberofthesiteshaverecordedincidentsof
surfacewaterflooding.Theseconstraintsshould
be appropriately managed on site, in discussion
the Lead Flood Risk Authority (Nottinghamshire
County Council). In the majority of cases, a
bespoke sustainable drainage system (SuDS)
willberequiredand,whereappropriate,enhance
biodiversity through habitat creation.
All of these sites have the potential to provide
on-site enhanced recreational and ecological
connections to nearby strategic green
infrastructurenetworksorcreatenewlocalgreen
corridors connecting with nearby open space,
walking/cyclingtrailsandhabitatareas. Asthese
proposed development sites are located on theurban edges, key landscape character policy
zonescharacteristicsandactionsshouldbetaken
into consideration when information proposals
fordevelopment.Additionally,visualandamenity
impacts will need to be adequately addressed.
A8.3Development master plans have been created
for the following sites:
SUE 1 - Pleasley Hill Farm
SUE 2 - Land off Jubilee Way
H1(a) - Clipstone Road East
H1(b) - Land off Skegby Lane
H1(c) – Fields Farm, Abbott Road
H1(d) - Three Thorn Hollows Farm
H1(g) – Abbott Road
226• ,,,. I� 'lil.J � 
ii' • 
._ �A ') � 
.......... .. : Figure A8.1 Pleasley Hill Farm master plan
228The development of the Pleasley site will include
commercial uses on land that will be located across
both sides of the Mansfield and Ashfield Regeneration
Route(MARR).TheCouncilexpectsthesecommercial
areas to be designed to a high standard and as part of
demonstrating the quality and robustness of design
proposals, applicants will need to demonstrate that a
series of options have been thoroughly explored.
Threekeydesignprincipleswillguidedesignproposals:
human scale;
easeofpedestrianandcyclemovement,including
across the MARR; and
creating a local connection.
A strong emphasis will be placed on creating an
environment that is of a human scale where the need
forvehicularaccessdoesnotcompromisethoseonfoot
and those on a bicycle. This will include a strong
movement strategy for enabling people to cross the
MARR easily, directly and comfortably. The character
of the MARR will need to change as it passed through
the allocated site area; calming vehicle speeds and
creatingamorehumanscaleenvironment.Optionsmay
include the use of tree planting, the use of different
surface materials and street furniture (such as more
modestly scaled lighting columns), carriageway
narrowing,inlineparking(whichinturnwillsupportthevitality of the commercial facilities) and gateway
features. Applicants will be expected to work closely
withtheCouncil and theHighways Authoritytoexplore
options which will be informed by appropriate
precedents.
Particularattentionmustbeaffordedtotheaccessibility
of these commercial uses, in particular access by foot
and by bicycle from adjacent residential areas. To
ensure a high degree of accessibility on foot and by
bicycle the connections between residential
development and the commercial areas will require
careful consideration to ensure that routes are direct,
convenient,generous,attractive,well-litandoverlooked;
thereby guarding against isolated, non-direct and
unpleasantroutesthatpasstotherearofbuildingsand
associated service areas. The arrangement of
commercial buildings and plots must not compromise
the need to create a permeable block structure that
allows direct connections to be made. In addition, the
design of the commercial area must ensure that those
arriving by bike are afforded secure and overlooked
parking facilities that are located as close to the
entrance as car parking spaces.
Astrong,Forestinspiredlandscapestrategywillcreate
a local connection. Where appropriate, this will
sensitively and creatively integrate the surface water
management strategy.
229Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 8 - Masterplanning requirementsFigure A8.2 Land off Jubilee Way master plan
230231Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 8 - Masterplanning requirementsFigure A8.3 Clipstone Road East master plan
232Figure A8.4 Land off Skegby Lane master plan
233Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 8 - Masterplanning requirementsFigure A8.5 Fields Farm, Abbott Road master plan
234Figure A8.6 Three Thorn Hollows Farm master plan
235Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 8 - Masterplanning requirementsFigure A8.7 Abbott Road master plan
236Appendix 9 - Key infrastructure requirements
Table A9.1 Key infrastructure requirements - Mansfield urban area
Comments Priority Requirement/
Additional
DemandExisting
ProvisionDelivery
ResponsibilityFunding
MechanismCost
EstimateInfrastructure Required Category
Deliveredaspartofdevelopment Medium N/A N/A Western
Power
DistributionDeveloper
fundedN/A Significantdevelopmentlikelytorequireupgradesto
theSkegbyLaneandRuffordtransformersandassociatedcircuitreinforcementElectricity
EnvironmentAgency(EA)plannedprojectinFCRMpipelineprogrammewhichwillreducefloodrisktoexistingpropertiesinthePleasleyValeareaBy2027 N/A N/A EA S106/Developer/
EAGrantin
AidFundingN/A Property-specificlevelimprovementtoflooddefences Flooddefences
New/expandedGPPractices Medium 65FTE
GPs53.6FTE
GPsNHS
MACCGS106/Developer £6,819,100 ContributiontowardsfacilitiestomeetadditionaldemandGPpractices
FundingtowardslibrarystockitemsonlyLow NewStock
per
DwellingSatisfactoryNCC S106/Developer £7,149,001 Provisionofadditionallibrarystock Libraries
1x2FE,2x1FEand1x1.5FEprimaryschoolsplus210newplacesatCrecentPrimarySchooland2classromextensionatLeasParkNettleworth. Costestimateexcludeslandcosts.NCCexpectfullcostrecoveryfromdevelopersincludinglandcosts.High £907 SatisfactoryNCC S106/Developer £22,650,628 Additionaldemandof1507primaryschoolplaces Primaryschools
Costscouldbehigherifanewclassroomornewschoolisrequired.Costestimateexcludeslandcosts.NCCexpectfullcostrecoveryfromdevelopersincludinglandcosts.Medium 1148new
placesSatisfactoryNCC S106/Developer £19,745,440 Additionaldemandof1148secondaryschoolplaces Secondaryschools
Junctioncapacityimprovement.CostestimatesuppliedbyNCC.High N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £1,860,000 ChesterfieldRoad/DebdaleLane Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.CostestimatesuppliedbyNCC.High N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £10,000 A60NottinghamRoad/BerryHillLane Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.CostestimatesuppliedbyNCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £40,000 CarterLane/SouthwellRoad/WindsorRoad Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.CostestimatesuppliedbyNCC.High N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer£5,000 A6191RatcliffeGate/A60StPetersWay Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.Detailsyettobedetermined.Costestimateindicativeatthisstage.High N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £50,000 SuttonRoad/SkegbyLane/SheepbridgeLane Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.CostestimatesuppliedbyNCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £40,000 A6191SouthwellRoad/OakTreeLane/Adamsway Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.CostestimatesuppliedbyNCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £3,210,000 A6117OakTreeLane/EakringRoad Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.Improvementtobedeliveredaspartofdevelopment.Medium N/A N/A Developer Developer£0 A60NottinghamRoad/A611DerbyRoad Transportimprovements238MansfieldDistrictLocalPlan2013-2033
Comments Priority Requirement/
Additional
DemandExisting
ProvisionDelivery
ResponsibilityFunding
MechanismCost
EstimateInfrastructure Required Category
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied by
NCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £3,340,000 A6191 Chesterfield Road / A617 MARR Transportimprovements
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied byNCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £2,010,000 A60 Nottingham Road / Baums Lane / Park Lane Transportimprovements
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied byNCC.Low N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £5,000 A6191 Southwell Road / Berry Hill Lane Transportimprovements
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied byNCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £5,000 A6191 / Bellamy Road TransportImprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.Detailsyettobedetermined.Cost estimate indicative at this stage.Low N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £50,000 A6009 Rosemary Street / A38 Stockwell Gate Transportimprovements
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied byNCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £3,310,000 A60 Leeming Lane / Peafield Lane Transportimprovements
NCC plan for a traffic signal junction with provision for thewider A60 bus priority scheme.High N/A N/A NCC NCC £500,000 A60 Leeming Lane / A6075 Warsop Road TransportImprovements
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied byNCC.Low N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £10,000 A60 Leeming Lane / Old Mill Lane / Butt Lane Transportimprovements
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied byNCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £1,760,000 A60 Leeming Lane / New Mill Lane Transportimprovements
Junctioncapacityimprovement.Detailsyettobedetermined.Cost estimate indicative at this stage.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £50,000 A6075 Debdale Lane / Priory Road Transportimprovements
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate supplied byNCC.High N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £260,000 A6117 Old Mill Lane / B6030 Clipstone Road West Transportimprovements239
Appendix 9 - Key infrastructure requirementsTable A9.2 Key infrastructure requirements - Warsop Parish
Comments Priority Requirement/
Additional
DemandExisting
ProvisionDelivery
ResponsibilityFunding
MechanismCost
EstimateInfrastructure Required Category
Additional FTE GPs at existing PracticesLow 13.8FTEGPs 13.9 FTE
GPsNHS MACCG S106/Developer £525,350 Contribution towards facilities to meet additional
demandGP practices
Funding towards library stock items onlyLow New Stock
per DwellingSatisfactory NCC S106/Developer £25,416 Provision of additional libarary stock Libraries
ThreeadditionalclassroomsrequiredatBirklandsPrimarySchool(subjecttofeasibility).Costestimateexcludeslandcosts. NCC expect full cost recovery from developersincluding land costs.High 116 New
PlacesSatisfactory NCC S106/Developer £1,559,961 Additional demand of 116 primary school places Primary schools
Costs could be higher if a new classroom or new schoolis required. Cost estimate excludes land costs. NCCexpect full cost recovery from developers including landcosts.High 88 New
PlacesSatisfactory NCC S106/Developer £1,536,140 Additional demand of 88 secondary school places Secondary schools
Junction capacity improvement. Cost estimate suppliedby NCC.Medium N/A N/A Developer/
NCCS106/Developer £100,000 A60 Church Street / Wood Street, Warsop Transport improvements240Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Table A9.3 Key infrastructure requirements - district wide
Comments Priority Requirement/
Additional
DemandExisting
ProvisionDelivery
ResponsibilityFunding
MechanismCost
EstimateInfrastructure Required Category
Delivered as part of development Consistent
with
developmentN/A N/A Developer
(for
provisionDeveloper
funded,along
with partnerN/A Green Infrastructure required where shortfalls in
provisionhavebeenidentified. Greeninfrsatructuretobe provided through developer funding along withpartner and grant funding where appropriate for widerstrategic Green Infrastructure areas.Communityopenspace,allotments, playingpitches/outdoor sport
required in
connection
to growth
sites)and grant
funding
where
appropriate
for strategic
Green
Infrastructure
areas.
Delivered as part of development Consistent
with
developmentN/A N/A Western
Power
DistributionDeveloper
fundedN/A Local connections to strategic infrastructure, potentialupgrades to primary sub-stations to accommodateemployment growthElectricity
Enough capacity for Local Authority Collected Waste withinCountybutashortfallofapprox'200,000tonnestomeetfutureC&I waste management needsBy 2033 N/A N/A NCC NCC N/A 200,000tonnesofextraEfWcapacityisrequiredwithinthe county to meet future Commecial and Industrialneeds that the district will contribute towardsEnergy from waste(EfW)
Delivered as part of development Consistent
with
developmentN/A N/A Developer Developer
fundedN/A Local measures to reduce the causes and impacts offlooding. Identified and delivered as part of individualdevelopmentsFlood defences
Delivered as part of development Consistent
with
developmentN/A N/A Cadent
GasDeveloper
fundedN/A Local connections to strategic infrastructure Gas
Landfillspaceisrunningout.Recyclingandcompostingratesare increasing but new landfill capacity will need to be found.By 2032/33 N/A N/A NCC NCC N/A 3.6millioncubicmetresnon-hazardousLandfillcapacityrequiredwithincountytomeetfuturedemandsthatthedistrict will contribute towardsLandfill
Recycling and composting increasing to meet targets to helpreduce demand for landfill.By 2033 N/A N/A NCC NCC N/A 182,000 tonnes per annum extra recycling andcompostingcapacityrequiredwithinthecountytomeetfuture demands that the district will contribute towardsMunicipal recycling andcomposting
Openreach provide free of charge Consistent
with
developmentN/A N/A Openreach N/A N/A FTTP for all developments of 30+ dwellings Telecommunications
Delivered as part of development Consistent
with
developmentN/A N/A Severn
Trent
WaterDeveloper
fundedN/A Watercompanychargesfor:connectingtotheexistingnetworks, requisitioning new assets and contributingto wider network reinforcement (where required)Waste water
Delivered as part of development Consistent
with
developmentN/A N/A Severn
Trent
WaterDeveloper
fundedN/A Watercompanychargesfor:connectingtotheexistingnetworks, requisitioning new assets and contributingto wider network reinforcement (where required)Water supply
More detailed information will be included in the Infrastructure Technical Paper.241
Appendix 9 - Key infrastructure requirementsAppendix 10 - Protected sports pitches (referred to in Policy IN3)
Table A10.1
Outdoor sports pitches protected under Policy IN3: Protection of community open space and outdoor sports provision
AGP Football Athletics Tennis Bowls HockeyRugby
UnionRugby
LeagueCricket Site name Area Ref
⁄ Carr Lane Park, Market
WarsopWarsop
ParishW1
⁄ Longden Terrace Miners
Welfare bowling green,
Market WarsopWarsop
ParishW2
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ The Meden School /
Meden Sports CentreWarsop
ParishW3
⁄ ⁄ Welbeck Colliery Miners
Welfare, Meden ValeWarsop
ParishW4
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ TheJohnFretwellSporting
Complex, Spion KopWarsop
ParishW5
⁄ AbbottRoadPlayingFields Mansfield M1
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ All Saints Catholic
AcademyMansfield M2
⁄ ⁄ Berry Hill Park Mansfield M3
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ The Brunts Academy Mansfield M4
⁄ ⁄ Bull Farm Park Mansfield M5
⁄ Carr Bank Park Mansfield M6
⁄ Chesterfield Road
Recreation GroundMansfield M7
⁄ Clipstone Welfare Miners
Welfare (Seventh Avenue
site)Mansfield M8
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ Debdale Park Sports and
Recreation GroundMansfield M9
⁄ ⁄ Field Mill Ground
(Mansfield Town Football
Club)Mansfield M10
⁄ Forest Town Arena
(Kingsway Park)Mansfield M11
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ Garibaldi College Mansfield M12
⁄ King George V Park Mansfield M13
⁄ Lords Ground, Mansfield
WoodhouseMansfield M14
⁄ ⁄ Manor Park Complex
(Mansfield District Council)Mansfield M15
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ Manor Sport and
Recreation Centre (Manor
Academy)Mansfield M16
242Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Outdoor sports pitches protected under Policy IN3: Protection of community open space and outdoor sports provision
AGP Football Athletics Tennis Bowls HockeyRugby
UnionRugby
LeagueCricket Site name Area Ref
⁄ ⁄ Mansfield Rugby Union
Football Club (RUFC)Mansfield M17
⁄ Mansfield Tennis Club Mansfield M18
⁄ Oak Tree Leisure Centre
(playing pitches to the rear
of)Mansfield M19
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ QueenElizabethAcademy
SchoolMansfield M20
⁄ ⁄ Queensway Park Mansfield M21
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ Racecourse Park Mansfield M22
⁄ ⁄ ⁄ ⁄ Samworth Church
AcademyMansfield M23
⁄ ⁄ West Nottinghamshire
CollegeMansfield M24
⁄ ⁄ Yeoman Hill Park Mansfield M25
243
Appendix 10 - Protected sports pitches (referred to in Policy IN3)Figure A10.1 Protected outdoor playing pitches
244Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 11 - The Mansfield green space standard
Please note: the pedestrian journey distances, indicated in the standard, relate to on-the-ground walking journeys,
notas-the-crow-flies.
A. Core Green space requirements
The council will seek to ensure, where feasible, that the majority(a)of residents have safe and easy access(b)to
all of the following:
1. open space within a 5-minute (400 metres) pedestrian journey;
2. play space (formal or natural play area)(c)suitable for a range of ages within a 5-minute (400 metres)
pedestrian journey OR other form of formal provision to meet the needs of the new development; and
3. natural green space(d)within a 10-minute pedestrian journey (800 metres).
Please note: This part of the standard can be met though the creation of either a number of open spaces
performing different functions or a single open space which combines: play or other form of formal provision
andnatural green space.
Where the access requirements are not met, new on-site open space within a development and/or off-site
contributions to existing open space will be required. See Part D below.
B. Access requirements to wider facilities
The council will seek, where feasible(e), to ensure that the majority(a)of residents have safe and easy access(b)
to:
1. a district level park(f)within a 15-minute pedestrian journey (1,200 metres); and
2. teenager provision(g)with a 15-pedestrian pedestrian journey (1,200 metres).
Please note: This part of the standard can be met though the creation of either a number of open spaces
performing different functions or a single open space which combines open space typologies.
245
Appendix 11 - The Mansfield green space standardThe following relates to Parts A and B above
a. It is recommended that 100% of residents within
a proposed development should, where
practicable, have access to provision within the
defined walking distances in the standard. The
size of existing nearby open space also needs to
be taken into account and should be adequate to
meet the needs of new development. In these
cases, a common sense approach and
consultation with the council will be needed to
inform requirements.
b. Access should be measured based on realistic
walking routes (on the ground) between the
proposed development and existing open space
entrance points (or, where feasible to new
entrances). The walking journey also needs to
take into consideration geographical access
barriers (e.g. busy roads, railway lines,
rivers)andawkward road layouts that are likely
to lengthen or restrict journeys. This should
consider how these can be most appropriately
addressed (e.g. new safe crossing points, new
entrances/pathways to nearby open space,
permeability of layout, access for people with
disabilities, etc).
c. Where feasible, new play or other form of formal
provision should cater for a range of ages,
disabilities and abilities, as it relates to the
community it is likely to serve.
d. Naturalgreenspaceisopenspacewherearound
one-third (1/3) or more of its area consists of
natural areas/features (e.g. trees, woodland,
orchards, wildflower meadows, sensory gardens,
nature trails or areas of natural play). Formal
landscapingcanbeincludedwhereitcontributes
to the park’s overall setting and feeling of
tranquillity, softening impacts from any nearby
urbaninfluences.Naturalgreenspaceareplaces
where human control and activities are not
intensivesothatafeelingofnaturalnessisallowed
to predominate.e. New provision for district parks and teenagers
facilities will most likely depend on available land
and viability factors. Addressing deficiencies in
PartAshouldbeprioritisedbeforePartB,although
newplayfacilitiesshouldcaterforarangeofages,
disabilities and abilities where feasible.
f. District level parks are typically medium to larger
parksthatprovidearangeofrecreationalfacilities,
including play, sports facilities, or other features
such as formalised gardens, sensory gardens,
etc.). They may also support community facilities
such as cafe, bandstand, outdoor theatre, or
organised social events.
g. Teenager provision includes open space with
facilities such as, NEAPs, skate/BMX parks, trim
trails, multi-use games areas, outdoor gyms, etc.
246Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
C. Quality Requirement
The council will seek to ensure that all new and enhanced community open space is designed to meet the
quality standard set out below:
1.Overall quality - All green spaces will be of overall 'good' quality, with priority given to the following:
a. be welcoming and accessible, and be designed to be inclusive and accessible for all, including
meeting disability access requirements;
b. incorporate safe and secure and active design principles and relevant codes of practice;
c. support social interaction through design and available facilities;
d. contribute positively to wildlife and access to natural green space, including natural play;
e. contribute positively to the surrounding area through place shaping;
f. meet the needs of local communities, for which the open space serves;
g. incorporate principles and features which enable easy and cost-effective maintenance;
h. offer a proportional range of facilities for supporting choice and active and healthy lifestyles; and
i. integrate with and enhance nearby strategic and local green infrastructure.
2.Location - The location of new community open space should complement the existing land form, local
andstrategicgreeninfrastructurecorridors/routesandothercommunityfacilities/civicspaces.Itslocation
and design should enhance and help shape the identity of new estates, and where possible the wider
setting. Its location, where all reasonably practicable, should meet the 5-minute accessibility standard.
3.Facilities and functions- Minimum facility requirements include: accessible paths, signage, bins,
bench(es), landscaping, and appropriate boundary treatment (e.g. knee rail, fencing, hedging, land
forming, etc.).
247
Appendix 11 - The Mansfield green space standardD. Amount of open space within new residential development
1. WherenewopenspaceprovisionisrequiredtomeetPartAand/orBabove,orthe size ofnearbyopen
space isn't best suited to meet the needs of new development, a minimum amount of community open
space to be provided on-site should be 10% of the developable area of the proposed residential
development.
2. The following green space/ landscaped amenity areas are excluded from the definition of open space,
but should, where possible, appropriate and safe to do so, be publicly accessible. These should be
provided in addition to the minimum 10% open space requirement above:
a. green space or landscaping (i.e. habitat buffer) required to mitigate impacts on protected species,
priority habitats or designated sites;
b. the physical area that a sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) takes up as required to mitigate
impacts from flooding and meet drainage needs (e.g. infiltration basin or swale);
c. landscapingrequiredtobufferindustrialorotherareastomitigateimpactsfromstatutorynuisances;
and
d. landscaped or open grass verges along roads or cycle routes or other amenity areas required to
meet road safety requirements, unless integrated as part of a wider mutli-functional green corridor.
248Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 12 – Designated local green space for protection and reasons for designation
Table A12.1 Designated local green space for protection and reasons for designation
Reason for Designation Name/Location Policy Reference
TitchfieldParkisdesignatedforitsbeauty,historicsignificance
and recreational value. The River Maun runs through the park
and contributes to its beauty, as does its overall setting andTitchfield Park, Mansfield IN6 (a)
formal landscaping. It is one of the first formal parks in the
district. It is one of a few parks that support petanque facilities
in the county. It also has a special relationship with Water
Meadowsleisurecentreandisanimportantwalkingandcycling
link within the long-distance Timberland Trail network. It
provides a variety of formal and informal facilities that support
a district-wide catchment.
BerryHillParkisdesignatedforitsbeauty,historicsignificance,
recreationalvalue,tranquillity,andrichnessofwildlife. Itisakin
to a country park-like resource due to its size and facilities. ItBerry Hill Park, Mansfield IN6 (b)
wasdonatedbytheminers’unionfortherecreationofMansfield.
It is historically significant to the district as it formed part of an
estate to Bury Hall (1730-1920s). The park was included in the
grounds to the hall when it became a rehabilitation hospital
(1920s). The existing form of the park has changed very little.
It holds a unique beauty due to its combined features
(e.g. pond, surrounding woodlands). Most of the site could be
considered tranquil. A majority of the site is designated as a
Local Wildlife Site and contains accessible urban woodland.
CarrBankParkisdesignatedforitsbeauty,historicsignificance
and recreational value. This is a historic memorial park with
three war memorials. Very little of the park's structure and
features have changed since the early 1800s.Carr Bank Park, Mansfield IN6 (c)
It offers a variety of informal and formal recreational
opportunities/facilities that would be difficult to replicate
elsewhere within the local area or the district, including an
historic pavilion, formal rose gardens, pentanque, tennis, play
area, Santa’s grotto and parkland setting. It offers a unique
setting for community events and adds to the historic setting of
local area and ‘The Park’ conservation area.
Fisher Lane Park is designated for its recreational value as it
supports a significant skateboard plaza that offers a unique
facility within the district. It is also an important walking and
cycling link within the long-distance Timberland Trail network.Fisher Lane Park, Mansfield IN6 (d)
This land is designated for its historic significance. The fields
retain their historic enclosed field patterns and are the last
remainingexamplesinthelocality. Theycontributetothesetting
of ‘The Park’ conservation area and nearby listed buildings.Land between Brunts Academy and Carr Bank Park IN6 (e)
Larkhills Park is designated for its beauty and recreational
value. The park offers an opportunity to experience views of
the adjacent countryside which is unique for this type of publicLarkhills Park, Forest Town IN6 (f)
open space in the district. It also plays an important role for
local residents as there is an overall lack of this type of open
space in this part of Forest Town.
Thiswoodlandisdesignatedforitsbeauty,historicsignificance,
recreational value, tranquillity and richness of wildlife. This is
a rare pocket of publically accessible, historic woodland withinUrbanWoodlandatLitchfieldLane/ChatsworthDrive,Mansfield IN6 (g)
urban the urban area. The site has been woodland since at
least 1875 and links with Berry Hill Park woodland. It offers a
uniquely beautiful and tranquil setting for walking and cycling.
Millennium Green, Mansfield Woodhouse is designated for its
historic significance and richness of wildlife. The site is a
significant green space within the ‘Mansfield Woodhouse’Millennium Green, Mansfield Woodhouse IN6 (h)
249
Appendix 12 - Local green space designationsReason for Designation Name/Location Policy Reference
conservation area and is one of the few areas in Mansfield
Woodhouse that affords views of the wider countryside and
townscapeinanotherwisedenselyurbanisedsetting.Itcontains
important semi-natural neutral grassland which is rare in a
densely built-up area of which it would be difficult to replicate
elsewhere on any nearby urban green space.
This amenity space is designated for its historic significance
and recreational value. It is historically associated with the
Unitarian Meeting House on Quaker Way which is the oldestOld Meeting House Unitarian Church, Mill Walk/Quaker Way,
Mansfield Town CentreIN6 (i)
purpose-builtnonconformistplaceofworshipinNottinghamshire
andisaGradeII*listedbuilding. Thisgreenspaceisimportant
to the listed building’s and the town centre’s historical setting.
It is the only publically accessible green space within the town
centre.
Spa Ponds is designated for its beauty, historic significance,
recreational value, tranquillity, and richness of wildlife. This
greenspaceoffersauniqueandtranquilrecreationalexperienceSpa Ponds off Clipstone Drive, Forest Town IN6 (j)
ontheedgeofurbanarea(ForestTown). Ithasspecialhistoric
significancewithinthecontextofClipstoneParkandassociated
medieval peel enclosure and King’s Houses. King Edward II
had the pond constructed in 1316, and was one of many
Plantagenet Kings to frequent Kings Clipstone and make use
of the royal hunting grounds of Clipstone Park. The beauty of
theLGSisduetoitsuniquewoodlandandwetlandsettingwhich
formsanimportantpartoftheSherwoodLandscapeCharacter
Area. The majority of this site is designated as a local wildlife
site and support priority habitats. The green space provides a
variety of recreational opportunities which include: walking,
organised community conservation volunteering events and
horse riding.
The Carrs Recreation Ground is designated for its beauty,
historicsignificance,recreationalvalue,andrichnessofwildlife.
It is an uniquely important green space within Warsop Parish.The Carrs Recreation Ground, Market Warsop IN6 (k)
Thesiteiscentraltothearea’slandscapecharacteranditslocal
andhistoricalsettings. Ithashistoricallyheld,andstillsupports,
the annual Warsop Carnival. It supports protected and priority
species. It also plays a role in providing a special recreational
resource within a mixture of town and rural settings. It is an
important recreational link along the long-distance Meden Trail
andprovideslocalconnectionstopublicrightsofwaylinkingto
Church Warsop.
ThisdesignationincludestwoseparateareaswithintheQuarry
Lane local nature reserve (LNR) that provide a unique a
resource for local community groups, school groups andThe Scrape and picnic area at, Quarry Lane Local Nature
Reserve, MansfieldIN6 (l)
residents. SetwithinthecontextoftheLNR,theseareasenable
inclusiveaccessforvisitorstoanoutdoorclassroomandtraining
area,ponddippingarea,paths,interpretationareas,andpicnic
area.Itisanaturaloasiswithincloseproximitytothetowncentre
and includes heritage assets symbolic of the district’s past
mining history. It is designated for its beauty, historic
significance, recreational value, and richness of wildlife.
Yeoman Hill Park is designated for its historic significance and
recreationalvalue. ThisparkistheonlyformalparkinMansfield
Woodhouseandcontributestothehistoricalsettingof‘MansfieldYeoman Hill Park, Mansfield Woodhouse IN6 (m)
Woodhouse’ conservation area. It also contains World War I
and World War II memorials. Important regular community
recreational and cultural/social events occur here. It offers a
rangeofformalandinformalfacilities,includingalargechildren’s
play area and bandstand/amphitheatre.
The section of Forest Park designated as LGS is the local
wildlife site curving around the eastern boundary of the park.
It is special to the community is serves as it provides a uniqueForest Park, Mansfield IN6 (n)
opportunity to enjoy a richness of wildlife. It is also designated
for its beauty as the cliff edge represents a unique feature in
the area.
250Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Appendix 13 - Monitoring framework
Table
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
No indicators proposed as policy sets out approach to take towards planning applications and is unlikely to be used to determine planning applications. All S1: Presumption in favour of sustainable
development
Work with partners, developers and land ownersthrough the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandissuesaffectingpolicydelivery.95% of target Meeting local housing need whenassessed on a three year rollingaverage.Net additional dwellings completed bylocation[1].All S2: The spatial strategy
85% of target
Development of further supplementary guidance.
A13 75% of target
If net additional dwellings against a three yearrolling average is:
50% of target
· below 95%– prepare Action Plan
· below 85% - require a buffer of 20% on the
five year housing land supply
· below 75%– apply presumption in favour of
sustainable development41ha Net additional economic land.
50%ofretailgrowthdeliverednot in accordance with S2 2cTargets and distribution inaccordance with S2 2cNetadditionalretailfloorspacebylocationand type.
· below 50% - partially review Local PlanLess than 4 years supply for3 years in a row5 years supply including anyshortfall and an appropriate bufferdepending on past delivery.No. of years supply of deliverable specifichousing sites.
Less than 5 years supply 10 years supply Supply of deliverable / developableemployment land. If the supply of deliverable specific housing sitesfalls:
· below 5 years – apply presumption in favour
of sustainable development.
· below 3 years– partially review local plan
If supply of deliverable employment land is below
a 5 years supply – partial review of Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy[2].1, 3, 4, 7, 9,11 and 14Policy S3: Development in the countryside
Development of further supplementary guidance.
251
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofbrownfield land in Mansfield district.Increase No. of additional dwellings on brownfieldland.1 and 2 S4: Supporting economy and housinggrowth through urban regeneration
Increase Amount of additional economic land onbrownfield land.
Increase Amount of net additional retail floor spaceon brownfield land.
Seek additional gap funding.
Consider use of Council powers including
Brownfield Register/PiP, LDO and CPO.
Development of further supplementary planning
guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofidentified sites.Substantial delay topreparation of master plan/design briefs for the site.Progress in the preparation ofmaster plan/ design briefs for thesite.Progresstowardsdevelopmentofidentifiedsites.[3]1, 2 and 6 S5: Delivering key regeneration sites
No progress made on theregeneration sites within thefirst 10 years of the planperiod.Planning Application submitted
Planning Permission granted.Development of a town centre masterplan and
further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding.
Delivery of the regeneration sites
Consider use of Council powers including
Brownfield Register/PiP, LDO and CPO.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% % of major non-residential applicationsapproved contrary to policy.4, 5, 6, 7, 8and 9Policy P1: Achieving high quality design
30% of major residentialapplications approved withred assessments againstBuildings for Life0% % of major residential applicationsapproved with red scores on Buildings forLife assessment.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Substantialdelaytotimetable Progress as per agreed timetable. Progress with adoption of Design SPD
30% of planning applicationswhere a design review is notcarried out100% % of major planning applications where adesign review was carried out.
Partial review of the Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.4, 5, 6, 7, 8and 9Policy P2: Safe, healthy and attractivedevelopment
30%ofqualifyingapplicationsfailing to submit a HealthImpact Assessment100% % of qualifying applications which submita Health Impact Assessment252Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Partial review of the Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.5, 7 and 9 Policy P3: Connected development
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Partial review of the Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.1, 2, 5 and 9 P4: Comprehensive development
30% of large sites without anagreed masterplan100% % of large sites (5ha or more or 150dwellings) granted planning permissionwhere a masterplan has been agreed
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Partial review of the Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.5, 7, 8, 9 and10P5: Climate change and new development
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Partial review of the Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.5 P6: Home extensions and alterations
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.5 and 7 P7: Amenity
Development of further supplementary guidance.
253
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.4 P8: Shop front design and signage
Information only No. of grants made through the ShopFronts scheme
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofidentified sites.Substantialdelaytotimetable Progressasperidentifiedtimetable Progress with delivery of identified sites.Key stages:
· EIA Screening (if required)1 and 3 H1: Housing allocations
· Submission of application
Development of further supplementary guidance. · Determination of application· Agreement of s106
Seek additional gap funding. · Approval of Reserved Matters· Commencement of development
Partial review of the Local Plan. · Site complete
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory No. of homes completed
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofidentified sites.Covered by other indicators Progress as per Local Plantrajectory.Net completed dwellings on identifiedsites.1 and 3 H2: Committed Sites
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding. Partial review of the Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Information only Average density of major residentialplanning permissions3, 5 and 7 H3: Housing Density and Mix
Information only Mix of house types on major residentialplanning permissions
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.Development of further supplementary guidance.
254Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandreasonsaffordablehousingissubstantially below target.75% or less of annual targetwhen assessed on a threeyear rolling average55dpa when assessed on a threeyear rolling averageNumber of Affordable homes completed 3 H4: Affordable housing
Substantial increase Reduce Number on housing waiting list
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Information only Number of affordable homes grantedplanning permission Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Partial review of the Local Plan.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand reasons delivery of customand self-build plots is substantially below levelrequired.Increase Information
only Number of custom or self-build homescompleted3 and 5 H5: Custom and Self Build
30% of qualifying sitesgranted planning permissionwithoutinclusionofcustomorself-build plotsDelivery of sufficient plots withplanning permission to meet needidentified on self/custom buildregister.Number of custom or self-build plotsgranted planning permission
Information
only
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal. Information only Number of people on self-build register
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Partial review of the Local Plan.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
to understand barriers to delivery of C2 uses.Increase NumberofnetadditionalC2bedsgrantedplanning permission2 and 3 H6: Specialist Housing
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Information only Net additional HMOs granted planningpermission1, 3 and 5 H7: Homes in multiple occupation
Information only Number of HMO licenses granted
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
255
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Review and address reasons for lack of progress
with DPD.Targetdatetobeestablishedthrough preparation of DPD.3 pitches Net additional pitches / sites delivered. 3 H8:AccommodationforGypsies,Travellersand travelling show people
Targetdatetobeestablishedthrough preparation of DPD.1 transit site Delivery of transit site
Increase Number of Travelling Show People plotsdelivered.Work with partners, developers and land ownersthrough the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to delivery of pitchesand transit site.Substantial delay at keystagesIdentified dates for key stages Progress towards adoption of DPD:
· Reg 18 consultation· Reg 19 consultation· Submission to SoS Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
· Examination
· Adoption
30% of applications granted
contrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Work with partners, developers and land ownersthrough the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandbarrierstodeliveryofeconomicdevelopment site.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.1 and 2 PolicyE1:Enablingeconomicdevelopment
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofidentified sites.Substantialdelaytotimetable Progressasperidentifiedtimetable Progress with delivery of identified sites.Key stages:
· EIA Screening (if required)1 and 2 Policy E2: Sites allocated as new
employment areas
· Submission of application
Development of further supplementary guidance. · Determination of application
· Agreement of s106
Seek additional gap funding. · Approval of Reserved Matters· Commencement of development
Partial review of local plan. · Site complete 256Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Information only Amount of employment land (ha)
completed on site
Work with partners, developers and land ownersthrough the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandbarrierstodeliveryofeconomicdevelopment sites.Information only Development completed on KeyEmployment Areas1 and 2 Policy E3: Retaining land for employmentuses
Information only Planning applications granted on KeyEmployment Areas
Substantial increase invacancy rate on a keyemployment areaReduce Vacancy rate on key employment areas
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Partial review of the Local Plan.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.1 and 2 Policy E4: Other industrial and businessdevelopment
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to delivery of locallabour agreements.30% of major schemesapproved without a locallabour agreement.50% % of major schemes where a local labouragreement is secured.2 Policy E5: Improving skills and economicinclusion
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.1 and 6 RT1: Main town centres
30% of 500sqm plus retailapplications granted withoutan Impact Assessment0% %ofretailapplicationsof500sqmormorewithout an Impact Assessment
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandbarrierstoimprovingMansfieldtown centre.Substantial worsening ofrankingImprove Venue score ranking[4] 1 and 6 RT2: Mansfield Town centre strategy
Substantial increase in towncentre vacancy ratesReduce % of town centre units vacant[5]257
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Substantial delay to
preparation.Preparation in accordance with keystages[6]Progress with preparation of town centremasterplan / investment framework.Reviewtowncentrevisionand/ordevelopmentoffurther supplementary guidance.
Preparation of Town Centre Masterplan Partial review of the Local Plan.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandbarrierstoimprovingMansfieldtown centre.No more than 25% in primaryfrontages% of ground floor units in non-A1 use 1 and 6 RT3: Mansfield town centre primaryshopping area
No more than 50% in secondaryfrontages
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Zero Loss of units of 500sqm or more from A1use
Zero instances of 3 or more inprimary frontagesInstancesofcontinuousfrontageofnon-A1units
Reviewoftowncentrevisionand/ordevelopmentof further supplementary guidance.
Zero instances of 4 or more insecondary frontages
Preparation of Town Centre Masterplan
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Partial review of the Local Plan.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandbarrierstoimprovingMansfieldtown centre.Information only Progress with enhancements to Old TownHall, Four Seasons Shopping Centre,RosemaryCentreandBealesDepartmentStore.1, 4, 5 and 6 RT4: Mansfield town centre improvements
Reviewoftowncentrevisionand/ordevelopmentof further supplementary guidance.
Preparation of Town Centre Masterplan
Seek additional gap funding.
None None N/a Details of improvements secured as part
of major development proposals6 and 9 RT5: Accessing Mansfield town centre258Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofidentified sites.Information only Progress with development of identifiedsites
· EIA Screening (if required)1 and 6 RT6: Retail and leisure allocations
· Submission of application
Development of further supplementary guidance. · Determination of application· Agreement of s106
Seek additional gap funding. · Approval of Reserved Matters· Commencement of development· Site complete
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofidentified sites.Substantialdelaytotimetable Progress as per agreed timetable Progress with development of identifiedsites
· Approval of Reserved Matters (if
applicable)1 and 6 RT7: Retail and leisure commitments
· Commencement of development
Development of further supplementary guidance.
· Site complete
Seek additional gap funding.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to improving districtand local centres.A1 is no longer thepredominate useA1 remains at 40% % of A1 retail use within centres 6 RT8: District and Local Centres
Substantial increase in towncentre vacancy ratesReduce % of town centre units vacant
Substantial%ofapplicationsgranted contrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Partial review of the Local Plan.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to improvingneighbourhood parades.A1 is no longer thepredominate useA1 remains at 40% % of A1 retail use within parades 6, 7 and 11 RT9: Neighbourhood Parades
Substantial increase invacancy ratesReduce % of units vacant
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.259
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Information only % of units vacant
Development of further supplementary guidance. 30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Substantial number ofapplications approved within400mZero No. of applications for A5 uses approvedwithin 400m of a secondary school orcollege.5 and 7 RT10: Hot food takeaways
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to provision of touristand visitor facilities in district.Information only Number of new hotel rooms / floor spaceof visitor accommodation built.1 and 6 RT11: Visitor economy
Details of new visitor and tourist attractions Information only
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandbarrierstodevelopmentofsite.Substantialdelaytotimetable Progress as per agreed timetable Progresswithdeliveryofsite. Keystages:
· EIA Screening (if required)1, 2 and 3 SUE1: Pleasley Hill Farm
· Agreement of masterplan
Development of further supplementary guidance. · Submission of application· Determination of application
Seek additional gap funding. · Agreement of s106· Approval of Reserved Matters
Partial review of the Local Plan · Commencement of development· Site complete
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory No. of homes completed
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory Amount of retail floorspace provided
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory Amount of economic ha provided
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygrouptounderstandbarrierstodevelopmentofsite.Substantialdelaytotimetable Progress as per agreed timetable Progresswithdeliveryofsite. Keystages:
· EIA Screening (if required)1, 2 and 3 SUE2: Land off Jubilee Way
· Agreement of masterplan
260Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
%ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontrary 0%
to policy.Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Development of further supplementary guidance. · Submission of application
· Determination of application
Seek additional gap funding. · Agreement of s106· Approval of Reserved Matters
Partial review of the Local Plan · Commencement of development· Site complete
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory No. of homes completed
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory Amount of retail floorspace provided
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory Amount of economic ha / floorspace
provided
Work with partners, developers and land ownersthrough the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to development ofidentified sites.Substantialdelaytotimetable Progress as per agreed timetable Progress with development of identifiedsites
· Approval of Reserved Matters (if
applicable)1, 2 and 3 SUE3: Committed strategic urbanextensions
· Commencement of development
Seek additional gap funding.
· Site complete
Partial review of the Local Plan
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory No. of homes completed
Amount of retail floorspace provided
Covered by other indicators Progressasperidentifiedtrajectory Amount of employment ha / floorspaceprovided
Work with partners, developers and land ownerstothroughthedeveloperforumandgrowthdeliverygroup understand barriers to provision of priorityinfrastructure.Failure to provided priorityinfrastructureProvision of priority infrastructure Progress with delivery of priorityinfrastructure required in district8, 9 and 10 IN1: Infrastructure delivery
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Seek additional gap funding. Partial review of the Local Plan
261ProgressasperidentifiedtrajectoryCovered by other indicators
ProgressasperidentifiedtrajectoryCovered by other indicators
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to provision of greeninfrastructure.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.7, 9, 10, 11and 12IN2: Green Infrastructure
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Seek additional gap funding.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Substantial loss of openspace and sports provisionNo net loss of those identified forprotection in the Local PlanNetchangeinhaofcommunityopenspaceand sports provision identified forprotection in the Local Plan[7]7 and 10 IN3: Protection of community open spaceand outdoor sports provision
30% of major residentialplanning permissions whichdo not accord with MansfieldGreen Space Standard100% % of major residential planningpermissions which accord with MansfieldGreen Space StandardDevelopment of further supplementary guidance.
0% % of applications granted contrary to therecommendations in the Playing PitchStrategySeek additional gap funding.Substantial%ofapplicationsgranted contrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Partial review of the Local Plan
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Information only Detailsofnewcommunityopenspaceandsports provision7 and 10 IN4:Creationofcommunityopenspaceandoutdoor sports provision in newdevelopment 30% of major residentialplanning permissions whichdo not accord with MansfieldGreen Space Standard100% % of major residential planningpermissions which accord with MansfieldGreen Space Standard
Development of further supplementary guidance.
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Seek additional gap funding.
Partial review of the Local Plan
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to provision ofallotments.Substantiallossofallotments(ha)No net loss (ha) Net change in allotments (ha). 7, 10 and 11 IN5: Protection and creation of allotments
Substantial increase innumbers on waiting listReduce Number of people on waiting list.
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.262Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Seek additional gap funding.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.SubstantiallossoflocalgreenspaceNo loss loss of designated local green space 7 IN6: Designated local green space
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Information only Details of planning permissions grantedon Local Green SpaceDevelopment of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding. Partial review of the Local Plan
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.7, 10 and 11 IN7: Local shops, community and culturalfacilities
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to delivering highwayimprovementsSubstantial delays to agreedtimetableProgress as per agreed timetable Progress with delivery of identifiedtransport schemes9 and 10 IN8: Protecting and improving thesustainable transport network
Information only No. of new planning permissions forresidential, employment and retail within400m of a bus stop.
Information only % of new dwellings and retail andemployment floorspace within 400m of atrain station.Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal. Substantial%ofapplicationsgranted contrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding.
263
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Partial review of the Local Plan
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Substantial increase inincidentsReduce NumberandtypeofincidentsinMansfield 9 and 10 IN9:Impactofdevelopmentonthetransportnetwork
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Substantial delay withprogress of ParkingStandards SPDProgressinaccordancewithagreedtimetableProgress with adoption of ParkingStandards SPD9 and 10 IN10: Car and cycle parking
Increase Number of electric charging points withindistrict accessible to the public.
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding.
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers to providingtelecommunications and broadband infrastructurein Mansfield.Information only Average broadband speed in Mansfielddistrict.10 IN11: Telecommunications and broadband
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Seek additional gap funding.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.11 and 14 NE1: Protection and enhancement oflandscape character
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding.
264Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Partial review of the Local Plan
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand barriers toprotection/enhancement of biodiversity andgeodiversity.Insufficient net gain inbiodiversity.Net gain in biodiversity reflectingDEFRA biodiversity metricBiodiversity 7, 8 and 12 NE2: Biodiversity and geodiversity
Substantial net loss No net loss Net change in ha of LWS, LGS and LNR
Information only %ofLWS/LGSinpositivemanagement[8]
Information only Details of habitat areas created by newdevelopment Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal. No loss Change in ha of SSSIs
Information only No.ofplanningpermissionsgrantedwithinSSSI impact zones[9].
100% %ofmajorapplicationswithmanagementplans(whererelevant)forhabitats,speciesand designated sites.Development of further supplementary guidance.
Substantial loss No loss Change in Ancient Woodland
Information only Number of applications granted within400m of ppSPASeek additional gap funding.
Substantial%ofapplicationsgranted contrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Partial review of the Local Plan
Undertake monitoring of air quality. Information only Haoflandthatiscontaminatedasdefined
byPart2aoftheEnvironmentalProtectionAct (1990)12 NE3: Pollution and land instability
Substantial worsening of airqualityPM2.5no more than 10µgm3Air quality modelling
FollowactionsrequiredbydesignationofanAQMA.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Designation of AQMA Zero No.ofAQMAsdesignatedwithinthedistrict
Substantial%ofapplicationsgranted contrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.12 NE4: Mineral Safeguarding Areas265
Appendix 13 - Monitoring FrameworkPossible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Work with partners, developers and land owners
through the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand reasons for increased riskSubstantial increase inheritageassetsclassedas‘atrisk’Reduce % of districts heritage assets classified as‘at risk’.4 HE1: Historic environment
Information only Date of most recent Conservation AreaAppraisal
Information only No. of applications approved againstHistoric England adviceReview relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal. 30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding. Partial review of the Local Plan
30% of applications granted
contrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.1, 2 and 4 HE2: Pleasley Vale Regeneration Area
Review relevant applications to establish reasonsnon-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.
Development of further supplementary guidance. Seek additional gap funding.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Information only Details of applications renewable and lowcarbon energy[10]8 CC1: Renewable and low carbon energygeneration
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding.
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Substantialnumberapprovedagainst Environment Agencyadvice0 Number of applications granted againstEnvironment Agency advice8 and 13 CC2: Flood Risk
N/a Information only NumberofapplicationsapprovedinFloodZone 2,3a or 3b
30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.Development of further supplementary guidance.
266Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Possible Remedial Actions Trigger Target Indicator< Objective Policy
Seek additional gap funding.
Partial review of the Local Plan
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Information only Number of planning permissions whichincorporate SUDs.8 and 13 CC3: Sustainable drainage systems
Information only Number of applications within surfacewater high risk areas.
Development of further supplementary guidance.
Seek additional gap funding. Partial review of the Local Plan
Review relevant applications to establish reasons
non-compliancewithpolicydidnotresultinrefusal.Information only Details of de-culverting schemes takenforward8 and 13 CC4: Protection, restoration andenhancement of river and waterbodycorridors Information only No. of applications approved in GreenSUDs Priority Areas
Information only No. of applications approved in low flowareasDevelopment of further supplementary guidance.
Information only Details of schemes to re-naturalise theRiver Maun
Substantial deterioration No deterioration Quality of water bodies assessed throughthe Water Framework DirectiveSeek additional gap funding.30% of applications grantedcontrary to policy0% %ofplanningapplicationsgrantedcontraryto policy.
Work with partners, developers and land ownersthrough the developer forum and growth deliverygroup to understand issues affecting delivery.Delay of review beyond fiveyears from date of adoptionComplete no more than 5 yearsfrom date of adoptionReview of Local Plan All IM1:MonitoringandreviewoftheLocalPlan
50% Meeting local housing need whenassessed on a three year rollingaverage.Net additional dwellings
Below 4 years for 3 years ina row5 years supply including anyshortfall and an appropriate bufferdepending on past delivery.Supply of deliverable specific housingsites.Review new evidence to establish if it significantlyimpacts on the evidence underpinning the localplans and the choices made in its preparation. New evidence becomesavailable which significantlyimpacts on the Local PlanNew evidence becomes available. Availability of new evidence.
Substantial delays on keysitesProgress with sites as identified Progress with key sites.
Partial or full review of the Local Plan.
267
Appendix 13 - Monitoring Framework26.1[1]TheHousingMonitoringReportwillcontinuetosetoutarangeofindicatorsincluding:no.ofhomeswithextantplanningpermission(fulland
outline) and the no. of homes under construction.
26.2[2] This will include identifying the nature of the application, the route of decision (i.e. LPA decision or appeal) and reasons granted planning
permission.26.3[3] Key stages to be confirmed following review of sites.
26.4[4] Due to cost this will be obtained every three years.
26.5[5] Town centre health checks will be carried out annually and published as part of the Retail Monitoring Report.
26.6[6] Key stages to be confirmed following scoping work
26.7[7] Includes replacements for the loss of those identified in the Local Plan. Fully new open space is monitored under IN4.
26.8[8] Include caveats as only monitors council owned sites
26.9[9] Assessed using http://magic.gov
.uk/Metadata_for_magic/SSSI%20IRZ%20User%20Guidance%20MAGIC.pdf
26.10 [10] Details to include type of renewable or low carbon energy and installed capacity
268Mansfield District Local Plan 2013-2033
Meeting your needs 
We may be able to provide this information in larger 
print, in Braille, on audio tape, on CD or in another 
language. Contact: 01623 463463  Minicom: 01623 
463444 Email: lp@mansfield.gov.uk 