  
i 
 Contents  
Chapter s  Page No. 
Chapter 1  Introduction  1 
Chapter 2  Melton Borough Today  - A Portrait  9 
Chapter 3  Vision and Strategic Priorities  15 
Chapter 4  Growing Melton Borough – The Spatial Strategy  21 
Chapter 5  Melton’s Communities – Strong, Healthy and Vibrant  51 
Chapter 6  Melton’s Economy – Strong and Competitive  75 
Chapter 7  Melton Borough’s Environment  97 
Chapter 8  Managing the delivery of the Melton Local Plan  131 
Chapter 9  Managing Development  145 
Glossary   155 
Appendices    
Appendix 1  Site allocations and policies  2 
Appendix 2  Schedule of Local Plan 1999 Saved Policies  70 
Appendix 3  Settlement Roles and Relationships  76 
Appendix 4  Infrastructure Delivery Schedule  78 
Appendix 5  Monitoring Framework  96 
Policies Maps  See separate Policies Maps document   
 
Tables   Title Page No. 
Table 1  Local Plan Preparation Timeline  1 
Table 2  Key Strategic Issues for Melton Borough  16 
Table 3  Key Component s of Housing Supply  23 
Table 4  Melton Settlement Roles  25 
Table 5 Distribution of ‘windfall’ sites  29 
Table 6  Residual Housing Requirements for Service Centre & Rural Hubs  33 
Table 7  Large Scale Development Site Delivery Summary  46 
Table 8 Optimum housing mix requirements for market and affordable 
housing  57 
Table 9 Minimum Gross Internal Floor Areas and Storage (m²)  59 
Table 1 0 Forecast change in jobs by employment sector 2011 -2036  77 
Table 1 1 Melton Borough Residents’ Employment by Sector (2011  Census)  77 
Table 1 2 Employment position summary table  79 
Table 1 3 Use Classes for business related uses  80 
Table 1 4 Cumulative floorspace required, Melton Borough 2015 -2036  89 
Table 1 5 Landscape Sensitivity levels and definitions  120 
Table 16  Most Common Horizontal Axis and Cluster Size  120 
 
Figures  Title Page No. 
Figure 1  Designated Neighbourhood Plan Areas  6 
Figure 2  Melton Borough in Context  7 
Figure 3  Key Diagram  20 
Figure 4  Melton Borough Housing Trajectory  23 
Figure 5  Melton Settlement Roles  28 
Figure 6 Affordable Housing Value Areas  62 
Figure 7 Affordable Housing Trajectory  63 
Figure 8 Asfordby Business Park and Holwell Industrial Area  88 
Figure 9 Melton Mowbray Town Centre Boundary and Shopping Frontage  92 
Figure 10 Derivation of Melton Borough’s Carbon Reduction Strategy  113 
Figure 1 1 The Energy Hierarchy  114 ii 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally blank  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018    Chapter 1: Introduction           1 
 Chapter 1: Introduction   
1.1 What is this document and how has it been prepared?  
1.1.1  This document is Melton Borough’s adopted local plan. It covers the entire 
Borough and sets out the development strategy, policies and proposals, 
including site allocations, which will guide l and use and development in the 
Borough up to 2036. It has been prepared in accordance with statutory 
requirements over the period from 2014. Key stages are shown  in Table 1.  
 Table 1: Local Plan Preparation Timeline  
Stage of Plan Preparation  
 Date  
Preliminary consultation  on what the Local Plan 
should contain (Regulation 18)  
 January  – March 2014  
 
Issues  & Options  Consultation on the key 
issues  and options available to address  them 
(Regulation 18)    
 October 2014 – January 2015  
 
Emerging Opt ions (Draft Plan)  
Consultation draft strategy, policies and site 
options for development (Regulation 18)  
 January  - April 2016  
 
Publication (Pre Submission) Draft Plan  
Formal representations invited on the draft plan  
(Regulation 19)  
 October - December 2016  
 
Addendum of Focused Changes (Regulation 19  
Formal representations invited on the focused 
changes to the Pre submission draft plan  
 June – August 2017  
Submission and Examination  Consideration of 
the submitted plan and representations by the 
Secretary of State, including Public Hearings in 
early 2018 and consultations on Modifications 
during Summer 2018.  October 2017 – September 
2018  
Inspectors Report  issued  
 14th September 2018  
Adoption  by Melton Borough Council  
 10th October 2018  
 
1.2 What is a Local Plan?  
1.2.1  The Local Plan guide s decisions on planning applications for development 
and sets out the strategic direction of the area on social, economic and 
environmental matters.  
1.2.2  Key roles of the  plan are to set out the amount of  new homes needed for the 
plan period , make provision for employment development and identi fy the 
infrastructure which might be needed to support it. The plan also identifies 
areas of land which should be protected. In addition, the plan  sets out who 2           Chapter 1: Introduction      Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 will work together to deliver the plan and what, where, how and when  
development will be delivered in the Borough.   
1.2.3  Local Plans must be positively prepared, justified, effective and consistent 
with national policy set out in the National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF)1 and the National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG ). It is not 
simply a duplicate of national policy, but applies the objectives of national 
policy to the local circumstances and local priorities.  
1.2.4  This adopted Local Plan will be the main factor used to decide planning 
applications for individual proposa ls, alongside Neighbourhood Plans, where 
applicable. The Local Plan must be kept up to date and reviewed when 
required.  
1.3  National Planning Policy (NPPF) and Practice Guidance  (NPPG)  
1.3.1  The NPPF  and the NPPG  are referred to throughout this document. Whilst 
there are other relevant central government plans, strategies and ministerial  
statements, the NPPF  and NPPG  set the ground rules and represent the 
main starting po int for determining the matters that the Local Plan needs to 
deal with.  
1.3.2  The Melton Local Plan was at an advanced stage of preparation when the 
revised N PPF was published by the Government in July 2018. Having 
reviewed the provisions of the revised NPPF, the Council considers that the 
policies and proposals in this plan are generally consistent with national 
planning policy.  
1.4 What period does the Local Plan cover, and when will it be 
reviewed?  
1.4.1  NPPF  states that the strategic policies of Local Plans should look ahead 
over a minimum 15 year period. The Melton Local Plan period is 25 years, 
from 01 April 2011 to 31 March 2036, but seven of these years had elapsed 
by the time the plan was adopted.  
1.4.2  A development strategy over this amount of time has allowed a clear 
direction of travel to be set out for the Borough, as the plan includes enough 
development to effect a real step change in economic, social and 
environmental conditions over that time. How ever the Local Plan will need to 
be subject to regular review. Such reviews are likely to be triggered if 
monitoring of the delivery of the plan indicates that development is not 
coming forward as expected, or if other factors prevail, such as updated 
evidence becomes available, or if the development needs of neighbouring 
Local Authorities need to be taken into account. The NPPF requires the plan 
to be reviewed within five years of adoption.  
                                                           
1 Named documents that are underlined in the text can be viewed online   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018    Chapter 1: Introduction           3 
 1.5  How have we engaged on the Local Plan?  
1.5.1  Melton Borough Council has undertaken extensive engagement with local 
people, businesses, landowners, developers and other stakeholders at each 
of the key stages of plan preparation.  
1.5.2  Community engagement and how it has influenced the plan at each stage 
(Table 1) has been recorded in the Melton Borough Local Plan Community 
Consultation and Engagement Statement  and its Addendum . This statement 
was prepared in sections alongside each stage of Local Plan preparation so 
that people could see how their contribution has helped to shape the plan.  
1.6  The Value Added by the Reference Groups  
1.6.1  The Melton Local Plan Reference Groups have been integral to the 
development of the Local Plan.  Since July 2013, they have ensured that the 
plan has evolved and been influenced by local people, and have contributed 
to the identification of constrai nts and opportunities, whilst developing an 
understanding of the rationale of the plan. The Reference Groups have also 
been party to the difficult decisions needed throughout each stage ensuring 
that the Reference Group members have travelled the complete journey of 
the plan’s preparation.  
1.6.2  There have been over nine rounds of Reference Group meetings, 
undertaking detailed discussions and workshop based exercises which have 
directly influenced the Local Plan.  Full details of all sessions are set out in 
the Community Consultation and Engagement Statement . 
1.7  How does the Local Plan relate to other plans and strategies for 
the area?  
1.7.1  Partnership working an d co-ordination of strategies are key features of the 
planning system.  Melton Borough Council has liaised with relevant bodies 
that prepare strategies affecting the Borough’s future, including health, 
transport, housing, employment, infrastructure provide rs and the 
environment. This is to ensure that plans and policies are as closely aligned 
as possible and that strategies support each other. Delivery of some of the 
policies and proposals in the Local Plan will rely on actions by other parties, 
so it is im portant that this plan and other key strategies are aligned.               
1.7.2  The Local Plan vision and objectives are aligned with the Council’s priorities  
set out in the Corporate Delivery Plan 2018 - 2020 , and address key issues 
set out in the  Sustainable Community Strategy 2015 - 2020 .  
1.7.3  Together with  other key local strategies, such as  Melton Borough’s 
Economic Growth Plan , these documents set out a joint vision for Melton 
Borough, shaping the actions and commit ments to further economic, social 
and environmental well -being.   4           Chapter 1: Introduction      Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 1.7.4  It is important to identify how future issues, challenges and priorities will be 
addressed across many different aspects and boundaries such as economic 
development, health, housing, e ducation, climate change and infrastructure 
delivery. Key amongst these will be joint working and the Council’s 
membership of the Melton Community Partnership, along with the Council’s 
strong relationship with the Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise 
Partnership . 
1.7.5  This shows the importance of having a Local Plan that positively works with 
others and which carefully balances economic, social and environmental 
aspects in order to achieve the greatest benefits f or the Borough, leading to 
sustainable development.  
1.8  What are Neighbourhood Plans and how do they relate to the 
Local Plan?  
1.8.1  Neighbourhood planning was introduced by the Localism Act 2011. By 
producing a Neighbourhood Plan, communities can take th e lead on 
developing planning policies for their areas, provided that their plans are 
prepared in accordance with the rules set out by the Government and that 
any plans and policies are in general conformity with the strategic policies 
contained in the Loc al Plan.  When a Neighbourhood Plan has successfully 
completed its preparation and been made, it will become part of the 
development plan. The policies and proposals included in the plan will then 
be used in determining planning applications in that area.  
1.8.2  There are currently 14 Neighbourhood Plan areas designated in the 
Borough. Each area is at a different stage in the preparation of their plan. 
The plans that had passed referendum or been adopted before October 
2018 are Wymondham , Waltham on the Wolds and Thorpe Arnold , Nether 
Broughton and Old Dalby , Clawson, Hose and Harby , and Frisby . These are 
shown on Figure 1, along with all the following designated areas:   
 Asfordby  
 Bottesford  
 Waltham on the Wolds and Thorpe Arnold  
 Wymondham and Edmondthorpe   
 Ab Kettleby  
 Hoby, Rotherby, Brooksby and Ragdale  
 Croxton Kerrial and Branston  
 Nether Broughton and Old Dalby  
 Somerby  
 Clawson, Hose and Harby  
 Frisby on t he Wreake  
 Great Dalby  
 Gaddesby  
 Scalford   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018    Chapter 1: Introduction           5 
 1.8.3  Melton Borough Council is working with these communities to align 
timetables and aspirations. This will include:  
• sharing evidence to ensure Neighbourhood Plans can make the fullest 
use of the most up to date available information;  
• providing advice and assistance in respect of the content of the NPPF 
and NPPG and any updates to these as it relates to the preparation of 
Neighbourhood Plans;  
• sharing its experience of how Examinations have informed earlier 
Neighbourhood Plans;   
• providing comprehensive responses to consultations at ‘Regulation 14’ 
and ‘Regulation 16’ stages of Neighbourhood Plan preparation; and  
• engaging positively in constructive discussions regarding innovative 
approaches to housing supp ly and other issues.  
 
1.8.4   In accordance with the Neighbourhood Planning Act (2017), the Council will 
work with communities in ensuring Neighbourhood Plans stay up to date and 
functional, including if necessary supporting any reviews of Neighbourhood 
Plans. The Council will strongly encourage Neighbourhood Plan Groups to 
align review periods and content with that of the Local Plan, to ensure 
continued alignment as and when Local Plan review is necessary. This will 
allow Local Plans and Neighbourhood Plan s to respond positively to 
changing needs, for example for housing or infrastructure. The Council will 
also use Local Plan Reviews as an opportunity to align Local Plan content to 
Neighbourhood Plan content where possible.  
1.8.5 For the purpose of testing  conformity of Neighbourhood Plans with the 
Local Plan , all policies included in the Local Plan up to  and including 
Chapter 8 are regarded as strategic policies.  Whilst the remaining 
policies will be relevant for determining planning applications, they ar e not 
viewed as strategic policies for the purpose of testing Local Plan conformity.  
1.9  How does the Melton Local Plan relate to the Plans of 
Neighbouring Local Authorities?  
1.9.1  The Melton Local Plan reflects joint working on strategic priorities with  
Leicester and the wider Leicestershire Local Authorities as well as 
Rushcliffe, South Kesteven, Newark and Sherwood Districts and Rutland, 
Lincolnshire and Nottinghamshire County Councils. This is known as the 
Duty to Co -operate. The Local Planning Author ities are required to 
undertake the Duty to Co -operate with neighbouring authorities and other 
public bodies throughout the plan -making process for strategic and cross -
boundary issues in order for the plan to be found legally compliant in the 
examination. This adopted Local Plan is a result of joint working with our 
neighbouring authorities.  6           Chapter 1: Introduction      Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 
1.9.2   Melton Borough forms part of the Leicestershire and Leicester Housing 
Market Area and as such, the Local Authorities work closely together, 
particularly when planning for housing, the economy and the infrastructure 
needed to support growth.  Figure 2 sets out Melton Borough in the context 
of the neighbouring Local Authorities; the thick line shows the Leicester and 
Leicestershire Housing Market Area.  
  Figure 1: Designated Neighbourhood Plan Areas  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018    Chapter 1: Introduction           7 
 Figure 2: Melton Borough in Context  
 
1.10    What is the status of the Melton Borough Local Plan 1999?  
1.10.1  The previously saved policies of the Melton Borough Local Plan 1999 (see 
Appendix 2) have been superseded by the policies of this adopted Local 
Plan and so are no longer part of the development plan. The policies in this 
plan and any made Neighbourhood Pla ns, read in conjunction with the 
NPPF , will guide decisions on planning applications.  
1.11  What is the Melton Borough Local Plan Sustainability Appraisal?  
1.11.1  Sustainability Appraisal (SA) is a statutory requirement and was an essential 
part of assessi ng and selecting options for the Melton Borough Local Plan.  It 
8           Chapter 1: Introduction      Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 involved a detailed assessment of the Local Plan’s objectives, options and 
proposed policies in terms of their environmental, social and economic 
impacts. Its purpose is to ensure that the pol icies and proposals of the local 
plan contribute to sustainable development.   
1.11.2  The Melton Borough Local Plan has been prepared alongside an iterative SA 
process.  The SA report  published alon gside this adopted Local Plan shows 
how reasonable alternative options and draft policies and proposals have 
been assessed against the sustainability objectives and the cumulative 
sustainability effect of all the policies and proposals. The SA process 
incorporated the requirements of the European Directive on Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (SEA) as well as an assessment of equalities 
and diversity.              
1.12  What is the Melton Borough Local Plan Evidence  Base?  
1.12.1  Local Plans must be based on robust evidence. This evidence is extensive 
and often technical in nature, and has informed all stages of plan 
preparation. It is available to view alongside the adopted Local Plan on 
www.meltonplan.co.uk/evidencebase . Also, at the end of each chapter, the 
main pieces of evidence relevant to that section are listed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018          Chapter 2: Melton Borough Today - a Portrait        9 
 Chapter 2: Melton Borough Today  - A Portrait  
2.1 General  
2.1.1  Melton Borough is an attractive rural area covering 48,138ha in the north -east 
part of Leicestershire and at the heart of the East Midlands.  The Borough has 
a total population of approximately 50,376 (Census 2011) which has risen 
from 47,866 (2001 Census) .  The main activities of the Borough are centred 
on the market town of Melton Mowbray.   
2.1.2  The Borough has a wide range and choice of places to live, with around a half 
of all existing housing located at Melton Mowbray. In the rural hinterland, 
there are some 70 attractive villages spread across all parts of the Borough 
including the larger settlements of Asfordby, Bottesford, Long Clawson and 
Waltham on the Wolds.  
2.1.3  The Borough’s employment base is primarily in food and drink related 
manufacturing , focused at Melton Mowbray. This main town is also where 
most retail, leisure and service sector jobs are located. Tourism, which makes 
a vital contribution to the Borough’s economy, occurs at locations more widely 
spread across the Borough, as well as at  Melton Mowbray.  
2.2  Housing  
2.2.1  In 2011 there were 21,490  households  in dwellings comprising : 
 8,784 detached houses ; 
 7,743 semi -detached houses ;  
 3,341 terraced houses ; and  
 1,622 flats/other .   
2.2.2  8.5%  of the housing stock is owned by the Local Au thority with only 2.6%  
available for rent from a Registered Provider (RP). Privately owned housing 
accounts for 88% of the housing stock , which is higher than average for the 
East Midlands region and the rest of the country.  Providing homes for those 
that cannot afford to buy is therefore a key challenge for the Borough.  
2.2.3  Melton Borough is located within the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing 
Market Area. This recognises the relationship of the Borough with Leicester 
City and the rest of Leicester shire in terms of acce ss to employment and 
services. However, parts of the area , e.g. Harby, Bottesford and Croxton 
Kerrial , relate more closely to Nottingham and Grantham.   
2.2.4  The average house price in the Borough is £ 145,000 , which is higher than the 
regional average but lower than the national average.  More detailed 
breakdown of house prices based on house type is provided in our latest 
Authority Monitoring Report (AMR).  In 2008/09 , the Borough delivered 114 
affordable home s. However, since then , delivery has become more 10    Chapter 2: Melton Borough Today – a Portrait       Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 challenging with five affordable homes delivered in 2013/14, eighteen in 
2014/15, 35 in 2 015/16 , and 35 in 2016/17. This reflects the decline in house 
building and the restricted  financial capacity of housing associations arising 
from the economic  recession . 
2.3  Jobs and Prosperity  
2.3.1  Melton Mowbray is the main service and employment centre . A significant 
percentage of jobs is in manufacturing (mainly food and drink) , which is higher 
than the n ational and regional averages. The jobs in Melton Mowbray are 
mostly provided by a few large manufacturers, although business start -ups 
are increasing, particularly in the rural parts of the Borough, where a growing 
trend for hom e working is matched with  an attractive environment.   
2.3.2  Of the resident working age population in Melton Borough, the proportion 
qualified below NVQ level 2 & 3 is very high and the proportion qualified to 
NVQ level 4 and above is also high . 21.4% of  people over 16 have no 
qualifications . This gap in skills reflects the relatively low skilled jobs that are 
available in the town (Local Futures Profile, 2013)  and represents a significant 
challenge for the economy, particularly in providing a labour force to service 
industry.  
2.3.3  There are a growing number of small and medium sized enterpri ses spread 
across the Borough. Some of the jobs are on business parks such  as Old 
Dalby or operating in smal l premises in rural locations. The number and 
diversity of jobs in the rural area have been increasing each year , as 
mentioned in paragraph  2.3.1 above.  
2.3.4  Melton Mowbray  is the Rural Capital of Food. The town centre has a varied 
range of commercial activity such as banks, solicitors and estate agents , but 
also a high proportion of independent retailers, partic ularly independent food 
shops. Vacancies in the town centre are relatively low.  There are three  
supermarkets : Tesco on Thorpe Road, Sainsbury ’s on Nottingham Road and 
Morrisons on Thorpe End . A new Lidl store on Scalford Road and a new Aldi 
on Leicester Road provide for the budget store market . 
2.3.5  Outside Melton Mowbray , Asfordby, Bottesford, Long Clawson and  Waltham 
on the Wolds act as the local service centres, although other larger villages , 
particularly to the south of the Borough , also perform a similar role.   
2.4  Accessibility and Transport  
2.4.1  The Borough is crossed by the A606 Nottingham to Oakha m road and the 
A607 Leicester to Grantham road. The A52 Nottingham to Grantham road 
runs through the Borough at the northern edge. The M1 Motorway is about 25 
minutes’ drive time to the west of Melton Mowbray, the A1 trunk road is about 
25 minutes’ drive t ime to the east, and Nottingham and East Midlands Airport 
are about 45 minutes’ drive time to the north west. Traffic is known to cross  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018          Chapter 2: Melton Borough Today - a Portrait        11 
 the Borough to link from the M1 to the A1 and the east coast ports. Melton 
Mowbray station is on the Birmingham to Stansted Airport railway line, 
providing quick and regular access to Leicester. Bottesford station is on the 
Nottingham to Skegness line , with a good connection to Grantham.  
2.4.2  Peak hour traffic flows at key junctions and sections of road in and around the 
Town Centre are at capacity. This results in severe delay s to journey times 
when crossing the town , of in excess of 5 minutes . This is adversely affecting 
the quality of life of the residents of the Borough going about their daily 
business and also adv ersely affects the perception of the town as a place to 
do business in , or to visit. The environmental impact of this traffic congestion 
is magnified by significant numbers of HGVs in the traffic mix.  
2.4.3  Despite the traffic conditions, Melton has relati vely high level s of use of 
alternative means of transport , including cycling and walking.  
2.5  Safety and Protection  
2.5.1  Crime and fear of crime is relatively low in Melton Borough compared to the 
national and regional averages, with Melton Borough rank ed 179th o ut of 376 
national districts  for the level of crime it experiences .  
2.6  Community Development  
2.6.1  On the indices of deprivation , Melton Borough is ranked 236 out of 354 
districts , putting it in the 40% least deprived districts nationally.  Melton 
Borough has an Index of Multiple Deprivation rating of 13.12. This compares 
to 25 in Leicestershire, 24.65 in the East Midlands and 15.78 in England.  
Whilst this means that the Borough scores favourably compared to the rest of 
the sub region and nat ionally, there  are pockets of deprivation , particularly in 
and around Melton Mowbray . 
2.6.2  Whilst the Borough has an ageing population with a high percentage of the 
population in their 40’s, there is an average number of young families living in 
the Boro ugh compared to the rest of the country. However, there are fewer  
under 16  year olds  and people aged between 15  and 44 living within the 
Borough  than is found in Leicestershire as a whole and the rest of the country. 
This suggests that younger people are m igrating out of the Borough for higher 
education opportunities and employment , and  there may be an inward 
migration of older people seeking retirement homes.  
2.6.3  Life expectancy for both the male and female residents in the Borough is 
higher than the re gional and national average but it varies across the 
Borough . 
2.6.4  A significant percentage (18.9 %) of the population  of Melton Borough  is 
obese , which is comparable to the national average.    12    Chapter 2: Melton Borough Today – a Portrait       Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 2.6.5  The Borough is served by 10 GP surgeries located in the town and larger 
villages. There are 8 dental practices in the Borough, mainly concentrated in 
Melton Mowbray. Secondary schools are located in Melton Mowbray and 
Bottesford and 19 villages have a prim ary school. MV16 is located in Melton 
Mowbray  providing further education for 16 –18 year olds. Brooksby College 
provides tertiary education choices.  
2.6.6  The hospital at Melton Mowbray has maternity facilities  as well as a ward that 
provides general reha bilitation and palliative care. There is both a leisure 
centre with a swimming pool and a sports village in Melton Mowbray , and 
there are two libraries, one in Melton Mowbray and another in Bottesford. In 
the rural areas of the Borough, village and parish halls make a valuable 
contribution to  local life, providing facilities for sports and leisure groups and 
accommodat ing further activities for the local population.  
2.6.7  There are no large parks and gardens in the north and east of the Borough, 
and these areas are not served by Egerton or Wilton Parks in Melton 
Mowbray.  Although there are other types of formal provision  servi ng the area , 
such as allotments and cemeteries , these do not provide the function of a 
local park that people  would visit and enjoy for recreational use or play.  
2.6.8  There is generally a good distribution of natural and semi -natural sites across 
the Borough . 
2.6.9  Open spaces in the more urban areas of the Borough tend to be well linked by 
green corridors, particularly in Melton Mo wbray, with its Heritage Trail taking 
in town centre parks and gardens.  
2.6.10 The Borough’s residents have access to a number of leisure facilities and 
cultural activities including a leisure centre, golf course s, and theatre and 
cinema within Melton Mowb ray. 
2.7  Environment  
2.7.1  Outside the built -up areas, a rable farmland accounts for about half of the 
area. The remainder is used for grazing. Approximately 95% of agricultural 
land is grade 3, which is good to moderate quality.  
2.7.2  The landscape is typically rolling hills and valleys. The most prominent 
features are the escarpments defining the southern edge of the Vale of 
Belvoir . The latter is also a tourist attraction, along with Bur rough Hill, a former 
iron-age fort in the s outh of the Borough.  
2.7.3  Melton Mowbray is situated in the centre of the Borough and is a large, well 
contained market town on rising ground above the Wreake Valley. The 
numerous small villages within the Borough retain many of their historical 
features and are built in loc al ironstone and sandstone . Most  are centred on a 
church or prominent spire. Many have been designated a Conservation Area,  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018          Chapter 2: Melton Borough Today - a Portrait        13 
 of which there are 4 5 in the Borough, containing some of the 702 listed 
buildings.  
2.7.4  Gently sloped river valleys are also chara cteristic features of the landscape, 
notably the Wreake, Eye and Gaddesby Brook. The main waterway is the 
Grantham Canal.  
2.7.5  Melton Borough has a long history of f lood events.  Flood alleviation work , 
such as the Brentingby Dam , has previously taken pla ce, which has 
significant ly reduced the impact of flood events in Melton Mowbray. Fluvial 
flooding is not the only type of flooding.  Secondary sources include run -off 
from hillsides, groundwater flooding, flooding from sewers and drains and 
blockages to a rtificial drainage systems . All these comprise a significant flood 
risk in some areas of the Borough.   
_________________________________________________________________________________  
KEY EVIDENCE  
2001 Census  
2011 Census  
Leicester and Leice stershire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment, GL Hearn 2017  
Local Futures Report, 2013  
Leicester and Leicestershire Employment Land Study, PACEC, 2012  
Melton Employment Land Study, BE Group, 2015  
Melton Open Spaces Study 2014  
Melton Playing Pitch Strategy, KKP, 2014   
Sports Facilities Strategy 2016 -2021, MBC, July 2017  
Authority Monitoring Re port 2016  
Authority Monitoring Report 2017  
DCLG’s The English Indices of Deprivation 2015  
  14    Chapter 2: Melton Borough Today – a Portrait       Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally blank  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018               Chapter 3: Vision and Strategic Priorities           15 
 Chapter 3: Vision and Strategic Priorities  
3.1  The Vision for Melton Borough  
3.1.1  The vision , objectives and strategi c priorities are the ‘golden thr ead’ running 
through the plan. They paint a picture of what the Borough will look like 
following the adoption and implementation of a Local Plan  designed to 
address the issues identified.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delivering the Vision  
To deliver the vision, the Borough Council will work with its partners and 
others to promote and manage development in a way which consolidates and 
builds upon the unique reputation, heritage, character and rural nature of 
Melton Borough so that it meets the needs of the local community, benefits the 
economy and maintains or improves the quality of the local environment.  
We will facilitate a sustainable pattern of high quality development which:  
 Meets the needs of businesses to provide a diverse, competit ive and 
innovative economy with high levels of local employment and good 
opportunities for training;  
 Meets the current and future housing needs of the whole community;  A Vision for Melton Borough  
In 2036, Melton Borough will be a thriving borough with new and well 
established local employers benefiting from a sufficient pool of appropriately 
skilled local workforce. There will be improved connectivity and ease of 
movement within and across the town , and to and from the nearby larger 
centres of Leicester, Loughborough, Nottingham and Grantham and the 
Borough’s many villages. This will have elevated Melton Borough as a 
desirable place to live, work in and visit, both sub -regionally and beyond.  
Much n ew housebuilding, including a significant proportion of new homes 
suitable for first time buyers, young families and those on lower incomes, will 
have helped balance the local housing stock and slow down or reverse the 
trend towards an ageing population. I t will also have increased the vibrancy 
of neighbourhoods, and helped to sustain local shops, schools and other 
services, both in Melton Mowbray and many of the villages. The strong 
historic and landscape character of the Borough will be as apparent and 
cherished as ever, and new development will be notable for the success with 
which it has been reflective of that character and integrated into its setting. 
The efficient use of land and the location of new development will have 
ensured that the best and most  versatile agricultural land can continue to 
support a strong rural economy and that development  overall during the 
plan period has created a more sustainable pattern and form than was 
prevalent at the outset.   
  
 16     Melton Local Plan, October 2018                    Chapter 3: Vision and Strategic Priorities            
  Provides the necessary infrastructure to support economic and 
population growth;  
 Streng thens and enhances Melton Mowbray’s role as a historic 
market town and as the main social and economic focus for the 
Borough;  
 Raises the quality, interest and diversity of Melton Mowbray’s town 
centre and reduces the impact of traffic;  
 Respects the individual character and distinctiveness of Melton 
Borough’s town and villages, preserving their heritage and 
promoting good design;  
 Ensures that people benefit from having better access to key 
services and facilities to create strong, healthy, safer commu nities;  
 Retains the character of the countryside whilst supporting land -
based industries and tourism opportunities;  
 Enhances and minimises harm to the natural environment;  
 Addresses the causes and effects of climate change and reuses and 
recycles resource s. 
3.1.2  The v ision, its delivery and the s trategic priorities have been developed  with 
significant input from Local Plan Reference Groups , and they have been 
refined by the consultation undertaken.  
3.2.  Strategic Issues, Objectives and Priorities for Melton Borough  
3.2.1  Strategic priorities are the main overarching matters that the Local Plan will 
help make happen, in support of a range of other plans and strategies being 
developed and delivered by the Borough Council and its partners. These 
prioriti es have emerged to address the key strategic issues, identified in Table 
2, that the Borough will face over the next 20 years or so.  
Table 2: Key Strategic Issues for Melton Borough  
Strategic Issue   
 Summary of Issue  
1: Ageing Population  The Borough’s population is ageing, to such an extent that if 
trends continue unchecked, there will be an increase in deaths 
over births in the Borough by 2036.  
Arising from this:  
 It would become increasingly difficult to meet the need 
and demand for serv ices.   
 In local areas like many villages where older people 
would predominate, the ability to support local services, 
including local schools and public transport, would be at 
risk.  
2: Amount and type of 
new housing  Not enough new housing, nor of the ri ght type, has been built in 
the Borough in recent years, making it difficult for first time 
buyers, young families and others on lower incomes to move 
into or to continue to reside within the Borough.  
3: Insufficient available 
local workforce  Arising fro m No. 2 above, local employers experience difficulties 
recruiting into relatively low skilled and low paid positions, 
affecting their efficiency and competitiveness. Most of the  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018               Chapter 3: Vision and Strategic Priorities           17 
 Strategic Issue   
 Summary of Issue  
working age population is already in work, and wages are not 
high enough to in centivise people outside of the Borough to 
travel to work in the Borough, or to move to the Borough for the 
same purpose.  
4: Impact of road traffic 
and congestion in 
Melton town centre  Melton Mowbray town centre is blighted and partially severed by 
high volumes of road traffic, including many heavy good 
vehicles, travelling across and through the town. This adversely 
affects local businesses, the attractiveness of Melton Mowbray 
to visitors, the ability of local people to go about their daily 
business, a nd the vitality and viability of the town centre as a 
whole.  
5: Connectivity  Arising from 4 above, there is poor effective road connectivity 
through and across the town.  
6: Flooding  There is a significant flood risk in some areas of the Borough. 
This arises from fluvial flooding, run -off from hillsides, 
groundwater flooding, flooding of sewers and drains and 
blockages to artificial drainage systems.  
 Unless this can be mitigated viabl y, this can act as a significant 
constraint on new development.  
7: Safeguarding valued 
heritage and local 
landscapes  The amount and quality of the Borough’s historic buildings and 
landscapes are highly valued and a key selling point for the 
Borough in ma rketing itself as an attractive place to live, visit or 
set up a business. Any new development will need to reflect and 
be sympathetic to that in its siting, design and layout.   
8: Absence of a large 
park in the north -east of 
the Borough  These areas are not served by provision elsewhere in the 
Borough. There is no significant single site that local people in 
this area can visit and enjoy for recreational use or play.  
9. Employment sites 
and premises  There is an insufficient supply of freehold sites and p remises, 
preferred by many local small medium enterprises (SME’s).  
10. Town Centre vitality 
and viability  Whilst the level of occupancy of town centre retail, financial and 
professional services is holding up compared to similar centres 
elsewhere, the qua lity and range of the retail offer is limited. The 
lack of modern office space within the town centre could also be 
depriving the centre of enhanced economic activity, daytime 
footfall and associated expenditure.    
 
3.3  Strategic Objectives  and Prioriti es  
3.3.1  The strategic objectives are the main or high level things that the Local Plan is 
designed to help achieve. The strategic priorities are the most important of 
these. It is where the Local Plan can make most impact to address the issues 
identified in Table 2. The Local Plan can significantly contribute to achieving 
the other objectives, but to a lesser extent, and often in support of the 
complementary actions from other functions of the Council and its partners.  
3.3.2  The strategic objectives and prioritie s for the Melton Local Plan will flow 
through the plan into various chapters. They reflect the key issues identified 
above and also relate to the objectives of the Melton Borough Sustainable 
Communities Strategy,  which are to:   
 18     Melton Local Plan, October 2018                    Chapter 3: Vision and Strategic Priorities            
  Improve the local economy and infrastructure  
 Re-vitalise Melton Mowbray town centre  
 Improve learning opportunities to help individuals achieve their 
potential  
 Make existing structures and projects more accessible  
 Reduce traffic congestion in Melton Mowbray  
 Focus our work in the priority neighbourhoods  
 Create a safer and stronger community  
 Enable and support the provision of affordable housing  
 Improve the he alth and well -being of local people  
3.3.3  They also link directly to the sustainability objectives of the Melton Borough 
Sustainability Appraisal,  but are not ident ical.  
3.3.4  The strategic objectives of the plan are set out below, with the priorities 
identified in italics . 
Strategic Objectives  
Housing Objectives   
1.   Help provide a stock of housing accommodation that meets the needs of 
the community, including the need for affordable housing . 
2.   Develop a housing stock to provide for the future as pirations for the local 
economy.  
Jobs and Prosperity Objectives  
3.  Enhance the vitality and viabilit y of Melton Mowbray town centre.   
4. Provide sufficient land to meet current and future employment needs . 
5.  Help regenerate the rural economy . 
6.  Promote the tourism potential of the Borough through its food, 
equestrianism and heritage assets creating a Melton Borough “brand” . 
7.  Create a mixed economy with increased knowledge -based jobs and wages . 
8.  Provide better training opportunities and increase educational attainment .  
Accessibility and Transport Objectives   
9.  Reduce the need to travel by car and improve access to public transport . 
10. Reduce traffic congestion in Melton Mowbray . 
Safety and Protection Objectives   
11. To improve community safety, reduce crime and the fear of crime . 
 
  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018               Chapter 3: Vision and Strategic Priorities           19 
 Community Development Objectives   
12. Improve access to services and facilities, including health, schools, socia l 
care, jobs, recreation, sport and education, broadband .  
13. Promote sustainable communities . 
14. Improve facilities for all the community . 
15. Improve the health of the Borough and reduce health inequalities within the 
community . 
Environment Objectives  
16. Promote high quality and innovative design which is visually attractive, 
reflects local context and distinctiveness, and, contributes to a safe and 
accessible environment , to make places better for people . 
17. Conserve the historic environment and Mel ton Borough’s heritage assets . 
18. Protect the rural character of the Borough . 
19. Reduce the risk of flooding and avoid development in areas prone to 
flooding . 
20. Protect and enhance the natural environment and biodiversity . 
21. Reduce pollution .  
22. Protect and manage the use of natural resources and mitigate activities 
that cause their loss or degradation . 
23. Prepare for, limit, and adapt to climate change and promote low carbon 
development  
24. Minimise the use of energy and promote forms of renewab le energy  
generation  in appropriate  locations . 
25. Ensure that the reuse and recycling of waste is maximised . 
 
3.3.5  Figure 3  indicates the broad spatial strategy of the Local Plan, and its context. 
The reasoned justification for and detail on this is dev eloped in subsequent 
plan chapters  
   
 20     Melton Local Plan, October 2018                    Chapter 3: Vision and Strategic Priorities            
 Figure 3:   Key Diagram
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             21  Chapter 4: Growing Melton Borough – The 
Spatial Strategy  
4.1  Sustainable Development  
4.1.1  Sustainable development is at the heart of the planning system  and is a key 
national objective.  The planning system theref ore has three overarching 
objectives to help deliver this:   
 An economic role – contributing to building a strong responsive and 
competitive economy;  
 A social role – supporting strong, vibrant and healthy communities;  
 An environmental role – contributing  to protecting and enhancing our 
natural, built and historic environment.  
4.1.2  A presumption in favour of sustainable development is set out in the NPPF .  
Plans should apply this presumption, and contain policies that will guide how 
the presumption will be applied locally.  
Policy SS1 - Presumption in favour of Sustainable Development  
When considering development proposals, the Council will take a 
positive approach that reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable 
development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework.  It 
will always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions 
which mean that proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to 
secure development that improves the economic, social and 
environmental conditions in the area.  
Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Local Plan 
(and, where relevant, with polices in Neighbourhood Plans) will be 
approved without delay, unless material considerations indicate 
otherwise.  
Where there are no policies relevant to the applicat ion, or the policies 
which are most important for determining an application are out of date 
at the time of making the decision, then the Council will grant 
permission unless:  
i) the application of policies in this Framework that protect areas or 
assets of pa rticular importance provides a clear reason for 
refusing the development proposed; or  
ii) Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly 
and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when assessed against  
22          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          the policies in the national planning policy framework taken as a 
whole.  
4.2 Housing and Employment Growth (Overall Strategy)  
4.2.1  The Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment 
(HEDNA)(Jan 2017),  the Towards a Housing Requirement for Melton report 
(TAHR)(Jan 2017) , and its Addendum (Jun 2017)  identify Melton Borough as 
forming part of the Leicester & Leicestershire Housing Market Area. The 
HEDNA provides a consistent, objective assessment of need for housing 
(OAN) and i dentifies an  Objectively Asses sed Need for the equivalent of 170 
new dwellings each year from 2011 to 2036 for the Borough of  Melton , driven 
by: 
 natural population increase (i.e. births exceeding deaths) ; 
 more people moving into the area than leaving ;. 
 the trend for smaller households,  including more people living alone ; 
 existing shortfalls in housing, particularly affordable housing;  
 economic growth trends; and  
 an adjustment for market affordability . 
4.2.2  The number of new homes needed in Melton Borough relates directly to the 
sustai nability and  success of the local ec onomy.  The Melton Employment 
Land Study 2015  considers how the Local Plan can support the economy with 
a supply of employment lan d, to allow local businesses and the economy to 
grow, and so provide more jobs and improve opportunities. The Melton 
Towards A Housing Requirement (TAHR)(January 2017) report and its 
addendum (June 2017) indicated that taking account of wider consideration s, 
there was a clear justification for planning for between 5,750 and 7,000 
dwellings, equivalent to 230 -280 dwellings per annum (dpa). The Council has 
agreed a housing  requirement of 245 dpa,  within that range . The overall 
quantity proposed is 6125 houses over the plan period of 2011 – 2036. This 
quantity would meet the demographic needs with affordability adjustment 
identified by HEDNA of 154 per year (3850 over the plan period) with the 
additional quantity of 9 1 per year (2275) required to deliver the strategic and 
economic objectives of the Plan set out in Chapter 3. This additional quantity 
would be drawn from the unmet need present elsewhere within the Housing 
Market Area (HMA). Only the City of Leicester hav e formally declared unmet 
need up to 2031 and requested that unmet need be dealt with in the Melton 
Local Plan. Should unmet need be declared elsewhere within the HMA within 
the local plan period, the apportionment across HMA authorities of all unmet 
need arising within the HMA shall be agreed as set out in a Memorandum of 
Understanding  (see paragraph 4. 8.8). If the unmet needs apportioned to 
Melton Borough exceed the 2275 dwellings, there may be a n eed for a full or 
partial review of the Local Plan, in accordance with Policy SS6.    
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             23  4.2.3  The planned delivery of this growth,  together with the sources of supply and 
the housing requirement over the whole plan period  is illustrated by the 
trajectory set out in Figure 4. The key components of housing supply identified 
to deliver this are identified in Table 3.   
Figure 4: Melton Borough Housing Trajectory   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes  
1. The ‘stepped requirement’ line shows the annual amount of new housing required, which increases in steps so that the 
overall housing requirement of 6125 new homes can be met over the plan period.  
2. The ‘planned delivery’ line shows the annual amount of new housing that is expected to come forward from the sources of 
supply identified in the graph and in Table 3 below .  
Table 3: Key Components of Housing Supply  
 Number of dwellings  
Completions 2011 -2018  777 
Remaining completions on large unallocated sites1 525 
Allocated sites (remaining capacity2) 5314  
Remaining completions on small unallocated sites3 265 
Windfall allowance4 435 
TOTAL  7316  
1Dwellings not completed at 31st March 2018 on sites of 10 dwellings or more with planning permission  
2Allocations  minus 11 completions in 17/18  
3Dwellings not completed at 31st March 2018 on sites of less than 10 dwellings with planning permission  
4Annual windfall allowance of 29dpa from Year 4 (21/22) for 15 years to 2036  
 
4.2.4  The housing trajectory shows that there will need to be a significant uplift in 
the amount of new housing delivered over the plan period if the overall 
planned requirement of 6125 dwellings by 2036 is to be achieved. Net 
completions for the period 2011 -2018 a mount to 777 dwellings, an average of 
111 per year, compared to the average annual requirement of 245 per year. 
The components of the trajectory show that going forward, the plan is reliant 
 
24          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          on the delivery of housing at the two sustainable neighbourhoods n orth and 
south of Melton Mowbray to achieve this uplift, but it will take until 2022/23 
before both are delivering significant numbers of new homes every year at 
close to their full capacity. It is also realistic to expect that the local housing 
market wil l need time to adjust to much higher levels of housebuilding. To 
reflect these matters, the annual housing requirement steps up from 170 
dwellings per annum (dpa) for the period to 2021, to 245dpa for the period to 
2026 and to 320 dpa thereafter. These ste pped requirements are the 
minimum number of new dwellings that should be provided in the relevant 
period, and all stakeholders involved in the delivery of housing should play 
their part in seeking to exceed the requirements by bringing forward 
development in accordance with the plan policies as a whole.   
4.2.5  The Employment Land Study suggest ed a need for 50.75  hectares (ha) of 
employment land in the Borough up to 2036. The study indicated there is a 
realistic supply of 19.46ha  and that t herefore the Loc al Plan should provide for 
an addition al 31 .29ha of employment land . The Local Plan therefore provides 
an allocation of 20ha of employment land as part of the Melton South 
Sustainable  Neighbourhood and 10ha as extensions to the Asfordby Business 
Park, both targeted towards the manufacturing and industrial sectors . A 
further 1 ha of office based employment is allocated close to Melton Mowbray 
town centre  and together, these are Melton’s key locations for economic 
growth.  The Local Plan also provide s for small scale employment as part of 
the Melton North Sustainable Neighbourhood . This will provide small -scale 
office or business start -up accommodation integrated into residential areas of 
the development, helping to provide a focal point for the community.  All this 
will be supported by the Local Plan’s positive approach to the rural economy 
and rural economic diversification , where plan policies can support the long 
term sustainability of the Borough ’s villages, building on and furthering the 
attractiveness  of the Borough for homeworking and small business start -ups, 
particularly as improvements to broadband speeds are made over the plan 
period.  
4.2.6   The roles of the town and villages in the Borough were reviewed following the 
Emerging Options consultatio n, and a revised approach adopted . This 
approach was based upon identifying settlements with four ‘essential criteria’ 
relating to service and facility provision :   
1. primary school;  
2. access to employment opportunities;  
3. fast broadband ; and  
4. a community building.  
4.2.7  The essential criteria ha ve been used to distinguish between the Service 
Centres and Rural Hubs. A Service Centre must have all 4 of the essential  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             25  criteria, whilst Rural Hubs must have at least 3 out of 4, with one of those 
being a primary school. An addition to this is those settlements within 500m of 
a Service Centre or 2.5km of Melton Mowbray , which are also identified as a 
Rural Hub , due to the ir proximity to services and facilities within a cluster. This 
gives rise to the identification of five settlement roles which are explained in 
Table  4 and are identified on Figure 5 below:  
Table  4: Melton Settlement Roles  
 
4.2.8 All settlements in the Borough have been identified as fulfilling one of these 
roles. However, it is recognised that the availability of facilities in villages  can 
change  and that this assessment needs to be regularly reviewed. The Local 
Plan policies should allow for communities to improve their  sustainability or 
change roles through appropriate and proportionate development  that also 
contributes towards the delivery of the Melton Local Plan vision and priorities . 
The policies are also sufficiently flexible to respond to changes to 
sustainability  that occur over time.  
4.2.9   This Plan has been prepared on the basis of the conclusions of Settlement 
Roles and Relationships Report 2016 . The following villages are identified as 
Service  Centres and Rural Hubs:  Main Urban Area  Melton Mowbray  
Service Centres  Service centres are villages that act as a local focus for services and 
facilities in the rural area. They have the essential services and facilities 
(primary school, access to employment, fast broadband, community 
building) and regular public tran sport, as well as a number of other 
important and desirable services such that they are capable of serving 
basic day to day needs of the residents living in the village and those 
living in nearby settlements. These villages should have all four of the 
Esse ntial services and a good range of important and other facilities.  
Rural Hubs  Rural Hubs are a village or a group of villages which share a range of 
essential and important local services which serve the basic needs of 
people living within them and in nearby settlements, which can be 
accessed by cycling and walking.  Residents will generally travel to 
nearby towns and cities to meet their retail, leisure and employment 
needs. These villages will have 3 out of the 4 essential services (as set 
out in para. 4.2. 6 above) and a range of other facilities, or easy access 
to them, in nearby settlements, forming a cluster or hub of village 
facilities. Settlements within 500m of a Service Centre or 2.5km of 
Melton Mowbray are also identified as a Rural Hub, due to their proximity 
to services and facilities   
Rural Settlement  Rural settlements (small villages or hamlets that have little or no local 
services, where residents are entirely dependent upon travelling to a 
nearby settlement or town or city for work, recreation and service 
provision).   
26          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          Service  Centres  
Asfordby  
Bottesford  
Croxton Kerrial  
Harby  
Hose  
Long Clawson  
Old Dalby  
Scalford  
Somerby  
Stathern  
Waltham  
Wymondham  
Rural Hubs  
Ab Kettleby  
Asfordby Hill 
Easthorpe  
Frisby on the Wreake  
Gaddesby  
Great Dalby  
Thorpe Arnold  
 
4.2.10 All settlements , together with their existing identified role, are listed at 
Appendix 3 , and shown on Figure 5.   
4.2.11 In finalising the Pre Submission  Draft Plan , Parish Councils were asked to 
update a Village Facilities table for their villages in 201 6. This update has 
revealed a number of changes and corrections to the availability of facilities in 
some villages  from previous stages of plan production . The role of a place is 
unlikely to change with minor fluctuations in service and facilities provision 
and it is important to consider what new development could add to a place 
and the Borough as a whole .  
4.2.12  The ‘Settlement Roles, Relationships and Opportunitie s Report 2015’  and 
further consideration of settlement roles and relationships in September 2016  
assessed the relative merits of maintaining, reducing or increasing the 
proportional split of historical hous e building rates in Melton Mowbray and the 
villages. The study also considered increasing the proportion of the Borough ’s 
housing requirement located in Melton Mowbray , to 65% or 70%, with the 
remaining 35%  to 30% being located in the villages.  Alongside this, the 
Council also assessed the merits of delivering much of the Borough’s housing 
requirement by identifying large scale h ousing development options  as urban 
extensions, or in the form of a new settlement. Three potential locations for a 
new village were assessed. This work, along with associated sustainability 
appraisals , concluded that an increased focus of development o n Melton 
Mowbray, delivered through the development of two new sustainable 
neighbourhoods , would have the greatest potential to realise the vision for the  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             27  
Borough , but that this should not be at the expense of allowing some of the 
Borough’s v illages to grow , to become more sustainable  and add to housing 
choice and delivery opportunities . 
 
  Figure 5: Melton Settlement Roles   
28          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          ‘Windfall’ sites  
4.2.13  National policy advises that an allowance for windfall development should 
only be included in the five year land supply and be assumed to make a 
contribution toward meeting the Borough’s housing requirement where there 
is strong evidence that such sites wi ll continue to come forward. Past delivery 
rates and the ‘relaxing’ of restrictions on small site development in the smaller 
villages brought about by Policy SS3 provide that.  
 
4.2.14  However , a high reliance on windfall sites will not demonstrate deliverability of  
housing requirements. Overall an allowance for windfall development of no 
more than 10% is made. This equates to an average of  25 per year which is 
lower than delivered in previou s years and, with the factors described above, 
is expected to continue or be exceeded. Table 5 indicates how allowing for 
5% windfalls in Melton Mowbray (200 homes – equates to 10 per annum) and 
15% for windfalls in the villages (322 homes equates to 16 pe r annum) affects 
the overall requirement t o identify sites for allocation.  
Table 5: D istribution of ‘windfall’ sites  
 Requirement 
(2011 -2036)  Windfall 
allowance  Residual to be 
identified  
Melton Mowbray  3981  200 (5%)  3781  
Rural Area  2144  322 (15%)  1822  
Borough Total  6125  522 (9%)  5603  
            
4.2.1 5 The approach set out above will need to be distributed to the Rural Area 
accordingly:  
• 15% of the 2145 dwellings (322) windfall development across Service 
Centres, Rural Hubs and Rural Settlements.  
• Service Centres & Rural Hubs – 85% of the 2144 dwellings (1822) via 
allocated sites.  
Site allocations in the rural area  
4.2.1 6 Housing development within the Service Centres and Rural Hubs  is allocated 
on the basis of the existing settlement size.  This is considered to be an 
inherently ‘fair’  and proportionate approach to allocation and will encourage 
growth in communities that is at a comparable rate, commensurate to their 
existing size.  Paragraphs 4.2 .19 to 4.2.2 4 below  set this out in more detail .  
Policy SS2 – Development Strategy  
Provision will be made for the development of at least 6,125 homes and 
some 51 hectares of employment land between 2011 and 2036 in Melton 
Borough.  Housing delivery is planned to increase within the plan period 
as follows:   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             29  Period  Average annual housing requirement  
2011 -2021                   a minimum of 170 dpa  
2021 -2026   a minimum of 245 dpa  
2026 -2036                   a minimum of 320 dpa  
The 5 -year housing land supply will be calculated on the basis of the 
relevant requirement for the period in accordance with the above. 
Subject to any review of the Plan, any shortfall in delivery from the start 
of the Plan period will be addressed by appl ying the Liverpool Approach, 
with the shortfall being delivered over the remaining years of the Plan 
period. This is necessary to ensure that the Plan’s policies for a 
significant uplift in the supply of housing in the 5 -year period following 
adoption, as part of the Plan’s sustainable, long term growth strategy, 
are not undermined by the setting of unrealistic housing targets in the 
short term.    
Development will be distributed across the Borough in accordance with 
the spatial strategy set out below:  
Melton Mowbray Main Urban Area is the priority location for growth and 
will accommodate approximatel y 65% of the Borough’s housing need. 
The role and sustainability of Melton Mowbray will be significantly 
enhanced through the delivery of at least 3,980 hom es and up to 31 
hectares of additional employment land by 2036 on allocated and other 
sustainable sites in accordance with Policy SS1 above. Development will 
be expected to contribute positively to the provision of key 
infrastructure, including traffic rel ief within the town, to support its 
growing population and economy.  
Service Centres and Rural Hubs will accommodate approximately 35% 
of the Borough’s housing residual requirement  (1822) on a proportionate 
basis. This will be delivered by planning positive ly for the development 
of sites allocated within and adjoining the Service Centres and Rural 
Hubs by 2036, and by encouraging small scale residential development, 
where it would represent sustainable development under Policy SS1 
above or would enhance the sustainability of the community in 
accordance with Policy SS3 - Sustainable Communities.  
Alongside Service Centres and Rural Hubs, Rural Settlements will 
accommodate a proportion of the  Borough’s housing need, to support 
their role in the Borough through planning positively for new homes as 
‘windfall’ sites within and adjoining settlements by 2036. This 
development will be delivered through small unallocated sites which 
meet the needs an d enhance the sustainability of the settlement in 
accordance with Policy SS3.  
Open Countryside: Outside the settlements identified as Service 
Centres, and those villages identified as Rural Hubs and Rural  
30          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          Settlements, new development will be restricted to  that which is 
necessary and appropriate in the open countryside.  
Neighbourhood Plans:  The Council will support the preparation of 
Neighbourhood Plans and development proposals promoted through 
Neighbourhood Plans, provided that they are consistent with t he 
strategic policies and proposals included within this Local Plan.  
* Please see Table 5 : Distribution of ‘windfall’ sites  
 
Development on unallocated sites in the rural area  
4.2.1 7 Where  no sites are allocated for new housing, schemes may be permitted 
where they represent sustainable development or demonstrably meet 
identified needs and/or help to sustain local services or facilities. Schemes of 
up to about 10 dwellings may be appropriate  within or on the edge of Service 
Centres, schemes of up to about 5 dwellings for Rural Hubs, and schemes of 
up to about 3 dwellings for Rural Settlements.  
4.2.1 8 Where employment or other development is proposed, this would need to be 
in accordance with Policies EC2, EC7, EC8, and C7, as appropriate.  
4.2.19  Delivery of the Borough’s housing target of 6,125 new homes and an 
employment land requirement of 31 ha over the period 2011 -2036 is essential 
to the long term prosperity of the Borough, to ensure an a ppropriate balance 
between new homes and new jobs, and to create sustainable communities 
where housing meets the different needs of the local population and supports 
new and existing services and facilities . To ensure that the housin g 
requirement is met, Policy SS2 and Table 6 establishes individual housing 
targets for Melton Mowbray and for each settlement in the Service Centre and 
Rural Hub categories. The majority of the development in these settlements 
will be met through allocations in the Local Plan.  These are set out in Policy 
C1. Housing allocations are on sites that can accommodate 10 dwellings or 
more . The remainder will be provided by ‘windfall’ development in accordance 
with Policies SS 1 to SS3.   
4.2.20 The villages identified as Service Centres  and Rural Hubs each have different  
sizes and ranges of facilities. They have different functions and different 
relationships with nearby towns, villages and the rural hinterland.  It is 
important that these differences are recognised and reflected in the  scale of 
new housing each is expected to accommodate. In each case, this has been 
examined and site allocations informed accordingly. Their ability to 
accommodate development and any particular constraints or requirements (at 
either settlement or individu al site level) are set out in Appendix 1 which 
should be read in conjunction with Policy C1.  
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             31  A proportionate approach  
4.2.21 Information on population has been compiled and an estimate of the number 
of households in each settlement has been calculated. Th is allows a clear 
idea of the size of settlements, with the general approach that development 
should be commensurate with exiting settlement size.  
4.2.22 This gives rise to the approach to distribution set out in Table 6. 
4.2.2 3 Figures have been calculate d identifying the number of new dwellings to be 
provided in each settlement based on existing population size. This figure has 
been amended to take into account dwellings that have been completed or 
are under construction since the beginning of the plan pe riod in 2011, and to 
allow for those dwellings on small sites with an extant planning permission 
which are yet to be started. The final residual requirement that should be 
allocated in each settlement is identified in Table 6 below.  
4.2.2 4 Not all settlements have sufficient allocations with the capacity to meet their 
residual requirement.  Of the 12 Service Centres, 3 villages (Croxton Kerrial , 
Long Clawson  and Scalford) do not meet their own residual requirement, 
however the remaining Serv ice Centre villages provide enough surplus to 
cover the shortfall and also provide additional capacity of 1 68 dwellings. In the 
Rural Hubs, 2 villages do not meet their residual requirements (Gaddesby and 
Great Dalby), however as in the case for the Servic e Centres, the total 
capacity provided by the remainder of the Rural Hubs cover the shortfall and 
provide additional capacity of 78 dwellings. This surplus provides a 1 7.5% 
‘buffer’ of capacity in the rural area adding flexibility in the plan to react to 
changing circumstances .        
 
33       Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                         Melton Local Plan, October 2018             
 Table 6:  
Residual Housing 
Requirements for 
Service Centre & 
Rural Hubs  Population 
Estimate 
(from  ONS 
Output 
Areas)  
% of 
population  Requirement 
based on % of 
population  
Minus  Total Net 
Completions 
2011 -
31/03/2017  Dwellings 
under 
construction - 
31/03/2017  Dwellings with 
planning 
permission on 
small sites at 
31/03/2017  
Equals  ‘Residual’ 
Requirement  Capacity from 
Site Allocations 
identified in 
policy C1(a)  
Service Centre      
       
     
Asfordby  2446  16%  290 76 0 0 214 225  
Bottesford  3525  23%  419 72 2 11 334 357 
Croxton Kerrial  530 4% 72 3 1 0 68 59 
Harby  931 6% 109 15 15 1 78 128 
Hose  580 4% 72 6 0 1 65 76 
Long Clawson  1066  7% 128 11 2 4 111 90 
Old Dalby  355 2% 36 5 0 23 8 28 
Scalford  356 2% 36 8 2 1 25 23 
Somerby  548 4% 72 14 1 13 44 69 
Stathern  728 5% 91 10 0 10 71 75 
Waltham on the Wolds  836 6% 109 19 9 5 76 131 
Wymondham  632 4% 72 12 1 5 54 55 
Service Centres    1506  251 33 74 1148  1316  
Rural Hub                
Ab Kettleby  223 1% 18 12 1 3 2 10 
Asfordby Hill  589 4% 72 20 5 0 47 87 
Easthorpe  143 1% 18 1 0 9 8 21 
Frisby on the Wreake  557 4% 72 2 0 2 68 118 
Gaddesby  381 3% 55 1 0 7 47 36 
Great Dalby  544 4% 72 6 0 1 65 37 
Thorpe Arnold  120 1% 18 0 0 0 18 24 
Rural Hubs    325 42 6 22 255 333 
            Totals    1403  1649 *  
*total number of units from allocations in Service Centres and Rural Hubs, including completions on allocated sites.  The total number of dwellings shown in this table is 11 units 
more than the numbers from allocations in Service Centres and Rural Hubs showin in the trajectory, where completions in Local  Plan allocations, in this case 11 units, are 
included in the ‘compl etions column.   
34          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          Policy SS3 – Sustainable Communities (unallocated sites)  
In rural settlements outside the main urban area, the Council will seek to 
protect and enhance existing services and facilities and will support 
sustainable development proposals in accordance with Policy SS2 
above which contribute towards meeting local de velopment needs, 
contributing towards the vision and strategic priorities of the plan, and 
improving the sustainability of our rural areas.  
In addition to those sites allocated through the local plan, planning 
permission will be granted for new residentia l development in the rural 
area within or on the edge of existing settlements, provided it is in 
keeping with the scale and character of the host settlement and where:  
1. The development provides housing which meets a proven local 
need as identified by substa ntive evidence, for example within in a 
Neighbourhood Plan or appropriate community -led strategy, or a  
housing assessment or other evidence provided by the applicant; 
and 
2. The development respects the Borough’s landscape and 
settlement character such that it conforms with policies EN1, EN4  
and EN6; and that (where relevant), the design conforms with 
Policy D1 and applicable environmental policies in any relevant 
Neighbourhood Plan; and  
3. The development will be served by sustainable infrastructure and 
or pr ovide new infrastructure or services to the wider benefit of 
the settlement; and  
4. The development respects ecological, heritage and biodiversity 
features and where appropriate provides mitigation to prevent any 
potential harm; and  
5. Where possible the develo pment does not result in the loss of 
best and most versatile agricultural land; and  
6. The development can be adequately drained and would not 
increase the risk of flooding, in accordance with Policy EN11.  
 
4.3  Growing Melton Mowbray through Large Scale Dev elopment Sites  
4.3.1  The development required in Melton Mowbray will be focussed in two new 
large scale  ‘sustainable neighbourhoods’ to the north and the south of the 
town. These two options were considered in the context of a wider range of 
options that were informed by the findings of the Melton Local Plan Issues 
and Options consultation and identified in  the Council’s Strategic Housing 
Land Availability Assessment.    
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             35  4.3.2  The Council has produced a paper ‘Assessing Large -Scale Development Site 
Options ’ which details the methodology for assessing a wide range of large 
scale site options. Each of the options were  scored against their ability to 
meet the Strategic Objectives and Priorities of the plan including objectives 
relating to: ‘Housing (and Affordable Housing)’; Accessibility and Transport; 
Safety and Protection Priorities; Jobs and Prosperity; Community 
Development; and Environment.  
4.3.3  All options were the subject to ‘Sustainability Appraisal’ and ‘Strategic 
Environmental Assessment’.  The Sustainability Appraisal  of the ‘Issues and 
Options’ Local Plan  concluded that the proposed ‘Melton North’ and ‘Melton 
South’ Urban Extensions  or sustainable neighbourhoods  offered  the best 
opportunities to provide strategic scale growth which delivered the 
outstanding requireme nts for new housing and employment development. 
Because of their scale, these options are able to support a range of services 
and facilities, help to encourage communities to form, and reduce the need to 
travel. They have willing promoters and are consider ed deliverable during the 
plan period.  
4.3.4  These developments will deliver new residential and business communities in 
the form of attractive and high quality new neighbourhoods and places 
supported by the infrastructure necessary to mitigate the impac ts of growth.   
4.3.5  The Melton Mowbray Transport Studies  have made clear that for the town to 
grow sustainably  there will be a need for strategic investment in the highway 
network that improves t he north/south connectivity. The transport evidence 
has appraised options to address traffic congestion within the town and has 
concluded that an outer distributor road is the best long -term deliverable 
solution. Additional traffic modelling and engineerin g solutions are being 
explored to develop the Melton Mowbray Transport Strategy in conjunction 
with the Highways Authority. This will include identification of the  ‘preferred 
corridor ’ for the distributor  road alongside a series of other measures that will 
assist traffic management and improve congestion. I t is expected that the full 
route of the distributor road will be delivered in a phased way . It is expected 
that development which is dependent upon the road  for access will provide or 
contribute towards the delivery of the Melton Mowbray Distributor  Road.  
4.3.6  The Sustainable Neighbourhoods identified in the plan are expected to 
provide the northern and southern link roads, which will themselves deliver 
some traffic congestion relief to the town centre . The connecting section 
between these link roads will require other forms of funding, including public 
funding. Melton Borough Council is working closely with Leicestershire County 
Council to determine the rou te of the outer distributor r oad and to secure 
funding for the remaining section  via public funding. Developer contributions 
from other sites in Melton Mowbray (outside the Sustainable Neighbourhoods)  
36          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          of 50 houses or more will also be expected to make a co ntribution, 
commensurate to their impact upon traffic conditions.  
4.3.7  Melton North and Melton South Sustainable Neighbourhoods will help to meet 
the towns need for development up to 2036 and beyond.  
4.4  Melton South Sustainable Neighbourhood  
4.4.1  The Local Plan will identify some 120 ha of land to the south of Melton 
Mowbray as indicated on the Policies Map. Melton Borough Council will work 
with developers and delivery partners to create the Melton South Sustainable 
Neighbourhood ( MSSN).   
4.4.2  The MSSN is a key part of the delivery strategy for the Local Plan and will 
help to bring forward  some 2,000 houses (of which it is expected that up to 
1,700 will be built during the plan period) and 20 hectares of employment 
land. This constitutes some 30% of  the overall housing and 60% of the 
outstanding employment requirements of the Borough  during the plan period .  
4.4.3  The MSSN will create an improved urban edge that respects the town’s 
heritage and relates sympathetically to Burton Lazars and the need t o prevent 
the coalescence of Melton Mowbray with Burton Lazars and Eye Kettleby. 
The site will provide a new residential and business community which will 
contribute to the economic growth of Melton Mowbray. The development will 
provide a mix of homes inte grated with the major expansion of the successful 
Leicester Road Business Park providing an opportunity to live and work within 
the neighbourhood.   
4.4.4  The MSSN will create improved residential and business gateways and 
improved connectivity to the tow n centre. It will improve east/west connectivity 
through a link road and green infrastructure which connect the A606 (Burton 
Road) to the A607 (Leicester Road). Th e former will be part of the Melton 
Mowbray Distributor Road . 
4.4.5  A new local centre will be provided off the existing Dalby Road providing a 
focal point for the new residential and business community. This will provide 
local shops to serve the new residents and community facilities including a 
new primary school.  
4.4.6  The development will be  designed to incorporate green infrastructure to 
create a neighbourhood that is attractive, walkable and well connected to local 
leisure facilities and main walking, cycling and public transport routes into the 
town centre. Provision will be made for play and open space areas and the 
development will contribute to the delivery of sports pitches and built leisure 
facilities. Provision of sports and built facilities should be informed by the 
Playing Pitch Strategy  and Indoor Facilities Strategy  (see Policy EN7). It will 
enhance the setting of the town and be respectful of its historic assets .  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             37  4.4.7  The landscape, design and layout principles set out in the  Areas of Separation 
and Settlement Fringe Sensitivity Study (2015)  and the  Biodiversity and Geo -
diversity Study (2015)  should be used to develop a comprehensive master -
plan and set of design codes to guide the on -going development of the site, to 
ensure that it respects existing landscape, wildlife and heritage assets and 
makes a positive contribution to the appearance of the settlement edge in this 
location. Particular attention should be paid to mitigating the setting impacts of 
the development i ncluding the Melton Mowbray Distributor Road on the 
significance of the St Mary and St Lazarus Hospital, which is a Scheduled 
Ancient Monument, through sensitive design, development extent, road 
alignment and landscaping measures avoiding or minimising any  conflict 
between the development and the conservation of the Scheduled Monument’s 
significance in its setting, in addition to contributions towards the public 
understanding of its value.  
4.4.8  Because the Sustainable Neighbourhoods are so crucial to hous ing and the 
wider plan strategy delivery overall, the Council will be closely monitoring their 
progress to fruition. To ensure that the Sustainable Neighbourhood is 
developed in a timely and sustainable manner, the Council will review the 
progress in deliv ering each of the key elements of the masterplan on at least 
an annual basis, through ongoing dialogue with delivery partners such as the 
site promoters, developers and infrastructure providers.  
Policy SS4 – Melton South Sustainable Neighbourhood (Strategic  
Development Location ) 
Melton Borough Council will work in partnership with developers and 
delivery partners to deliver the Melton South Sustainable 
Neighbourhood ( MSSN) identified as a strategic development location  
on the Policies Map. The Sust ainable Neighbourhood will provide:  
Housing  
h1: 2,000 homes (of which 1,700 will be delivered before 2036), 15% of 
which should be affordable;  subject to viability  
h2: Homes of a range of tenures, types and sizes in accordance with 
Policy C2;  
Extra care housing to meets the needs of our ageing population in 
accordance with Policies  C2, C3 and C8 . 
Employment  
em1: 20 hectares of employment land for B1 (business) B2 (general 
industrial) and B8 (storage and distribution) uses to expand and 
enhance the existing Leicester Road Business Park.  
 
  
38          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          Community facilities  
c1: A new primary school (2.5 hectares) as part of a local centre and 
financial contributions towards secondary  education, to meet the 
identified need for school places; and  
c2: An accessible local centre to serve the needs of the residents of the 
development including:  
A  A parade of shops providing up to 400 sq.m (net) of A1 (retail)  
B  Up to 400 sq.m (net) of other ‘A2 – A5 class’ uses;  
C  Small -scale employment opportunities (inc luding B1 (a) office 
uses); and  
D:  A range of appropriate non -retail and community facilities and 
services (including community hall and medical services).  
 
Transport  
t1: A comprehensive package of transport improvements informed by an 
appropriate transport assessment including:  
  A:  A strategic road link connecting the A606 to the A607 forming part 
of the Melton Mowbray Distributor Road as part of a wider agreed 
scheme; and  
  B:  Measures to mitigate the short and medium term impacts of 
developmen t on the existing transport network where adverse 
impacts are identified ; 
  C:  New and enhanced bus services connecting the development with 
the Town Centre and local  employment opportunities.  
t2: Measures that seek to achieve a modal shift away from private car 
use including:  
  A:  frequent bus service from the site into Melton Mowbray Town 
Centre and local  employment opportunities with accessible bus 
stops which are less than 400 metres walk from all new residents;  
  B:  well-connected street pattern s and walkable neighbourhoods 
providing high quality, safe and  direct walking, cycling and public 
transport routes including links using the green infrastructure 
network;  
  C:  the retention of existing and provision of new walking, cycling 
and road connec tions within Melton Mowbray, to town centre 
facilities, and to existing and new employment and education 
services; and  
  D:  provision of a Travel Plan for new residents which includes 
measures to encourage the use of public transport, as part of a 
wider t ravel plan.  
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             39  Environment  
en1: Protection of the separate identities of Burton Lazars and Eye 
Kettleby in accordance with Policy EN4 and respond to settlement fringe 
sensitivity in accordance with Policy EN1 to create a locally distinctive 
development and  an improved town edge , with particular regard to the 
ridgeline to the south of Melton Mowbray that separates the visual 
connection between Melton Mowbray and Burton Lazars ; 
en2: Protection and enhancement of important areas of bio -diversity 
(habitats and species), in accordance with Policy EN2 , including : 
  A:  Protection and enhancement to the existing wildlife corridors and, 
where appropriate, provide new corridors to create a coherent 
network of biodiversity and green  infrastructure , specifically the 
River Wreake tributaries and the Edendale Brook; and  
  B:  Establish a protection zone between the River Eye SSSI and any 
future development; and   
en3: Protection and enhancement of historic and archaeological 
features in accordance with Policy EN13; high quality, sensitive design, 
development extent and road alignment to mitigate the setting impact of 
the development including the Melton Mowbray Distributor Road on the 
significance of St Mary and St Lazarus Hospital Scheduled Ancient 
Monument, avoidin g or minimising conflict between the dev elopement 
and the conservation of the Scheduled Monument’s significance in its 
setting, in addition to connecting green links within the development to 
the wider landscape setting of the monument, and contributions t owards 
improvements in the public understanding of its value.  
en4: Provide a network of new high quality multi -functional green 
spaces in accordance with the Council’s open space standards set out 
in Policy EN7;  
en5: Provision of, or contributions towards,  sports pitches and indoor  
leisure facilities in the town, in  accordance with the Playing Pitch 
Strategy and Indoor Facilities Assessment (see Policy EN7);  
en6: Encourage developers to provide a development  that compiles with 
building regulations for energy efficiency and carbon emissions, and to 
seek 10% of houses that obtain energy from renewable sources;  
en7: Buildings and spaces which are adaptable to future climatic 
conditions including extremes of temperature, drought and flooding;  
en8: Development that provides appropriate SuDS and flood alleviation 
measures in accordance with the Melton South assessment in the 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment. Areas of the MSSN that are at higher 
risk of flooding shall not be used for built development ; and  
40          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          en9: Protection and enhancement of water quality.  
Master planning and delivery  
A master plan, including a phasing and delivery plan, should be 
prepared and agreed in advance of, or as part of, submission of a 
planning application for the Melton South  Sustainable Neighbourhood 
(MSSN). In order to achieve a comprehensive approach, the master plan 
should be prepared for the whole SSN including the adjacent 
employment site. It will set out in detail the structure and development 
concepts of the SSN to inc lude, amongst other things:  
m1: The amount, distribution and location of proposed land uses 
alongside a timetable for their delivery;  
m2: Important environmental features, including high grade agricultural 
land and biodiversity sites, and heritage assets that are to be protected;  
m3: Areas of green infrastructure and green space (including important 
strategic green gaps to be protected); and  
m4: Areas of new landscaping ; 
m5: Design which performs well against Building for Life 12  and seeks  
to develop the principles of 'Active Design' , in accordance with Policy 
D1. 
The MSSN master plan will be prepared in consultation with key 
stakeholders. Planning permission will not normally be granted for the 
SSN until a comprehensive master plan has been completed to the 
satisfaction of the Local Planning Authority.  
The Local Planning Authority will monitor compliance of the delivery of 
the SSN in accordance with the agreed master plan and delivery 
timetable. Where slippage against the agreed delivery timetable in 
excess of 1 year is identified, the Local Planning Authority will review 
the master plan and delivery timet able with partners to ensure 
sustainable development is delivered in accordance with the Policy.  
Subsequent development shall be in accordance with the master plan 
and agreed design codes.  
 
4.5  Melton North Sustainable Neighbourhood  (MNSN)  
4.5.1  The Local Plan identifies a location some 100 ha of land to north of Melton 
Mowbray , as indicated on the Policies Map for the delivery of the Melton North  
Sustainable Neighbourhood ( MNSN).   
4.5.2  The MNSN is a key part of the delivery strategy for the Lo cal Plan and will 
help to deliver some 1,700 houses (of which it is expected that 1 ,500 will be  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             41  delivered in the plan period ). This constitutes almost 25% of the overall 
housing requirements of the Borough.  
4.5.3  The MNSN will create a high quality resid ential neighbourhood around the 
Melton Country Park and a new community hub adjacent to the existing John 
Fernley Academy , which will include small scale economic development 
opportunities targeted towards business start -ups and a new primary school.  
4.5.4  Walking and cycle connectivity to the town centre will be significantly 
improved , including the provis ion of a greenway through the Melton Country 
Park.  The development will also provide a new link road connecting the 
Scalford Road with Nottingham Road and upgrades to Bartholomew’s Way 
and Welby Road linking to the A6006 Asfordby Road , as part of the wider 
Melton Mowbray Distributor Road .   
4.5.6  The development will be designed to incorporate new green infrastructure to 
create a neighbourhood that is attractive and walkable. Provision will be made 
for play and open space and the development will deliver or facilitate the 
provision of sports pitches in the immediate vicini nty, and contribute towards 
indoor leisure facilities  within Melton Mowbray . Provision of sports and built 
facilities should be informed by the Playing Pitch Strategy  and Indoor 
Facilities Strategy  (see Policy EN7). It will enhance the setting of the town and 
be respectful of its heritage, designed in a way that development is sensitive 
to the Melton Mowbray landscape.  
4.5.7  The landscape, design and layout principles set out in the  Areas of Separation 
and Settlement Fringe Sensitivity Study (2015)  and the Biodiversity and Geo -
diversity Study (2015)  should be used to develop a comprehensive master -
plan and set of design codes to guide the on -going development of the site to 
ensure that development integrates successfully with the Country Park and 
the surrounding landscape and respects the setting, dark skies, existing 
wildlife and heritage assets and makes a positive contribution to appearance 
of the set tlement edge in this location.  
4.5.8  Because the Sustainable Neighbourhoods are so crucial to housing and the 
wider plan strategy delivery overall, the Council will be closely monitoring their 
progress to fruition. To ensure that the Sustainable Neighbourhood i s 
developed in a timely and sustainable manner, the Council will review the 
progress in delivering each of the key elements of the masterplan on at least 
an annual basis, through ongoing dialogue with delivery partners such as the 
site promoters, developer s and infrastructure providers.  
Policy SS5 – Melton North Sustainable Neighbourhood  
Melton Borough Council will work in partnership with developers and 
delivery partners to deliver the Melton  North  Sustainable   
42          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          Neighbourhood ( MNSN) identified as a strategi c development location 
on the Policies M ap.  The Sustainable Neighbourhood will provide:  
Housing  
h1: 1,700 houses (of which 1500 will be delivered before 2036) , 15% of 
which should be affordable , subject to viability  
h2: Homes of a range of tenures, types and sizes in accordance with 
Policy C2;  
Extra care housing to meets the needs of our ageing population in 
accordance with Policies  C2, C3 and C8 ; and  
Employment  
em1: Small scale employment uses as part of a new local centre. 
Employment uses will mainly be for B1(a) offices. Other employment 
uses will be acceptable where they could be satisfactorily accessed and 
activities undertaken without adversely affecting the  amenities of the 
residents of nearby houses.    
Community facilities  
c1: A new primary school (2.5 hectares) as part of a local centre and 
financial contributions or additional land provision  towards secondary 
education to meet the identified need for s chool places;  
c2: An accessible local centre that will incorporate a mix of uses 
including ‘small -scale’ retail uses (up to 200 square metres), office 
based employment uses and a range of community facilities & services, 
including healthcare facilities as necessary.   
Transport  
t1: A comprehensive package of transport improvements informed by an 
appropriate transport assessment including:  
A:  A strategic road link connecting A606 Nottingham Road to Melton 
Spinney Road forming part of the Melton Mowbray Distributor 
Road  as part of a wider agreed scheme;  
B:  Securing a route  that allows north /south connectivity as part of 
the Melton  Mowbray Distributor Road;  
C:  Measures to mitigate the impact of development on the existing 
transport network where adverse impacts are identified;  
D:  New and enhanced bus services connecting the development with 
the town centre and local  employment opportunities; and  
E:  Provision  of new walking and cycle links as part of the proposed 
development.  
F:  The Melton Park Greenway – a series of measures that improve 
accessibility and the attractiveness of walking and cycling 
connections through the Melton Country Park to the town centre   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             43  and other town attractors such as employment, education and 
retail.  
t2: Measures that seek to achieve a modal shift away from private car use 
including:  
A:  a frequent bus service from the site into Melton Mowbray Town 
Centre and local  employment opportunities with accessible bus 
stops which are less than 400 metres walk from all new residents;  
B:  Well-connected street patterns and walkable neighbourhoods 
providing high quality, safe and  direct walking, cycling and public 
transport routes includin g links using  the green infrastructure 
network;  
C:  The retention of existing and provision of new walking, cycling 
and road connections within Melton Mowbray; to town centre 
facilities; and to existing and new employment and education 
services; and  
D: Provision of a Travel Plan for new residents which includes 
measures to encourage the use of public transport, as part of a 
wider travel plan.  
 
Environment  
en1: Protection to the separate identities of Scalford and Thorpe Arnold in 
accordance with Policy EN 4 and respond to settlement fringe sensitivity 
in accordance with Policy EN1 to create a locally distinctive development 
and an improved town edge;  
en2: Protection and enhancement of historic assets and their settings;  
en3: Seek to retain and mitigate any  potential harm to notable areas 
identified in the biodiversity study, in accordance with Policy EN2, 
including:  
A:  Protection and enhancement to the existing green infrastructure, 
local wildlife sites, wildlife corridors and, where appropriate, 
provide n ew corridors to create a coherent network of biodiversity 
and green  infrastructure providing links from existing green 
infrastructure to the countryside, specifically Melton Country 
Park, Scalford Brook and Welby Brook and the disused railway 
line;  
B:  Establish a protection zone between Melton Country Park and any 
future development.  Development should respond to the local 
topography and utilise it to define the protection zone. This zone 
should also include the provision of an undeveloped area of land 
between part of the existing northern boundary of the park and 
the proposed distributor road.   
44          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          C:  Establish a protection zone between areas of high ecological 
importance identified around Scalford Brook in the biodiversity 
study and any future development;  
en4: Provide a network of new high quality of multi -functional green 
spaces in accordance with the Council’s open space standards set out in 
Policy EN7;  
en5. Provision, or facilitation, of  sports pitches in the immediate vicinity, 
and contribute towards indoor built leisure facilities within Melton 
Mowbray, in accordance with the Playing Pitch Strategy and Indoor 
Facilities Assessment (see Policy EN7) ;   
en6: A development that complies with building regulations for energy 
efficiency and carbon emissions;  
en7: Buildings and spaces which are adaptable to future climatic 
conditions including extremes of temperature, drought and flooding;  
en8: Development that provides appropriate SuDS and flood alleviation 
measures in  accordance with the Melton North assessm ent in the 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment. Areas of the M NSN that are at higher 
risk of flooding shall not be used for built development ; and 
en9: Protection and enhancement of water quality.  
Master planning and delivery  
A master plan, including a phasing and delivery plan, should be prepared 
and agreed in advance of, or as part of, submission of a planning 
application for the Melton North Sustainable Neighbourhood ( MNSN). In 
order to achieve a comprehensive approach, the master pl an should be 
prepared for the whole MNSN . It will set out in detail the structure and 
development concepts of the MNSN to include : 
m1: The amount, distribution and location of proposed land uses 
alongside a timetable for their delivery;  
m2: Proposed key transport links, within and outside of the development, 
including those between the main housing and local centre, town centre 
and nearby employment uses, services and facilities; 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             45   
m3: Important environmental featu res, including high grade agricultural 
land, biodiversity  sites and heritage assets that are to be protected;  
m4: Areas of green infrastructure and green space (including important 
strategic green gaps to be protected);  
m5: Areas of new landscaping: and  
m6: Design which performs well against BfL12  and seeks to develop the  
principles  of 'Active Design' , in accordance with Policy D1.  
The MNSN master plan will be prepared in consultation with key 
stakeholders. Planning permission will not normally be granted for the 
NSN until a comprehensive master plan has been completed to the 
satisfaction of the Local Plann ing Authority.  
The Local Planning Authority will monitor compliance of the delivery of 
the SSN in accordance with the agreed master plan and delivery 
timetable. Where slippage against the agreed delivery timetable in excess 
of 1 year is identified the Loca l Planning Authority will review the master 
plan and delivery timetable with partners to ensure sustainable 
development is delivered in accordance with the Policy.  
Subsequent development shall be in accordance with the master plan and 
agreed design codes.  
 
4.6 Other sites in Melton Mowbray  
4.6.1   Strategic housing land availability assessment (SHLAA)  submission s included 
other sites in Melton Mowbray for some 723 dwellings and potential for a 
further strategic development locat ion of in excess of 1,000 d wellings. To 
provide the flexibility in the plan to help ensure that the housing requirement is 
met, that a 5 year land supply is maintained and there is sufficient housing 
choice, the Local Plan proposes to allocate all these sites , but not the 
strategic development location . These sites, in conjunction with the  
Sustainable Neighbourhoods and sites already committed, will provide the 
combined allocation for Melton Mowbray of 3,980 capacity stated in the 
development strategy, with allowance for ‘headroom’.  These sites are likely to 
come forward during the lifetime of the plan and would be considered suitable 
in principle because they are located within the most sustainable settlement.  
These sites are addressed as individual allocations, alongside sites in r ural 
locations, in Policy C1 and its related appendix.   
46          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          4.7  Large Scale Development  Site Delivery  
4.7.1  A detailed trajectory for the delivery  of housing  has been produced alongside 
this Plan including  delivery rates at the proposed Sustainable 
Neighbourhoods, allocated sites and other potential sources of delivery.   
4.7.2  Both the MNSN and MSSN will be constructed over the duration of the plan  
period, an d beyond. Having regard to nationally accepted build rates for large 
scale development sites , it is considered realistic to assume an annual 
average completion rate of 100 dwellings per year, based on the assumption 
that two house builder outlets would ope rate concurrently on each site. The 
effect of this is shown in Table 7.  
 Table 7: Large Scale Development Site Delivery Summary  
  2016 -2021  2021 -2026  2026 -2031  2031 -2036  
1 South Melton Mowbray  35 525 575 570 
2 North Melton Mowbray  25 475 500 500 
4.8  Long T erm Growth  Strategy and Review T riggers  
4.8.1  Melton Borough Council is committed to delivering the required amount of 
housing and employment to meet the needs of its population and help sustain 
its economy. The Council monitors housing and employment land (and other 
development completions) to assess  progress to meeting outstanding 
requirements.  
4.8.2  The Council considers that the spatial  strategy and development allocations 
included  in this plan are  deliverable,  but it will continue to monitor progress 
against targets set out in the attached monit oring framework (Appendix 5 ).  
4.8.3  Where the Council identifies that the strategy is not delivering against the 
identified target, it will  implement and  explore ways of addressing any 
shortfall. Initially this would involve considering the reserve sites  identified in 
this plan, but if these sites prove not to be suitable or deliverable, a partial 
review of the plan may be required to consider further options and strategic 
approaches to delivery.  
4.8.4  Following the adoption of the Melton Local Plan, if  significant shortfalls in 
housing are identified along with sustained difficulties in providing a five year 
supply of housing, the Council will assess the suitability of other sites (not 
included in the plan) that could help to deliver growth. These include a wide 
range of options comprising sites already considered during the Plan making 
process and any new opportunities that subsequently emerge.   
4.8.5  Land to west of Melton Mowbray may have potential for longer -term growth , 
however this will depend up on the future use and availability of this land .  At 
the current time, the majority of the site is in active use and not available for  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             47  development. The majority of the land is owned and occupied by the Ministry 
of Defence Animal Centre (DAC). The DAC is a key part of Melton Mowbray 
heritage and ha s for many years made a significant contribution to Melton 
Mowbray’s economy.  
4.8.6 Melton Borough lies within the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market 
Area. A Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA)  
for the L& L area was published in January 2017, which sets out the long term 
objectively assessed need for new housing in each of the local authority areas 
up to 2036 . A Joint  Statement of Co -operation  between the L&L housing 
market area authorities was also agreed concurrently to commit the parties to 
continue to work collaboratively and has been updated by a version dated 
November 2017.   
4.8.7 This collaborative working is t aking place through the preparation of a joint 
Leicester and Leicestershire Strategic Growth Plan. The Plan, which is 
expected to be finalised in Summer  2018 , will include a vision for Leicester 
and Leicestershire to 2050 and will set out the scale and spa tial distribution of 
future development in the HMA . 
4.8.8 Should the Strategic Growth Plan set out a scale and spatial distribution of 
development  for this Council which is significantly different to that set out in 
the Local Plan, an early review or parti al review of the Local Plan will be 
brought forward to address this matter, unless there is sufficient flexibility 
already provided for within the plan. Should a review be required , it will be 
commenced within 6 months  of any adoption by the Council of the  Strategic 
Growth Plan and Memorandum of Understanding. As and when there is any 
update to the objectively assessed development needs across the HMA, a 
similar approach will be applied.   
 
4.8.9  In undertaking any review, the Council will work with the qu alifying bodies that  
have or are preparing any Neighbourhood Plans to ensure that any revisions 
to the local plan and neighbourhood plans align.  
Policy SS6 – Alternative Development Strategies and Local Plan 
Review  
 
Melton Borough Council is committed to meeting its requirements for 
housing, employment and other development and infrastructure. The 
Council will regularly monitor delivery of new development in the 
context of policies and targets within this plan. Where monitoring 
identifies significant and persistent shortfalls in the delivery of housing 
and employment, infrastructure or spatial distribution that deviates 
significantly from the plan strategy, or there are changes within the HMA 
to the objectively assesse d need for development or the spatial   
48          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                          distribution of growth across the HMA, the Council will consider a full or 
partial review of the Local Plan to identify alternative or additional 
development sites.  
Any plan review arising from the above should be carr ied out quickly. 
The Council will prioritise exploring potential alternative or long term 
options in terms of their suitability, availability, infrastructure and 
deliverability.  
The circumstances in which a review (defined as being publication of an 
invitation to make representations in accordance with Regulation 18 of 
The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning)(England) Regulations 
2012) will be carried out are specified as follows:  
 The adoption by the Council of the Strategic Growth Plan and the 
Memorandum of Understanding, which proposes a quantity or spatial 
approach that is significantly different to that set out in the Local 
Plan, unless there is sufficient flexibility already provided for within 
the Plan; or  
 5 years from adoption and every 5 years subsequent to the 
completion of the Review; or  
 changes occur within the HMA to the objectively assessed need for 
development or the spatial distribution of growth across the HMA 
including Melton; or  
 Where, when demonstrated by the Monitoring Framewor k (Appendix 
5), that:  
(i) the Housing Delivery Test indicates that delivery is below 
75% of the housing requirement as set out in the housing 
trajectory, over the previous three years  (subject to the 
transitional provisions in NPPF 2018) ; or 
(ii) The circumstances for review specified in Polices SS4 and 
SS5 above in respect of the masterplanning and delivery of 
the Melton Mowbray Sustainable Neighbourhoods, become 
applicable . 
The review will be commenced within 6 months of occurrence of one of 
the above circumstance s.  
Where there is a made Neighbourhood Plan, the review will carried out 
in consultation with the NP ‘qualifying bodies’ and, where applicable, 
solutions prepared via the NP revision process. If a NP is in preparation 
but not made, the Council will  inform  the qualifying body who may 
consult with their community to identify alternative proposals for 
consideration.  
_________________________________________________________________________   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                   Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy             49  KEY EVIDENCE  
2011 Census  
Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment, GL 
Hearn, 2017  
Towards a Housing Requirement for Melton Borough, GL Hearn, 2017  
Addendum to Towards a Housing Requirement for Melton Borough, GL He arn, 2017  
The Melton Employment Land Study, BE Group, 2015  
Five Year Housi ng Land Supply and Housing Trajectory Update, MBC. 20 -12-17 
Annex to 5YHLS document: Melton  Long Term Trajectory for Allocated Sites, MBC, 20 -12-
17 
Five Year Housing Land Supply and Stepped Trajectory Approach, MBC, 21 -06-18  
The Melton Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment, Melton Borough Council, 2015  
The Melton Settlement Roles and Relationships Study, Melton Borough Council, 2015  
The Melton Alternative Large Scale Development Sites Assessment Report, Melton Borough 
Council, 2015  
Melton Local Plan Sustainable Neighbourhoods Topic Paper, MBC, 2016  
The Melton Mowbray Transport Study  
Land South of Kirby Lane ,Melton Mowbray, Heritage Settings Technical Note, Cotswold 
Archaeology, 2017  
   
50          Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy                                  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This page is intentionally blank  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        51  Chapter 5: Melton’s Communities – Strong, 
Healthy and Vibrant  
5.1 Strong, healthy and vibrant communities are crucial to the sustainability of 
places, and contribute greatly to quality of life and wellbeing.  
5.2  The Local Pla n aims to support and strengthen local communities throughout 
Melton Borough, focusing on people’s needs, including accessible services, 
housing, transport and jobs.  
5.3  Housing  
5.3.1  Housing of sufficient quantity, quality, affordability and type is critical for 
successful communities throughout the Borough.   
5.3.2  Melton has many specific housing needs that are to be catered for through the 
Local Plan. These are:  
 an ageing population  
 vulnerable groups such as homeless people  
 households with additional access requirements  
 households on low and uncertain incomes or whose needs cannot be 
met by the market  
 people living in houses occupied by more than one household  
 people in nee d of extra care  
 Gypsies and Travellers  
5.4  Housing Allocations  
5.4.1  In accordance with Policy SS2 – Development Strategy  the Local Plan 
allocate s a range of sites for development across the Borough.  
5.4.2  To identify the preferred housing sites, the Council carried out a systematic 
assessment of a wide range of potential housing development options which 
were mostly identified through the Council’s  Strategic Hou sing Land 
Availability Assessment (SHLAA),  consultation responses received during 
local plan preparation as well as Council owned land.   Each of the sites  
received through any of the sources listed above that were capable of 
accommodating 10 or more dwelli ngs and were within or adjacent to a Service 
Centre or Rural Hub (identified in Policy SS2) were  assessed separately 
against a number of factors, and the resultant site selections are included in 
Policies C1( A) and C1( B) and in Appendix 1, alongside individual ‘site -
specific’ policies.  
5.4.3  The assessments have provided the site options available to meet the 
housing requirement for each location. The assessment ranks sites according 
to their suitability  and deliverability, with availability and poss ible alternatives  
52         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 also being taken into account. The residual requirement for each Service 
Centre or Rural Hub is set out in Table 4 of Chapter 4, and the most suitable, 
sustainable and achievable sites identified to meet these residual 
requirements as clo sely as possible. Sites completed and under construction 
at end of April 2017 and small sites with planning permission but not yet 
started were accounted for in calculating the residual requirements for each 
settlement, whereas large sites with planning pe rmission (or a resolution to 
grant) do contribute to meeting the residual requirement, and are usually the 
highest ranked option in each settlement.  
5.4.4  Whilst the housing requirement has been adjusted to include sites completed 
and under construction a nd small sites, it does not include large sites which 
already have planning permission (or a resolution to grant), as these are 
included in the settlement assessments, usually as the highest ranked option 
to meet allocations. Small sites with planning perm ission but not yet started in 
each village have  been discounted from the village requirement in the same 
way as sites completed and those under construction.  
5.4.5 The Council needs to demonstrate that the plan will deliver a rolling five year 
housing land supply  and that this supply is deliverable and realistic. In order to 
demonstrate a 5 year land supply, the sites have been identified taking into 
account their deliverability.  
5.4.6  Appendix 1 comprises a ‘settlement -by-settlement’ approach, including 
bespoke policies for each settlement to reflect its circumstances and the 
individual requirements. For ex ample, policies may be required in some 
locations that allow sites to progress only once infrastructure issues have 
been resolved, and sites may have critical design and layout requirements 
that need to be addressed for them to be regarded as ‘suitable’.  
5.4.7 Whilst the Local Plan as a whole includes a methodology for monitoring and 
trigger points for review  (Appendix 5) , it is considered good practice to build in 
flexibility within the plan itself to allow for a more robust approach and 
‘insulate’ the nee d for review arising from relatively minor shortcomings on 
delivery, e.g. if an allocated site should become unavailable, or problems of a 
detailed nature are identified at application stage resulting in delay or non -
delivery , or if sites cannot deliver as  many new homes as envisaged . The 
Plan therefore includes ‘reserve sites’ in Melton Mowbray and Service Centre 
settlements where there are further suitable, available, and deliverable / 
developable sites to offer this flexibility and additional resilience.  These are 
identified separately in Appendix 1 and are the subject of Policy  C1(B), which 
also outlines the limited circumstances in which they could come forward.  ’A 
limited amount of’ flexibility is provided within Policy C1(A) through the  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        53  allocations (a  surplus of 756 homes2) with further flexibility provided by the 
reserve sites (a surplus of 562 homes), and the windfall allowance.  
Policy C1 (A) – Housing Allocations  
New housing will be delivered within the Local Plan on the following 
sites:  
Melton Mowb ray 
 Site 
Reference  Address  Capacity  
MNSN  Melton North Sustainable Neighbourhood  1500  
SMSN  South Melton Sustainable Neighbourhood  1700  
MEL1  Land at Nottingham Road  85 
MEL2  Site of King Edward VII school, Burton Road  120 
MEL3  Hilltop Farm, Nottingham Road  75  
MEL4  Top End, Cattle Market  26 
MEL5  Silverdale, Scalford Road  16 
MEL6  Land fronting Dieppe Way, Scalford Road  37 
MEL7  Land at Thorpe Road  16 
MEL8  Beeby’s Yard, Burton Street  11 
MEL9  Wycliffe House, Snow Hill  20 
MEL10  Land adjacent to St Bartholomew's Way and Horseguards 
Way 70 
MELTON MOWBRAY TOTAL  
 3676  
 
Service Centres  
Site 
Reference  Address  Capacity  
ASF1  Land east of Station Lane & south of Klondyke Way  100 
ASF2  Fields south of Bypass and north of Regency Road  55  
ASF3  Land off Hoby Road, Asfordby  70 
Asfordby Total  225 
BOT1  Land rear of Daybell’s Farm & 18 Grantham Road  41 
BOT2  Land off Grantham Road  65 
BOT3  Rectory Farm  163 
BOT4  Land at bottom of Beacon Hill, Normanton Lane  88  
Bottesford Total  357 
CROX1  Land west of Saltby Road east of Highfields Farm  39  
CROX2  Land east of Saltby Road & south of A607  10 
CROX3  Land south of Main Street (A607) and west of the Nook  10 
Croxton Kerrial Total   59 
HAR1  Allotment Gardens, Boyers Orchard  15 
HAR2  Former Cheese Producing Dairy, Langar Lane  10 
HAR3  Former Millway Foods, Colston Lane  53 
HAR4  Land at Colston Lane  50 
Harby Total  128 
HOS1  Land off Canal Lane  41 
                                                           
2The difference between the housing requirement (6125) and all the sources in Table 3 except for the windfall 
allowance.   
54         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 HOS2  Land west of Harby Lane  35 
Hose Total  76 
LONG1  Land at Melton Road  10 
LONG2  Corner of Broughton Lane & Hickling Lane  35 
LONG3  Birleys Garage, Waltham Lane   45 
Long Clawson Total  90 
OLD1  North Lodge Farm, Longcliffe Hill  28 
Old Dalby Total  28 
SCAL1  Land south of Melton Road  23 
Scalford Total  23 
SOM1  Football field at Somerby  27 
SOM2  Land off High Street  42 
Somerby Total  69 
STAT1  Point Farm, Main Street  65 
STAT2  Land adjacent Lavesley House 14 City Road Stathern  10 
Stathern Total  75 
WAL1  Land rear of 48 High Street  26 
WAL2  Land east of Melton Road  105 
Waltham on the Wolds Total  131 
WYM1  Glebe Road  12 
WYM2  Land off Butt Lane  21 
WYM3  Land known as Brickyard Lane  22 
Wymondham Total  55 
SERVICE CENTRES TOTAL  
 1316  
 
Rural Hubs  
Site 
Reference  Address  Capacity  
ABK1  Land off A606  10 
 Ab Kettleby Total  10 
ASFH1  Land off Houghton Close & Glebe Road  40 
ASFH2  Land of Stanton Road  47 
 Asfordby Hill Total  87 
EAST1  Land east of Green Lane  9 
EAST2  Land west of Green Lane  12 
 Easthorpe Total  21 
FRIS1  Land off Great Lane  48 
FRIS2  Water Lane  22 
FRIS3  Land south of village  48 
 Frisby on the Wreake Total  137 
GADD1  Holme Farm  14 
GADD2  Land off Pasture Lane  11 
GADD3  Land north of Pasture Lane  11 
 Gaddesby Total  36 
GREA1  Land off Burdett Close  37 
 Great Dalby Total  37 
THOR1  Land to the South East of Thorpe Road, (A607)  13 
THOR2  Land to the west of Thorpe Road  11 
Thorpe Arnold Total  24 
RURAL HUBS TOTAL  
 333  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        55  Housing proposals will be supported where they provide:  
1. A mix of dwellings in accordance with Policy C2;  
2. Affordable housing in accordance with Policy C4;  
3. The necessary infrastructure required to support development in 
accordance with Policy IN1; and  
4. High quality design in accordance with Policy D1.  
5. The requirements as set out in Appendix 1 or relevant 
Neighbourhood Plan.  
The development of sites allocated in Neighbourhood Plans that have 
reached post examination status prior to the adoption of this local plan 
and which are not identified in Policy C1(A) or C1(B) may also be 
permitted, subject to the conditions and criteria  above.  
Policy C1 (B): Reserve Sites  
Proposals for new housing development on the reserve sites listed in 
this policy and identified on the Policies Map will be permitted where:  
a) It helps to meet the identified housing requirement and 
development needs of t he settlement; and  
b) It will secure the sustainability of the settlement; and  
c) It is  demonstrated that a) and b) above cannot be achieved 
through allocation under Policy C1(A) and other permissions 
granted . 
Where proposals on reserve sites are submitted, assessment will be 
carried out taking into account the following:  
i. the degree to which the allocated requirement is unmet  within a 
settlement ; 
ii. the likelihood that the allocated sites and outstanding permissions 
in the relevant settlement category (Me lton Mowbray or Service 
Centre) will be delivered;  and 
iii. evidence of the extent of community support through allocation of 
reserve sites in Neighbourhood Plans and/or bespoke approaches 
to measuring support.  
 
Reserve Sites  
Site Reference  Address  Capacity  
MEL11  Snow Hill, Melton Mowbray  240 
HAR5  Land south of Colston Lane, Harby  13 
LONG 4 Canal Farm, Long Clawson  40 
OLD2  Debdale Hill Field, Old Dalby  23 
SOM3  Land off Burrough Road, Somerby  33  
56         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 STAT3  Land west of Blacksmiths End, Stathern  45 
WAL3  Land east of Melton Road, Waltham on the Wolds  168 
Total    562 
 
5.5  Housing  Mix 
5.5.1  Melton has a very distinctive mix of housing, with few smaller ‘entry level’ 
properties such as terraced houses or flats and a large proportion (40%) of 
larger, detached houses.  
5.5.2  A limited offer in terms of housing mix has implications for affordability and 
demand for affordable housing.  
5.5.3  Furthermore, Melton has an ageing population, (over the 2011 -36 period the 
number of people aged 65 and o ver is projected to increase by 92% with a 
higher (192%) increase in the number of people aged 85 and over), with many 
households residing in large and potentially unsuitable properties, increasing 
the need to provide smaller homes suitable for downsizing households. This 
in turn would release existing family housing stock back into the market.  
5.5.4  The Local Plan aims to ensure that the new housing provided in the Borough 
over the next 20 years best meets the changing needs of the population. An 
appropr iate mix of housing is necessary to secure mixed and balanced 
communities where people’s needs and aspirations for new housing are met. 
The policy seeks to provide greater choice in the housing market.  
5.5.5  To offer a mix of housing suitable for a wide v ariety of housing needs and to 
balance the current stock, the Melton Local Plan will encourage a mix of 
property types on developments of 10 or more dwellings.  
5.5.6  Melton Borough Council’s Housing Needs Study  which examines the housing 
needs of the Borough at a detailed ward level shows that the greatest need 
for both market and affordable housing is for two and three bedroom houses 
and bungalows. The low proportion  of smaller homes currently available in the 
Borough makes it difficult for older people who want to downsize, those on 
low incomes and benefits, and younger people who want to find their first 
home. There is still a need for some medium and larger family homes, 
although we expect to see less of these types of homes than in the past. We 
also need to ensure that the design of new houses addresses the different 
needs of people in our community, including older people and those with 
disabilities.  
5.5.7  The 2016 Melton Borough Council Housing Needs Study (HNS),  rather than 
the more recent 2017 Housing and Economic Development Needs 
Assessment (HEDNA),  is used as the primary evidence for the optimum  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        57  housing mix (see Table 8 ) because it is based on the demographic change 
likely to be associated with the delivery of 245 dwellings per an num. 
Affordable housing is split between intermediate housing and social/affordable 
rented, to reflect the difference in the housing mix requirements of each. The 
housing mix table will be applied having regard to the particular characteristics 
of a scheme  when providing advice on planning applications or where 
planning permission is sought. Further guidance on how housing mix will be 
dealt with through development management will be set out in an affordable 
housing and housing mix supplementary planning do cument. Until that 
document is completed, the Housing Needs Study (MBC, 2016)  and the 
HEDNA (2017) will be used as the evidence to inform the determination of 
planning applications.  
Table 8: Optimum Housing mix requirements for market and affordable 
housing  
 1-bed*  2-bed 3-bed 4+ bed  
Market  5% 30% 45-50% 15-20% 
Intermediate  15-20% 50-55% 25-30% 0-5% 
Social/affordable 
rented  30-35%*  35-40% 20-25% 5-10% 
All dwellings  15% 30-35% 35-40% 15% 
*: The 1 bed need for affordable housing is an anomaly and over inflated.  This is because the 1 bed need  figure 
includes elderly people, and as they are not affected by current welfare benefit changes, on some occasions, may be 
allocated a 2 bedroom property.  
Policy C2 – Housing Mix  
We will seek to manage the delivery of a mix of house types, tenures  
and sizes to balance the current housing offer, having regard to market 
conditions, housing needs and economic viability, taking account of  
site specific circumstances and the housing m ix information set out in 
Table 8 or in any future update of the housing mix evidence.  
Residential proposals for developments for 10 or more dwellings should 
seek to provide an appropriate mix and size of dwellings to meet the 
needs of current and future households in the Borough including extra 
care and accessible housing, having regard to the latest evidence of 
housing need.  Residential developments which include bungalows will 
be particularly supported.  
Proposals for retirement homes, sheltered homes an d care homes will 
be supported and encouraged to meet the technical standard for access 
of Building Regulations 2015 Part M4(2) or any subsequent revisions.   
58         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 Proposals for wheelchair accessible dwellings, where the Council is 
responsible for allocating or nominating residents, will be encouraged to 
meet the technical standard for access of Building Regulations 2015 
Part M4(3), or any subsequent revisions.  
5.6  Housing Standards Review  
5.6.1  New homes need to be high quality, accessible and sustainable. To achieve 
this, the Government has created the new national technical standards 
comprising new additional optional Building Regulations on water and access, 
and a new national space standard. This system complements the existing set 
of Building Regulations, which are mandatory. The optional regulations and 
space standard can only be applied where there is a local plan policy based 
on evidenced local need and where the viability of development i s not 
compromised.  
5.6.2  The demographic profile for Melton indicates a future need for housing for 
older and disabled people (including wheelchair user dwellings).  The Housing 
and Economic Development Needs Assessment 2017 (HEDNA)  estimates 
that the population change for people with mobility problems will be 100% 
over the plan period.  
5.6.3  There are two optional higher technical standards for access in Part M o f the 
Building Regulations 2015.  
 M4(2) is the standard applicable to dwellings  that  provide  a  higher  
level  of  accessibility  that  is beneficial  to  a  wide  range  of  people  
who  occupy  or  visit  the  dwelling,  and  provides  particular  benefit  
to  older  and  disabled  people,  including  some wheelchair users.  
  M4(3) is the standard  applicable to dwellings  that  are  suitable,  or  
potentially  suitable  through adaptation to be occupied by wheelchair 
users.  
5.7  National Space Stand ard 
5.7.1  The National Space Standard deals with internal space within new dwellings 
and is suitable for application across all tenures. It sets out requirements for 
the gross internal (floor) area of new dwellings at a defined level of 
occupancy, as well  as floor areas and dimensions for key parts of the home, 
notably bedrooms, storage and floor to ceiling height.  
5.7.2  There is a need for smaller houses in Melton to meet the first time buyer and 
downsizing market and as such, this standard will ensure that new smaller 
properties have sufficient circulation, storage and living space. This should 
help make the offer of smaller dwellings more attractive to ‘empty nesters’ and 
effectively release more family sized dwellings onto the market.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        59  5.7.3  Unlike o ther aspects of the Housing Standards Review, the space standard 
has not been incorporated into the Building Regulations. The standard is set 
out in Table 9.  
5.7.4  Melton Borough Council’s Housing Needs Study  recommends that providing 
the right mix of housing may provide more flexibility than adopting the space 
standard. For example, a three -bedroom home which does not meet the 
standard may be preferable to a two bedroom one which does. However, the 
Council has aspirations to deliver as many homes which meet the standard as 
possible, and as such a specific policy is included in the Local Plan. House 
builders are also encouraged to address the lack of transparency in sales 
literature regarding whether bedrooms are designed for one or two -person 
occupancy.  
Table 9: Minimum Gross Internal Floor Areas and Storage (m²)  
Number of 
bedrooms 
(b) Number of 
bedspaces 
(persons)  1 storey 
dwelling  2 storey 
dwellings  3 storey 
dwellings  Built in 
storage  
1b 1p 39 (37)*  - - 1.0 
2p 50 58 - 1.5 
2b 3p 61 70 - 2.0 
4p 70 79 - 
3b 4p 74 84 90 2.5 
5p 86 93 99 
6p 95 102 108 
4b 5p 90 97 103 3.0 
6p 99 106 112 
7p 108 115 121 
8p 117 124 130 
5b 6p 103 110 116 3.5 
7p 112 119 125 
8p 121 128 134 
6b 7p 116 123 129 4.0 
8p 125 132 138 
           *1. Built -in storage areas are included within the overall GIAs and include an allowance of 0.5m ² for fixed 
services or equipment such as a hot water cylinder, boiler or heat exchanger.  
 2. GIAs for one storey dwellings included enough space for one bathroom and one additional WC (or 
shower room) in dwellings with 5 or more bedspaces. GIAs for two and three storey dwellings include 
enough space for one bathroom and one additional WC (or shower room). Additional sanitary facilities 
may be included without increasing the GIA provided all aspects of the space standard have been met.  
 3. Where a 1b1p has a shower room instead of a bathroom, the floor area may be reduced from 39m ² to 
37m², as shown bracketed.   
4. Furnished layouts are not required to demonstrate compliance.  
Policy C3 – National Space Standard and Smaller Dwellings  
Residential developments for open market housing will be 
particularly supported where the national space standard is applied 
to dwellings with up to and including 3 bedrooms.  For affordable  
60         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 housing, schemes using the Housing Quality Indicators standards 
will be supported.  
5.8  Affordable Housing  
5.8.1  Affordable housing is housing that meets the needs of those whose needs are 
not met by the market. It is defined by the National Planning Policy 
Framework and the Housing and Planning Act 2016 and any subseq uent 
amendments.  
5.8.2  Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and private registered 
providers (as defined in section 80 of the Housing and Regeneration Act 
2008), for which guideline target rents are determined through the national 
rent regime. It may also be owned  by other persons and provided under 
equivalent rental arrangements to the above, as agreed with the local 
authority or with the Homes England .  
5.8.3  Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or private registered 
providers of social housing to households who are eligible for social rented 
housing. Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a rent of no 
more than 80% of the local market rent (including service charges, where 
applicable).  
5.8.4  Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided at a cost above 
social rent, but below market levels subject to the criteria in the Affordable 
Housing definition above. These can include shared equity (shared ownership 
and equity loans), other low cost homes for sale and intermedi ate rent, but not 
affordable rented housing.  
5.8.5  Melton’s housing situation reflects the national situation, with house prices 
outstretching average earnings, meaning many cannot afford to buy or even 
rent a home. The relationship between the cost of h omes and wages is called 
affordability. Affordability is an issue for the Borough; to buy one of the 
cheapest 25% of homes sold in the Borough, residents need to earn more 
than the national average wage. The availability of smaller or ‘average’ priced 
home s is limited in comparison to the number of larger and more expensive 
homes in the Borough. This highlights the problem that many households 
within the Borough face with not being able to afford a home.  
5.8.6  Affordable housing is mainly provided by the following sources:  
1. Directly by local authorities and private registered providers, often relying 
on external grant investment.  
2. By developers on site.  
3. Rural exception sites, also reliant on external grant investment.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        61  4. Financial contributions.  This is where affordable housing provision is not 
met on site, but instead a lump sum or commuted sum is provided to the 
Local Authority who takes the lead on converting it to new affordable 
homes in the Borough.  
 
5.8.7  The types of affordable housing ra nge from rented housing, usually rented 
from a private registered provider (PRP) or local authority, part -ownership part 
rental properties through a PRP, to a low cost home ownership property, 
usually bought directly from house builders.  
 
5.8.8  The Local Plan aims to address the needs of these people by seeking an 
element of affordable housing as part of new private housing development, 
alongside supporting appropriate grant or other funded PRP and Council led 
affordable housing schemes, which ar e expected to continue throughout the 
plan period.  
 
5.8.9  The Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic Development Needs 
Assessment (HEDNA), Jan 2017,  indicates that some 1,750 affordable 
houses are required to satisfy need over the plan period (70pa), but this could 
increase or decrease over the lifetime of the plan in response to changing 
economic circumstances. The HEDNA also indicates that around 20 % of 
affordable housing provision should be of an intermediate tenure (e.g. shared 
ownership) and the remainder being social or affordable rented housing, 
which will be adjusted on a site by site basis to take account of other local 
evidence. Further guida nce on the mix and type of affordable housing will be 
set out in affordable housing and housing mix supplementary planning 
document (see paragraph 5.8.14 below).   
 
5.8.10  In order to meet the identified need, the Local Plan seeks to maximise the 
amount of  affordable housing possible on qualifying private housing sites 
without undermining overall scheme viability. Smaller sites do not ‘qualify’ for 
affordable housing under National Planning Guidance so provision is sought 
from sites of 11 or more units and/ or where the floorspace exceeds 1000 m2.  
 
5.8.11 The Council’s Local Plan and CIL Viability Study  indicated that it is not viable 
to meet all the identified afforda ble housing needs for the Borough, and that 
there is significant variation in the percentage of affordable housing that would 
be viable in different parts of the Borough. The ‘value areas’ to which different 
required minimum percentages of affordable housi ng would apply are 
identified in Policy C4 and in Figure 6.   
 
5.8.12 Based on an analysis of where new housing is planned and the minimum 
percentage of affordable housing that the viability study indicates can be 
sought in different parts of the Borough, t he local plan includes a target of   
62         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 Figure 6: Affordable Housing Value Areas  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        63  1300 net additional affordable homes to be provided . In the first five years after 
adoption, an uplift  in new affordable homes provision is expected, arising from 
delivery through Section 106 agreements on sites with planning permission, small 
scale Registered Provider schemes and increasing newbuild by the Council. 
Thereafter, contributions from S106 site s, RPs and the Council are expected to be 
steady and sustained, underpinned by delivery at the Sustainable Neighbourhoods. 
The planned delivery of these is indicated in the affordable housing trajectory in 
Figure 7 below.  
Figure 7:  Affordable Housing Traje ctory  
 
Notes  
1. The planned delivery trajectory is the annual amount of new affordable housing that is expected to come 
forward from the sources of supply referred to in paragraph 5.8.12 above.  
2. The affordable housing requirement is the proportion of the rem aining overall housing requirement that 
will be delivered as affordable housing.  
 
5.8.13 On  individual planning applications, regard will be given to the housing need 
at that relevant time, along with the projected level and mix of affordable 
housing needed. A viability assessment may be requested in the exceptional 
circumstance where an applica nt considers the level of affordable housing 
provision being sought to be unviable.  
 
5.8.14 An affordable housing and housing mix supplementary planning document 
(SPD) will set out further guidance about delivery in this area of housing. It will 
include t he following items:  
 Mix, type, design and layout of affordable housing  
 Off site provision  
 Commuted sums  
 Financial contributions  
 Affordable housing in perpetuity  
 Allocation of affordable housing  
 Local connection  
 
64         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
  Starter Homes  
 
5.8.15 With large scale, ph ased developments, it might be necessary to consider a 
varied approach to affordable housing delivery and/or contributions. For 
example, to ensure the delivery of the scheme and its associated 
infrastructure, the affordable housing contribution could be de ferred until later 
phases of the development, or a reduced contribution rate could be agreed on 
the basis of securing other infrastructure provision in place of the total 
affordable housing requirement for the scheme. These approaches could be 
assessed via  scheme -based viability assessments.  
 
Policy C4 – Affordable Housing Provision  
Melton Borough Council will seek to manage the delivery of around 
1300 new affordable homes between 2011 and 2036 in order to balance 
the housing stock and meet the community’s housing needs.  
It will do this by applying a target for affordable homes within housing 
developments on all sites of 11 or more units and/or where the floor 
space exceeds 1000 m2, having regard to market conditions, housing 
needs, housing mix (in regard t o tenure, type and size), economic 
viability and other infrastructure requirements based on the following 
percentages for different value areas:  
Location  Minimum percentage 
of affordable housing  
Value Area 1  40% 
Value Area 2  32% 
Value Area 3  25% 
Value  Area 4  15% 
Melton North  Sustainable Neighbourhood  15% 
Melton South  Sustainable Neighbourhood  15% 
Melton Mowbray  5% -10% 
The Council will also manage the delivery of schemes through private 
registered providers and our own delivery programme of affordable 
hous ing over the whole plan period.  
5.9  Rural Exception Sites  
5.9.1  Another means of delivering affordable housing is through the ‘exception site’ 
policy. This is where land adjacent to existing settlements is used to provide 
for an identified  affordable housing need (established through the Melton 
Borough Council Housing Need Study, Rural Housing Need Surveys and 
Neighbourhood Plan surveys) to meet the needs of local people, or those with 
a ‘local’ connection. This land would not normally be p romoted for residential 
development and should be held in perpetuity for affordable needs (through a 
legal agreement making certain stipulations e.g. rent to be set at a social rent  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        65  to ensure the housing remains affordable forever) . This type of affordable 
housing provision has proved successful in Melton Borough with rural 
exception sites in Wymondham, Waltham on the Wolds, Somerby, Old Dalby 
and Long Clawson. Other villages will be subject to a programme of Rural 
Housing Need Survey s in order to identify whether there is a requirement for 
new affordable homes.  
5.9.2  This type of provision is reliant on external grant investment, but National 
Planning Policy now allows for the provision of market housing on such 
exception sites, prov ided that it cross -subsidies the affordable housing. Cross 
subsidy with market housing will be considered on specific planning 
applications rather than being included in policy.   For affordable housing 
through rural exception sites, the population must be 3,000 or less , otherwise 
the area would not be considered rural.   This is the Government accepted 
size of population to determine a rural area.   The exception sites should 
reflect the character and scale of the settlement.  The exception relates to 
developm ent outside the criteria outlined in Policy SS3 , limiting development 
in some settlements. It is not an exception to key constraints, such as high 
flood risk , etc. 
Policy C5: Affordable Housing through Rural Exception Sites  
To enable the provision of affordable housing in the rural areas, the 
Council will consider proposals for 100% affordable housing on sites 
which would not normally be acceptable for general market housing, 
where there is a demonstrable need from people wit h a local connection. 
This ‘Rural Exceptions’ housing shall remain ‘affordable’ in perpetuity to 
continue to meet local need.  Starter Homes will not be provided on rural 
exception sites as they cannot be held in perpetuity in the same way as 
affordable ho using.  Rural Exceptions schemes will be considered in 
settlements with a population of fewer than 3,000 where a demonstrable 
need exists. Provision may also be made where groups of villages can 
demonstrate a combined local need. In some circumstances (mos t likely 
due to viability) , it will be acceptable to provide an element of market 
housing on rural exception sites , to cross subsidi se the affordable 
housing.   
5.10  Provision for Gypsies and Travellers  
5.10.1 Definitions for Gypsies and Travellers vary across pieces of legislation. The 
definition used for planning purposes is set out in Planning Policy for Traveller 
Sites (PPTS) (August 2015): “Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their 
race or orig in, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or 
their family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have  
66         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of 
travelling showpeople or circus people tra velling together as such”.  
5.10.2 Gypsies and Travellers mainly live on pitches. Pitches are permanent 
authorised sites either provided by Local Authorities or owned by Gypsies and 
Travellers themselves.  Pitches can be large enough to accommodate a 
single  static caravan and a touring caravan. They often also have a day room, 
with water and electric supply, to provide utility washing and bathroom 
facilities.  Pitches in rural areas can often be a lot larger and may 
accommodate many caravans.  
5.10.3 Transit  sites are authorised sites which are used for short stays by Gypsies 
and Travellers. The sites are provided on a permanent basis and have basic 
amenities and services, which include water supply, shared toilets, washing 
facilities/utility room, and waste disposal.  
5.10.4  National Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (2015) requires all Local 
Authorities to set targets for new pitches and plots. Local authorities must also 
identify and maintain a five -year supply of sites in order to meet their targets 
for both new permanent residential and transit pitches.   
5.10.5 As evidenced in the Leicester and Leicestershire Gypsy, Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople  Accommodation Assessment  (GTAA) 2017 , Melton’s 
permanent pitch requirement from April 2016 to March 2021 is 2 permanent 
residential pitches, and between April 2021 and March 2026 it is 1 permanent 
residential pitch. Work has started on 3 permanent pitches  and 2 transit 
pitches, granted planning permission (2015) as an extension to the existing 
Valley View site on Dalby Road, Melton Mowbray.  Work has also started on a  
further 2 permanent pitches, granted planning permission (2016) at Sandy 
Lane, Melton Mow bray. These permanent pitches meet all currently identified 
need, and there is currently no further requirement for any pitches from April 
2026 to 2036. Further permanent pitches will only be sought if subsequent 
GTAA reviews establish a need.  
5.10.6 The G TAA 2017 has identified a current need for public transit pitch provision 
of 36 caravan spaces (or managed equivalent) spread over 2 -3 sites in 
Leicestershire. It suggests that an initial review should be completed of 
potential sites that are deliverable i n the short -term, and that new provision 
should be prioritised where needs are greatest, in the North West of the 
County and the City, and that further provision should reflect the location of 
unauthorised encampments, the strategic transport network, and overall 
geography of the county. It indicates that consideration should be given as to 
whether new sites and/or managed approaches to dealing with unauthorised 
encampments, such as tolerated stopping or Negotiated Stopping 
Agreements, offer the best option  to accommodating transit needs.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        67  5.10.7  The GTAA also indicates that unauthorised encampments should be reviewed 
once there is sufficient evidence available, as changes to national policy in 
2015 could result in more households travelling, and the consequ ent need for 
transport sites. The Council therefore commits to undertaking the appropriate 
evidence base review and working with the other Leicestershire Local 
Authorities to establish, if the review shows a requirement, the most 
appropriate and deliverabl e location for additional transit provision.  
5.10.8  A regular review of Gypsy; Traveller and Travelling Show people permanent 
pitch and plot requirements (including transit pitch requirements) will be 
undertaken.  
5.10.9  The GTAA 2017 has not identified nee d for any plots for showpeople for 
Melton between April 2016 and 2036.   
Policy C6 – Gypsies and Travellers  
The most recent Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment will 
be used to identify pitch and plot requirements and where a need is 
found, the Council will take steps to deliver the necessary sites in a 
timely manner in order to support the Gypsy and Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople community.  The GTAA will also be used as a 
basis for determining planning applications, together with the c riteria 
within the most  up to date national Planning Policy for Traveller Sites.   
We will support sites for Gypsies and Travellers that:  
1. facilitate the traditional and nomadic life of travellers while 
respecting the interests of the settled community; an d  
2. are appropriate in scale, well designed, and provide suitable 
landscaping and boundary treatments; and  
3. provide an acceptable living environment for occupiers and are free 
from flooding, pollution, hazards or other adverse impacts on 
standards of living;  and 
4. are well -related to local infrastructure and services of a nearby town 
or village, including safe and convenient access to the road network; 
and  
5. promote peaceful and integrated co -existence between the site and 
the local community.  
 
5.11  Sustainable  Communities  
  
5.11.1 With the exception of the town of Melton Mowbray, Melton Borough is largely 
rural in nature. It  is neither possible nor desirable for all new development  to 
take place  in the town and it is important that appropriate development is  
68         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 supported in  the villages  in order to maintain their vitality, to  meet  local need 
and to provide housing choice. This is outlined earlier in Chapter 4.  
Accessing Services in Melton Borough  
5.11.2  Every year, Melton Borough Council conducts an Audit of Village Services.  
The services, as considered by the audit, are listed below;  
 education facilities (nursery and primary school and secondary school)  
 local shops, post offices and petrol stations/garages  
 health care facilities (general medical practice, dentist and pharmacy)  
 community facilities (village hall, public house, library, sport and leisure 
groups and places of worship)  
 transport facilities (a regul ar 6 day a week bus service)  
 opportunities of employment in other businesses  
 allotments  
 
5.11. 3  Communit y facilitie s are not specifically defined , althoug h any  facility  or service  
which  enjoys  wide support  could  be regarded  as belonging  to the 
"community". The items listed above offer an illustration of the facilities which  
would be considered as community facilities. The list is  not intended to be  
exhaustive.  
 
Development  which  will improve  community  assets  
5.11.4 An  increase  in community  facilities  can contribute  towards  the continuing  
viability of villages . It is important , therefore , that proposal s which would resul t 
in eithe r an increase in, or improvements  to, community  assets  and facilities  
are supported.  Gains  can also be made by the  replacement of existing 
community assets.  For example, replacing an old or  outdated village hall with 
a modern facility could allow the old site to be redeveloped to create a  new 
village asset such  as a playing field, or  for affordable housing.  
 
Development  which  will result in loss of community  assets  
5.11.5 It  is recognised  that there  needs  to be scope  for change  of use where  there  is 
no longer  a demand  for the service  or facility  and it is no longer  viable.    
Proposals  for a chang e of use or for developmen t which will resul t in the loss of 
communit y facilitie s and/or services  must  be fully justified.  They  must  
demonstrate  that all options  for continued  use have  been  fully explored  and 
that retention  would  not be economically  viable.  They  must show that there is 
no reasonable prospect of the established use being retained or resurrected , 
and that there is little evidenc e of publi c suppor t for the retentio n of the facilit y. 
 
5.11.6 In the case of public house s and shops , it must be demonstrate d that all 
reasonable efforts have  been  made  to sell or let (without  restrictive  covenant)  
the property  as a public house or shop and that it is not economically viable.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        69   
5.11.7 Where  permission  is given  for a change  of use of a community  facility  and/or   
land, preference will be given to the premises remaining in some form of 
community or employment  use, provided  that the proposal  adheres  to other  
policies  in the Local Plan.  
 
5.12  Community Right to Buy  
 
5.12.1 The Government  has introduced  legislative  changes,  as part of the Localism  
Act, which  allows  community  groups  to nominate "assets of  community  
value". This  gives communitie s an opportunit y to bid to acquir e and operat e 
those asset s shoul d they become available.  This national  initiative  
complement s the objectives  of Policy  C7. Howeve r, the proces s of nominating 
assets and bidding for the right to acquire them would form an important part 
of the assessment  of a proposal  through  Policy C7.  
 
Policy C7 – Rural Services  
Support will be given to proposals and activities  that protect, retain or 
enhance existing community  services and facilities * or that lead to 
the provision  of additional  assets that improve  community 
cohesion and well -being to encourage sustainable development.   
Proposals for  the change  of use of community  facilities* , which  would  
result in  the loss of the community use , will only be permitted where 
it is clearly  demonstrated that either:  
1. there  are alternative  facilities  available  and active  in the same  
village  which would  fulfill  the role of the existing  use/building,  
or 
2. the existing  use is no longer  viable  (supported  by documentary  
evidence),   
and there is no realistic  prospect  of the premises being  re-used 
for alternative business  or community  facility  use. 
The proposal  must also demonstrate  that consideration  has been given  
to: 
a) the re-use of the premises  for an alternative  community  
business  or facility , and that effort has been made to try to 
secure such a re -use;  
and 
b) the potential  impact closure  may have on the village  and its 
communit y, with regard to public  use and support  for both the 
existing  and proposed use.  
 
* including facilities  such as community/vill age halls, village  shops, post offices,  school s, 
health services,  care homes,  public  houses,  playing  fields  and allotments.   
70         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 5.13  Self-Build and Custom Build Housing  
5.13.1 Custom build housing, including self -build, is housing built by individuals or 
groups of individuals for their own use, either by building the home on their 
own or working with builders.  
 
5.13.2 The self -build and custom build sector makes an important co ntribution to 
housing supply, with about 1 in every 10 homes being built or commissioned 
by individuals. Yet this ratio is far lower than the proportion seen in most 
European countries.  
 
5.13.3 The Government wants to enable more people to build their own home and 
wants to make this form of housing a mainstream option in order to increase 
the capacity and diversity of the house building industry to build more high 
quality new homes faster.  
 
5.13.4 Many self -builders and custom builders find it difficult to secure a building plot 
for their projects and this is currently seen as the single biggest barrier to 
more self -build and custom build projects coming forward.  
 
5.13.5 The Custom Build Homes p rogramme was introduced by the Government in 
2011 to support and encourage more people to build their own homes. As a 
result , national planning policy and guidance requires Local Authorities to 
establish the demand and, where a demand exists, to plan for s uch housing in 
their area.  
5.13.6 The Self -Build and Custom House  Building Act 2015 places a duty on Local 
Authorities to hold a register  of individuals and associations of individuals who 
wish to acquire serviced plots of land to bring forward self -build and custom 
house building projects.  The Act also places a duty on Local Authorities to 
have regard to those registers in carrying out planni ng and other functions 
namely housing; the disposal of any land of the authority; and regeneration.  
 
5.13.7 The self -build and custom build dwellings policy provides a mechanism for 
developers of large residential developments to sell a proportion of servi ced 
plots to prospective self -builders or custom builders. There are a number of 
models which a developer could pursue which include any of the following:  
 
 DIY – the customer buys a serviced plot and builds their own home to    
their own specification or uses a contractor.  
 Self-finish - the customer buys a serviced plot and works with the 
developer to create a home to their specification which is then built as a 
watertight shell. The customer then finishes the dwelling themselves or 
uses a contractor.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        71   Full Custom Build - the customer buys a serviced plot and works with the 
developer to create a home to their specification. The house is completed 
by the developer.  
 Community – a group of individuals join forces to purchase a number of 
plots. They may emplo y a planning consultant, architect and a contractor.  
 
5.13.8 In 2015 the Council assessed the demand for self -build and custom build in 
Melton Borough and determined that it was such that a specific policy in the 
Local Plan was justified. The company Buil dStore was used to carry out a 
search of how many people had subscribed to their Plot Search facility 
(people looking for self -build plots) and their Custom Build Register (people 
looking specifically at custom build sites). A total of 63 people in Melton  
Borough  were registered as searching for either a self -build plot or a custom 
build site. Local chartered surveyors have up to 3 enquiries per week from 
self-builders and hold a register of potential self -builders seeking a building 
plot.  
5.13.9 The Melton Housing Needs Study 2016  assessed the demand for self -build in 
the Borough. Evidence provided by local estate agents indicates that 
significant demand exits for self and custom build projects and the biggest 
barrier to success is the lack of available land.    
5.13.10 The Self -build and Custom Build policy requires a proportion of plots on 
large housing proposals to be marketed for self and custom builders. The 
Melton Housing Needs Study  recommends that in order to ensure adequate 
plots are marketed, such a policy should set out a minimum size. An analysis 
of people on th e Council’s Self/Custom Build Register  reveals that the 
majority wish to build a single detached dwelling, and as such minimum plot 
requirements reflect this. The Study also recommends  that appropriate 
marketing should include direct contact with people on the Council’s 
Self/Custom Build Register and  via the National Custom and Self -build 
Association ( NaCSBA ) portal or similar. This should include that administered 
by Buildstore. In add ition, the Study  recommends  that the price of marketed 
plots must be commensurate with their value.  
Policy C8 – Self Build and Custom Build Housing  
To support prospective self -builders and custom builders on sites of 100 
dwellings or more, developers will supply at least 5% of serviced 
dwelling plots, for sale, at an appropriate price, to self -builders or 
custom builders, which will be controlled by t he following means:  
 
A) the Council may seek developments of 5 self -build or custom build 
dwellings in a single site location to be developed in accordance with 
an agreed design code;   
72         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 B) where plots have been made available and marketed appropriately for  
at least 12 months and have not sold, the plot(s) may either remain on 
the open market or be built out by the developer.  
C) marketed plots should be of a size at least equal to that of those for 
detached dwellings of 2 -3 bedrooms on the main development site.   
In locations within or adjacent to the built form of settlements and those 
in keeping with the surrounding area, self -build proposals for  
community schemes will be particularly supported.  
5.14  Health  
5.14.1 National Planning Policy states the pu rpose of planning is to ‘contribute to the 
achievement of sustainable development’  and to ‘support strong, vibrant, and 
healthy communities’.  
5.14.2 Positive planning can lead to reductions in health inequalities, by improving    
access to healthy food, t hrough offering choices in the local market and 
reducing obesity by encouraging physical activity through the inclusion of 
open -spaces and leisure facilities. Planning can also facilitate social 
interaction which in turn can lead to improvements in mental health and 
general well -being.  
5.14.3 Health and wellbeing is covered throughout National Planning Practice 
Guidance (NPPG) including the themes of transport, natural environment, 
climate change and design. Considering health at the design stage of a 
devel opment proposal can therefore help to realise significant health benefits . 
5.14.4 There is a close relationship between poor housing and poor health. Poor 
housing can have a negative impact on a wider range of physical and mental 
health problems. Good hous ing can have beneficial impact on health, 
wellbeing and wider community benefits, including increasing energy 
efficiency, addressing fuel poverty, adapting homes to improve accessibility 
and wider programmes of home and neighbourhood improvement and 
suppor t.  
5.14.5 Leicestershire’s Health and Wellbeing Strategy  states that there is a strong 
link between deprivation and health and wellbeing. It makes growing the 
economy of Leicestershire, improving infrastructure to make Leicestershire an 
attractive place to invest in and focusing on growth in new high value 
econ omies a priority. Although Leicestershire is rural and affluent, there are 
long standing challenges posed by deprivation with some of the lowest 
household incomes clustered around parts of Melton , where Melton Egerton 
ward has the lowest income levels. The  Leicestershire Health and Wellbeing 
Board is working with the Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                              Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies        73  (LLEP) to maximize the health gain associated with new employment 
opportunities in Leicestershire.  
5.14.6 The Public Health Team at Leicester shire County Council is now responsible 
for most of the public health services previously provided by the NHS. The 
team recommends that for large residential strategic developments of 1,000 
dwellings and over, planning proposals should be accompanied by a Rapid 
Health Impact Assessment. For other non -strategic major developments, 
where the Local Planning Authority considers it is important to assess the 
proposal’s impact on public health, a desk -based assessment is appropriate.  
Policy C9 – Healthy Communiti es 
All development proposals should make a positive contribution to the 
following promoters of health and well -being:  
a. Good quality, accessible green spaces, public realm, sports and 
recreational facilities close to where people live and work, to 
encourage greater participation in play, sport, walking and cycling 
and to maximise opportunities for social interaction;  
b. Safe, convenient and attractive network of streets, paths and 
cycleways integrated with public transport which connect homes, 
workp laces, shops, schools, healthcare, leisure and other services 
and facilities to encourage active travel and prevents social isolation;  
c. High quality local food growing spaces, including green roofs, edible 
landscaping, garden plots, community gardens, al lotments and local 
markets, in order to provide access to fresh, healthy and affordable 
food;  
d. ‘Healthy Homes’ that are affordable, easy to warm, have good natural 
light, decent space (internal and external), exploit views, safe from 
flooding and overhea ting, and are adaptable to people’s changing 
circumstances that can occur over a lifetime;  
e. High quality residential amenity;  
f.  A range of employment opportunities in accessible locations;  
g. The avoidance of over concentration or clustering of any use  type that 
could detract from people’s ability to adopt healthy lifestyles 
(including hot food takeaways, payday lenders and betting shops);  
h. Good local air quality, with new development in an air quality 
management area to be consistent with the aims an d objectives of the 
Air Quality Action Plan, providing an air quality assessment where 
appropriate.   
74         Melton Local Plan, October 2018                             Chapter 5: Melton’s Communit ies             
        
 Contributions will be sought from developers towards the provision of 
health facilities where their development would impact on the capacity 
of existing hea lthcare provision.  
Proposals for new health care facilities should relate well to public 
transport services, walking and cycling routes and be accessible to all 
sectors of the community. Opportunities for the multi -use and co -
location of health facilities with other services and facilities should be 
considered to provide co -ordinated care  and a community focus.  
Health impacts of major development proposals should be considered 
early in the planning process through the submission of a Health Impact 
Assessmen t (HIA) with a planning application, where the Local Planning 
Authority requests it.  
5.14.7  The HIA will enable the applicant to demonstrate how this policy has been met 
and should be commensurate with the size of the development.  
_________________________ ______________________________________________________  
KEY EVIDENCE  
Five Year Housing Land Supply and Housing Trajectory Update, MBC. 20 -12-17 
Annex to 5YHLS document –Melton Long Term Trajectory for Allocated Sites, MBC, 20 -12-
17 
Five Year Housing Land Supply and Stepped Trajectory Approach, MBC, 21 -06-18  
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment, MBC, August 2017  
Melton Mowbray : Update to Site Assessments, MBC, May 2017  
Service Centres: Update t o Site Assessments, MBC, May 2017  
Rural Hubs: Update to Site Assessments, MBC, May 2017   
2011 Census  
Melton Borough Council Housing Needs Study, JG Consulting 2016  
Housing and E conomic Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA), GL Hearn, 2017  
Leicester and Leicestershire Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation 
Assessment  (GTAA) 2017  
Melton Village Services Audit 2014  
Leicestershire’s Health and Wellbeing Strategy 2013 -2016  
Indices of Multiple Deprivation 2015  
Melton Lo cal Plan and CIL Viability Assessment, Cushman & Wakefield, 2017  
Melton Self Build and Custom Build Register  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    75 
 Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy – Strong and 
Competitive  
 
6.1 Introduction  
6.1.1  Melton Borough benefits from a vibrant economy, underpinned by a significant 
and predominantly food related manufacturing sector, concentrated on the 
market town of Melton Mowbray. The town is the main economic centre  for 
the Borough, providing a base for the larger employers and being the main 
retail and service destination for local people and visitors.  
6.1.2  Melton Mowbray is England’s “Rural Capital of Food”. Its town centre is the 
main destination for shopping and leisure within the Borough, with a ric h, 
diverse and distinctive retail and other uses offer, enhanced by a weekly 
livestock market and twice -weekly Farmers ’ Market.  
6.1.3  Businesses in the rural areas also play an important part in supporting the 
local economy. There is a diversity of mostly  smaller rural enterprises in and 
around the Borough’s villages, including farm diversification , from  small scale 
up to regional tourism enterprises.  
6.1.4  The Borough currently has very low levels of unemployment, but also high 
levels of low paid/low skil ls employment, especially within Melton Mowbray. 
This is attributed to the presence of a number of large manufacturers, 
particularly in food related businesses, and a reliance on agriculture.  
6.2  The Economic context  
6.2.1  Economic growth is a key objec tive of the National Planning Policy 
Framework.  
The NPPF  2012  defines economic development as:  
“Development including those within the B Use Classes, public and 
community uses and main town centre  uses (but excluding housing 
development)”  
6.2.2  Melton Borough’s economy sits within its wider Leicestershire context and the 
Local Plan’s economic strategy is aligned with the aspirations contained within 
the economic strategy of the Leicester and Leicestershire Local Enterprise 
Partnership .  
6.2.3  As well as contributing to wider economic goals, the Borough Council is 
committed to working with the private sector to deliver employment 
opportunities t hat meet the identified employment  needs for current and future 
local residents and those who work in the Borough.   
 
                    
76         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 6.2.4 The Melton Borough Community Partnership has set out priorities for Melton 
Borough’s economy in its Melton Economic Development Strategy  (MEDS) . 
These are reflected in the Local Plan which aims to deliver those sustainable 
economic development priorities spatially, so as to enhance the prosperity of 
the Borough’s residents. Unless there is any significant step change in 
approach, it is expected that this Local Plan will be flexible enough to 
accommodate any reviews to the MEDS over the plan period.  
6.3  Identifying Employment Growth Sectors   
6.3.1  Employment in Melton Borough  has historically been provided through 
farming and food production . However over the last 50 years , jobs in 
manufacturing and services have grown significantly as a proportion of overall 
jobs. Manufacturing employment in Melton Borough has largely been pr ovided 
by significant companies such as Masterfood s (pet food producer), Melton 
Foods (Samworth Brothers), Kettleby Foods, Long Clawson Dairy and Arla 
Foods.  
6.3.2  Nationwide, the service sector has grown significantly and continues to grow, 
whilst manufa cturing has started to decline. This is not fully reflected in the 
Borough of Melton where manufacturing is forecast to experience significant 
growth up to 2036.  
6.3.3  Whilst Melton Borough’s food and drink specialism provides bespoke 
opportunities and a degree of local resilience, there is a need to monitor 
closely how this sector will perform in the future.  
6.3.4  Growth in a range of economic sectors is essential for the Borough’s economic 
future. A more resilient and higher performing economy will need  to provide a 
greater diversity of jobs in a broader range of industries. The employment 
study indicates that the main areas of forecast employment growth are 
manufacturing, professional and other private services and information and 
communication  (see Table 10 ).  
6.3.5  Melton Mowbray also has the potential to attract and retain knowledge based 
industries e.g. PERA  Business Park, which are key to competitive economies . 
They  include enterprises such as:  
 Hi-tech Manufacturing  
 Finance & Banking  
 Business Services  
 Communications  
 Computing  
 Research and  Development; and  
 Media   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    77 
 6.3.6  These  enterprises usually require high quality sites in accessible attractive 
locations , and may be best located in an d around the town centre , and/or  
integrated into mixed use s chemes , or could be provided for as part of a 
single large business park.  
Table 1 0: Forecast change in jobs by employment sector 2011 -2036  
Employment Sector  Jobs 
(2011)  % Jobs 
(2036)  % 
Agriculture, energy and water3 860 4 850 3 
Manufacturing  4,410  19 6,120  24 
Construction  1,490  7 1,740  7 
Distribution, hotels and restaurants  2,050  9 2,560  10 
Transport and communication4 1,540  7 1,840  7 
Financial, Real Estate, Professional and 
Administrative activities5 4,400  19 5,180  20 
Public administration, education and 
health  4,290  19 3,950  15 
Wholesale and Retail  3,560  16 3,780  15 
Total Jobs (all sectors)  22,620  100 26,020  1006 
 (Source: Employment Land Study, 2015 ) 
 
6.3.7  Based on previous rates of delivery for each sector, the majority of B class 
employment growth has been in B1(a) offices and B2 manufacturing. The 
current main employment sectors are shown in Table 11  below.  
Table 1 1: Melton Borough Resident s’ Employment by Sector (2011 Census)  
Employment Sector  People 
Employed  % 
Agriculture, energy and water  1,080  4 
Manufacturing  4,416  17 
Construction  1,982  8 
Distribution, hotels and restaurants  5,341  20 
Transport and communication  1,705  6 
Financial, Real Estate, Professional and 
Administrative activities  3,568  14 
Public administration, education and health  6,780  26 
Other  1,508  6 
Total Jobs (all sectors)  26,380  100 
Note: The figures relate to people living in the Borough and those travelling to work 
outside it (not jobs in the Borough).   
  
6.3.8  However, historic trends may not be replicated going forward . Employment 
forecasts contained in the Employment L and S tudy indicate that the main 
                                                           
3 Includes Agriculture (650) Extraction and mining (10) and utilities (200)  
4 Includes Transport (1,020) and Information and Communication (520)  
5 Includes ‘Professional and other services’ (4,220) and ‘Finance and Insurance’ (180)  
6 Does not sum due to rounding.   
 
                    
78         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 growth areas are likely to be in the manufacturing and service industry 
sectors , as shown in Table 10.  
6.3.9  The  forecast changes in employment by employment sector over the next 20 
years and to the local economy in general have informed the assessment of 
how much employment land is needed.   
6.4 Ensuring an appropriate labour supply  
6.4.1  A number of the Borough’s key employers are currently unable to grow due to 
a lack of local labour and a shortage of freehold development sites available. 
If businesses are unable to expand in the Borough for these reasons, there is 
the very real possibility they will look to reloc ate out of the Borough.  Even 
without relocation, high levels of commuting workforce coming from outside 
the Borough is not a sustainable model.  
6.4.2  The Melton Employment Land Study (2015)  found that there is likely to be a 
7.1-7.9% increase in jobs in the Borough and an increase in the likely 
demands for employment land. This, combined with an existing low 
unemployment rate (only 0.9% of the working age populati on claim Job 
Seekers allowance), puts pressure on employers looking for additional staff 
and may force some to halt plans for expansion or employ staff from out of the 
Borough, leading to a likely increase in unsustainable modes of transport 
being used.  
6.5 Providing Jobs  
6.5.1  The Borough Council, in line with government guidance, is seeking to achieve 
sustainable growth. This forms part of the rationale as to why the planned 
housing requirement  is more than the objectively assessed housing need for 
the borough, as identified in the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and 
Econ omic Development Needs Assessment , and w hy the spatial strategy 
seeks to use new development to enhance Melton Mowbray’s local and sub -
regional role , whilst also allow ing villages to develop sustainably . The Local 
Plan’s strategy for providing jobs is  therefore based on an assessment of 
employment and economic development needs and also the employment 
needs generated from new housing.   
6.5.2  To enable businesses in the Borough to grow, increased labour supply must 
be provided in the locality. More job s require an increase in the working age 
population, which will arise from planned new households. Moreover, in 
allocating 30ha of employment land, businesses have the opportunity to 
expand. These measures, combined with the delivery of strategic 
infrastru cture such as the Melton Mowbray Distributor Road, will pave the way  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    79 
 for internal business growth and external investment coming into the town, 
which will represent a step change from trend based employment growth 
forecasts.  
6.6 Amount of Employment Land N eeded   
6.6.1 Historically , Melton Borough has had a number of large employment sites with 
an ample supply of employment land. The three largest sites , Asfordby 
Business Park, Holwell Works and Leicester Road Business Park , provide a 
substantial part of the employment land in the Borough.  
6.6.2 In identifying an appropriate amount of employment land, the Local Plan 
seeks to align provision with the anticipated growth in jobs. More jobs require 
an increase in the working age  population, which will arise from new 
households. More specifically, the policies seek to allow flexibility maximising 
the opportunities for and choice of employment that matches the available 
local employment and the future employee skills base. This wil l help to ensure 
that the Borough of Melton retains its economic competitiveness, meeting 
local economic needs and reducing the need for large scale out -commuting.  
6.6.3 The Employment Land Study (2015)  suggests there is a ‘realistic deliverable 
supply’ of 19.46ha of employment land (with planning permission) and that the 
Local Plan should provide for an additional 30.29ha of employment land. The 
requirement for emplo yment land is based on an assessment of historic 
employment  land take up in the Borough , and local intelligence about the 
future needs of businesses already in the Borough and those that might want 
to locate here . The plan takes account of changing economic conditions , the 
need to offer a balanced portfolio of sites and the presence of deliverability 
constraints that may affect some sites , and has made an allowance for  all 
these  to offer flexibility in the overall requirements.   
6.6.4  Takin g account of the above, Policy SS2 – ‘Development Strategy’ has 
identified a need to deliver 50.75ha of employment land in the Borough up to 
2036.   
6.6.5  Table 12  sets out the employment  land supply for the Borough. It identifies 
completions since 2011 an d sites that have planning permission 
(commitments), and sets out the additional land need ed during the plan 
period.  
Table 1 2: Employment position summary table  
 Requirements  
2011 -2036  Completions  
2011 - 2015  Commitments as 
at 1st April 2015  Residual 
2015  - 2036  
Employment land 
(in Hectares)  50.75ha  7.5ha  19.5ha  23.75ha  
  
 
                    
80         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 6.6.6 The Council will the monitor progress against these targets through its annual 
monitoring report.  
6.6.7 Reference to employment land in the Local Plan refers mainly to offices, 
industrial space and warehouses. These are known as “Class B Uses” and 
are defined in the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as 
amended). The y are set out in Table 13  below.  
Table 1 3: Use Classes for business related uses  
 Employment Land (Class B Land Uses)  
1. B1: Business  
a) Offices, other than a use within Class A2 (Financial Services)  
b) Research and development of products or processes  
c) Light industry  
2. B2: General Industrial  
Use for the carrying out of an industrial process  
other than one falling in class B1  
3. B8: Storage & Distribution  
Use for storage or distribution centre (includes open air storage)  
   
6.7  Employment Locations and Providing Jobs   
6.7.1  The Local Plan  seeks to sustain existing viable employment sites and make 
new land available  for investors to create new jobs in the Borough , and for 
existing businesses to expand.  
6.7.2  Research including consultation with local business and property agents led 
to recommendations in the Council’s Employment Land Study (2015)  that the 
majority of add itional employment allocations should be in and around Melton 
Mowbray, but that the role of the rural economy also needs to be recognised. 
This gives rise to two strands of the spatial strategy, ‘Melton Mowbray 
Employment Growth’ and ‘The Rural Economy’ , dealt with separately below . 
6.8  Melton Mowbray Employment Growth   
6.8.1  Melton Mowbray is the main economic centre  for the Borough , providing the 
larger employers  and the main retail and service destination for local people 
and visitors. The Spatial Strategy seeks to use new development to enhance 
Melton Mowbray’s local and sub -regional role but also allows villages to 
develop sustainably.  
6.8.2  The Local Plan therefore provides for an allocation of 20ha of employment 
land as part of the Melton South Sustainable  Neighbourhood  (Chapter 4, 
Policy SS5) and identifies 10ha of additional land (achieved by remodelling 
and intensifying use) within the Asfordby Business  Park. Both are targeted 
towards the manufacturing and industrial sectors and intended to be Melton’s  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    81 
 prime locations for economic growth. As part of the proposals elsewhere in 
this plan for a distributor ro ad, attention should be paid to  ensuring an 
effec tive connection with  St Bartholomews Way, to ensure an effective link 
from Asfordby Business Park to the town’s arterial  roads out of the town, 
distributor roads around the tow n and easy access on to the wider road 
network.  
 Offices  
6.8.3  Notwithstanding previous rates of office delivery, the demand for land for 
additional office space in Melton Mowbray is perceived to be relatively low , in 
part due to premises available in rural areas and high quality office 
accommodation provided at PERA Business Park on Nottingham Road.  The 
majority of new office development is expected to be delivered within Melton 
Mowbray town centre and/or as part of an extension to PERA. Some 
additional growth may be appropriate as part of the ‘local centres’ associat ed 
with the strategic developments to North and South of Melton Mowbray, which 
may also provide some small business start -up space.  
Policy EC1 – Employment Growth in Melton Mowbray  
The Council will seek to meet the employment needs of its residents and 
the wider economy, by providing sufficient new employment land for the 
period up to 2036 in the following locations:  
1. 10 hectares of employment land  on brownfield land available at 
Asfordby Business Park for class B employment uses (as shown on 
the Policies Map);  
2. 20 hectares of employment land, located off Leicester Road, as part 
of the South Melton Mowbray Sustainable Neighbourhood; and  
3. 1 hectare of employment land for B1(a) office  space within or 
adjacent to Melton Mowbray town centre and/or including PERA 
Business Park.  
Proposals for employment development on allocated and non -allocated 
sites in Melton Mowbray will be allowed where:  
4. The site is located in an area that can be easil y accessed by public 
transport, walking and cycling, and can be satisfactorily accessed by 
service and other employment related vehicles;  
5. It provides a mix of B -class employment uses that seek to meet local 
business and employment needs;  
6. The sequential app roach to town centre uses is applied  where offices 
(use class B1(a)) are proposed.   
 
  
 
                    
82         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 6.9  Melton Borough’s Rural Economy  
6.9.1  Whilst Melton Mowbray will be the focus for economic growth, the contribution 
of a diversity of rural enterprises to the Borough’s economy now and in the 
future cannot be underplayed . Outside the town, these  operat e in and around 
village s across the Borough, including t he larger ones . Rural enterprises can 
operate differently to those in the town, and whilst they include large 
employers, such as L ong Clawson Dairy, Masterfoods at Waltham and 
Ragdale Hall, businesses tend to be of a smaller scale  and include many start 
ups.   
6.9.2  Rural businesses often have strong local connections in terms of proximity 
and their local workforce, but also enjoy the attractive rural environment and 
the connections  to a number of major centres such as Nottingham and 
Leicester , and to the national transport network.  
6.9.3  The Local Plan must guide development in a way which ensures that the 
natural and physical environment (infrastructure) remains attractive and a 
local workforce can be provided to service business. This means additional 
employment growth in the villages  through a positive approach to the rural 
economy and rural diversification.  The Local Plan policy does not allocate 
specific sites in the rural areas. Instead, it encourages and allows small 
business es to start up and expand to medium sized enterprises , where this 
can be achieved without any significant adverse impacts on the environment, 
local infrastructure and amenity.  
6.9.4  Employment growth in the rural areas will be supported where it contribute s to 
the long term sustainability of villages and is sympathetic to the rural 
character and attractiveness of the area. Increased homeworking and small 
business start -ups are anticipated over the plan period, particularly in light of 
improvements to broadb and speeds.  
6.9.5  In order to support the rural economy, where agricultural buildings are no 
longer needed for agriculture , they can be converted to provide employment 
opportunities. Conversions can bring environmental improvements , as good , 
sensitive de sign and general improvements can enhance the wider visual 
appearance of the area.  
6.9.6  However it is also important to consider whether development is appropriate 
in its location, so that any significant numbers of visitors or employees can 
access it by means other than the car.  
6.9.7  Local planning policies are also required to support farm diversification  into 
agricultural and other land –based rural businesses  such as farm shops,  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    83 
 holiday accommodation and farm based processing and packaging, as these 
can help maintain working farms. Enterprise s relating to the keeping or 
breeding of horses  are also prevalent in the Borough’s rural areas.  
6.9.8 Schemes brought forward that generate additional traffic should contain 
sufficient car parking to avoid exacerbating the dangerous blockages to roads 
or footpaths that occur, particularly within settlements .  
6.10  Food Enterprise Zone and ‘Food and Farming’ Local Development 
Order  
 
6.10.1 Melton Mowbray is England’s “Rural Capital of Food” and whilst Melton ’s food 
and drink specialism provides bespoke opportunities and a degree of local 
resilience, farm businesses are under pressure to respond to pricing volatility 
and to adapt  to environmental challenges which adversely impact productivity 
and farm income.  
6.10.2 In February 2015 , Melton Borough Council in partnership with the Leicester 
and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership (LLEP) , successfully responded to 
DEFRA’s national call for pilots to support a ‘Food and Farming’ Local 
Development Order (LDO). T his pilot will ultimately deliver the planned growth 
of Leicestershire’s only Food Enterprise Zone (FEZ). The LDO  element  was 
completed in June 2016 and was designed to allow a specific range of 
development to be fast tracked over a two year period  (which can be 
extended after a formal review  to five years)  to enable new and existing food 
and farm based businesses to innovate, grow, and adapt to changing market 
opportunities , delivering enterprise and additional jobs for the local and sub -
regional economy.  
6.10.3 A key focus of the FEZ will be to improve integration within the food chain, 
linking the farmers at the beginning of the food chain, the manufacturers who 
add value to the food, the distribution partners who deliver it, the businesses/ 
establishment s who sell it , and the customers who b uy the high quality food 
products. There is also a significant export opportunity for the ‘ Made in Britain’ 
brand as well as the historic Melton Mowbray ‘covenant’ and branding as the 
‘Rural Capital of Food’.  
6.10.4 It is the ambition of the FEZ and LDO component to inspire development that 
contributes to a growing rural economy  by seeing an increase in productivity 
and sector output . The initiative also recognis es that investment in high -level 
skills training is need ed to support the sub -regional and UK agri -food sector 
response to food security and food sustainability issues.  
  
 
                    
84         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 6.10.5 The NPPF  2012  indicates in paragraph 28 that ‘planning policies should 
support sustainable growth in rural areas , in order to  create jo bs and 
prosperity by taking a positive approach to sustainable new development’. 
Economic diversity and agricultural diversification will therefore be 
encouraged specifically via the LDO , subject to it being demonstrated that the 
enterprise clearly enhance s the food and farming supply chain and proposals 
involve the re -use of existing redundant buildings, or are entirely contained 
within an existing enclosed area with no significant adverse impact on the 
locality. Examples of proposals for the re -use and ad aptation, or in certain 
defined circumstances, the replacement of buildings or new 
buildings/extensions, are provided below:  
• Uses and small scale developments to allow farm diversification  
• ‘Farm shops’  
• New development to allow existing businesses to grow  
• Uses directly related to agriculture and where the enterprise forms part of 
the food and farming supply chain.  
 
Policy EC2 – Employment Growth in the Rural Area (Outside 
Melton Mowbray)  
 
In order to support the rural economy, the Council will allow for:  
A) new employment land to be provided in rural settlements; and/or;  
B) rural employment proposals which create or safeguard jobs.  
The following types of rural employment development are acceptable:  
1. The re -use of existing farm buildings and well -designed n ew buildings 
for employment;  
2. Schemes for farm diversification involving small -scale business and 
commercial development that helps  to support the viability and 
retention of the farm holding;  
3. Small -scale tourism proposals, including visitor accommodat ion, 
such as glamping, camping and bed & breakfast;  
4. The expansion of existing rural businesses, dependent upon the 
nature of the activities involved, the character of the site and its 
accessibility;  
5. Small scale employment development to meet local ne eds; and  
6. The use of land for agriculture, forestry and equestrian activity, and  
subject to the proposal:  
7. Being of an appropriate scale for its location;   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    85 
 8. Having sufficient accessible off road car parking provided on site or in 
the nearby vicinity to cater for the use proposed .  
6.11  Protecting existing employment areas  
6.11.1 The Council is mindful of the National Planning Policy Framework 2012, which 
advises that:  
“Planning policies should avoid the long term protection of sites allocated for 
employment use where there is no reasonable prospect of a site being used 
for that purpose”  
6.11.2 Taking account of the findings of the Melton Employment Land Study 2015, 
the Council considers that all of the Borough’s network of employment 
premises and l and is essential to serve the needs of the existing economy , to 
help maintain a wide portfolio of employment sites , and to  provid e jobs, 
especially in the rural area . Without it, there could be a  negative effect on the 
local economy and the Council’s aim s for sustainable development.  
6.11.3 The Borough Council will seek to ensure that where existing employment sites 
are economically viable, contributing to the economic growth  of the Borough  
and the wider economy and providing valuable jobs for local people , they 
remain in employment use. This reflects the findings of the Employment Land 
Study 2015 , which indicated that a number of employment sites should be 
safeguarded from non B class uses, includ ing: 
 Masterfoods HQ, Waltham.  
 Asfordby Business Park, Asfordby Hill  
 Holwell Works (Melton Mowbray Business Park), Asfordby Hill  
 Stanton PLC (St Gobain), Asfordby Hill  
 Saxby Road Area (incorporating Hudson Road Estat e), Melton 
Mowbray  
 Crown Business Park (incorporating the Six Hills Area), Old Dalby  
 Old Dalby Trading Estate, Old Dalby  
 Melton and Kettleby Foods, Melton Mowbray  
 Leicester Road Estate, Melton Mowbray.  
6.11.4 However, t he Borough Council recognises that as  the economy changes, the 
requirements for the scale and type of land and premises needed may also 
change.  
6.11.5 The Council will continue to monitor planning applications that affect the 
provision of current employment land , to ensure that any net gains  and losses 
are recorded and appropriate action taken to ensure that employment 
provision and local need are, as far as possible , balanced.  
  
 
                    
86         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 Policy EC3 – Existing Employment Sites  
The following employment sites and industrial estates across the 
Borough will be retained for employment uses (within Classes B1, B2 
and B8 of the Use Classes Order).  
Employment facilities listed for retention:  
EC3(i)  Masterfoods HQ, Waltham.  
EC 3(ii)  Asfordby Business Park, Asfordby Hill . 
EC3(iii)  Holwell Works (Melton Mowbray Business Park), Asfordby 
Hill. 
EC3(iv)  Stanton Plc (St Gobain), Asfordby Hill . 
EC3(v)  Saxby Road Area (Incorporating Hudson Road Estate), 
Melton Mowbray . 
EC3(vi)  Crown Business Park, Old Dalby . 
EC3(vii)  Six Hill Business Area, Six Hills . 
EC3(viii)  Old Dalby Trading Estate, Old Dalby . 
EC3(ix)  Melton And Kettleby Foods, Melton Mowbray . 
EC3(x)  Leicester Road Estate, Melton Mowbray.  
EC3(xi)  Normanton Lane, Bottesford.  
EC3(xii) Orston  Lane, Bottesford.  
EC3(xiii)  Hickling Lane Employments Sites, Long Clawson.  
EC3(xiv)  Snow Hill Industrial Estate, Melton Mowbray . 
EC3(xv)  Burrough Court, Burrough on the Hill . 
 
Proposals to change the use of all of part of an existing employment site 
or allocation to non -employment uses will be permitted where:  
a) it can be demonstrated, through an acceptable viability study, that 
the site is no longer economically viable for employment purposes in 
the long term nor can be made so, and either:  
b) its release f or other purposes would offer significant benefits to the 
local area, in particular where proposals have demonstrable 
community support, for example through an allocation in a made 
Neighbourhood Plan or:  
c) the site is no longer needed to provide the employme nt land and 
facilities to meet employment needs with the local area.  
Proposals for non B -class employment uses on employment sites will 
be allowed where they would support the effective operation of that site 
and would not be more appropriately located in  town centres or are 
required to make the site viable and are not in conflict with policies 
contained within this Local Plan.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    87 
 6.12  Holwell Works and Asfordby Business Park  
6.12.1 The Holwell  Works and Asfordby Business Park represent significant 
opportunities and challenges for the Borough. The area identified as Asfordby 
Business Park in Figure 8  and on the Policies Map is the entire business park 
area that is being marketed for employment u ses. It includes at least 10ha of 
brownfield land, and it is this that should be the focus of growth during the 
plan period. Any expansion beyond this, onto the greenfield part of the site 
(7.6ha in the north west corner - see Figure 8),  will only be permit ted where it 
can be demonstrated that the proposed development will avoid harm to the 
significance of the adjacent Grade II* listed Church of St Bartholomew, Welby 
including the remaining earthworks and old pasture in its setting which appear 
to represent the physical remains of the medieval village it was built to serve. 
Any development shall be informed by pre -determination archaeological 
investigation such that earthworks or buried remains within the allocation area 
can be treated in the planning process  in a manner proportionate to their 
importance both in their own right and as setting to the church. Studies have 
suggested that the Holwell Works site is contaminated affecting the viability of 
appropriate development. Asfordby Business Park is under occu pied, but this 
may be partly due to units only being available on a leasehold arrangement 
and therefore not attractive to  potential freehold investors. Improved access 
will be considered as part of the Melton Mowbray Transport Strategy and will 
likely be s ecured through development specific mitigation. Both sites are 
identified on Figure 8.  
6.12.2 Both sites are still seen as significant opportunities for the Borough , as part of 
a wider economic development strategy.  They are both well serviced by 
water an d power and benefit from a rail connection . Both sites represent 
significant brownfield opportunities for the Borough.  
6.12.3 The starting point in considering the future of these sites is establishing 
whether they are viable employment opportunities going  forward.  If not, there 
may be potential to consider other land uses.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                    
88         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 Figure 8: Asfordby Business Park and Holwell Industrial Area  
 
6.13  Other employment proposals  
6.13. 1 The Local Plan and the wider economic development strategy for the Borough 
seek to generate a climate where investors will create sustainable jobs, either 
by expanding existing business, setting up new enterprises or through 
relocations to the area. The Lo cal Plan policies allow flexibility in the amount 
and type of employment land in the Borough. The policies are not prescriptive 
in the mix of employment types (other than seeking to locate office uses to 
town centre locations ).  
6.13.2  The Local Plan is seeking to plan positively for economic growth. It provides 
flexibility of sites to meet the growing employment needs of the Borough and 
the wider economic area. The proposed allocations allow for high employment 
retention rates and limit  the impacts of unsustainable commuting. The 
employment sites identified are ‘deliverable’ during the plan period and are in 
sustainable locations that are attractive to a commercial market. 
Notwithstanding this, the Council recognises that other ‘speculat ive’ 
employment sites and proposals for mixed -uses incorporating employment 
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    89 
 might be proposed during the plan period. The following policy seeks to plan 
positively for such circumstances.  
Policy EC4 – Other Employment and Mixed -use Proposals  
Proposals for employment and mixed -use developments ( incorporating 
employment uses) outside of existing or allocated employment sites will 
be encouraged where:  
a) the employment component of the scheme can be satisfactorily 
accessed by service and other employment related vehicles;  
b) the proposed uses are not more appropriately located in town 
centres;  
c) the site is located in an area that can or has the scope to be easily 
accessed by public transport, walking and cycling;  
d) the mix of uses does not result in an unacceptable impa ct on 
residents by reason of noise, disturbance, air quality or other 
emissions caused by the use of the building or the vehicle 
movements associated with it;  
e) the proposal does not adversely affect land which is of particular 
significance to the form and c haracter of the settlement; and  
f) the proposal is of an appropriate scale in the context of the existing 
settlement.   
6.14  Retail, Leisure and the Town Centre  
New retail and commercial leisure requirements  
6.14.1  In order to plan effectively for new retail and commercial leisure 
developments , the Council has gathered evidence of the amount and type of 
such  development that is required to help to meet identified needs.   
6.14.2 The Melton Borough Retail Study 2015  assessed the future needs for retail 
and commercial leisure development across the Borough of Melton between 
2015 and 2036. The study indicated that there was no demonstrable need for 
additional ‘convenience’ r etail floorspace , and that ‘comparison’ floorspace 
would only be needed after 2021 . Table 14  indicates the level of net and 
gross comparison floorspace needed over the plan period.  
Table 14 : Cumulative net and gross floorspace  required in Melton Borough 
2015 -2036  
  
By 2021  
 2026  2031  2036  
Net 
 1,020 m2 3,020  m2 5,080  m2 8,870  m2 
Gross  
 1,450  m2 4,310  m2 7,260  m2 12,670  m2   
 
                    
90         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
  
6.14.3 Melton Borough Council will work proactively with the private sector and other 
partners such as the Melton BID (Business Improvement District) to deliver 
the comparison retail need throughout the plan period to in a way that 
positively improves the overall retail offer of Melton Mowbray town centre. 
This could include realising development, redevelopment and land assembly 
opportunities arising from the Melton Mowbray Transport Strategy and/or land 
currently in beneficial uses. Furthermore, the Counci l will investigate 
opportunities through its Town Centre Strategy (a commitment made in the 
Melton Growth & Prosperity Plan, 2018 -2022 ) to ensure this need is met.  
6.15  Melton Mowbray Town Centre  
6.15.1 Melton Mowbray Town Centre is the main destination for shopping and leisure 
within the Borough.  It has a distinctive retail offer with a high proportion of 
independent retailers and small franchises which are enhanc ed by the weekly 
livestock market ; the twice -weekly Farmers’ Market and the thrice -weekly 
town centre stall market.  The town centre is  much more than just a destination 
for shopping. It contains a rich and diverse number of uses which together 
give the tow n its own distinctiveness.     
6.15.2  The National Planning Policy Framework seeks to ensure town centres 
remain vibrant, diverse and healthy and perform effectively as the heart of 
communities. To achieve this, it seeks to ensure that where possible , ‘main 
town centre uses’ (as defined by the NPPF) , including retail uses, leisure uses 
and offices , are directed towards town centre locations.  
6.15.3 Over the last twenty years, the role of the town centre as a destination to buy 
goods and services has been  affected  by factors such as the growth in online 
retail and services and the cost of travel. One effect is that uses  that provid e 
for social meetings , such as coffee shops and cafes , have increased , whereas 
shops have declined. This change in retail and t he role of town centre is 
happening nationally. However recent developments around the centre of 
Melton Mowbray, such as the Premier Inn, Sainsbury’s, Lidl, the 
redevelopment of Brooksby College and the Parkside Offices at Burton St reet 
have had a  positive  impa ct upon the town centre.  
6.15.4  The Melton Borough Retail Study (2015),  and ‘benchm arking data’ for the 
Town Centre ha ve indicated that Melton Mowbray town centre has proved 
relatively resilient.  Vacancies remain low ; the busy market and the ‘Rural 
Capital of Food’ brand may be  the reasons for its continued resilience . The  
Local Plan considers the general need for change i n and around the town 
centre over the next 15 -20 years, how it could happen, how the role of the  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    91 
 town centre will continue to change , and how to ensure that change is 
positive.  
6.15.5  Balanced against the growing convenience of accessing services and 
shop ping through the internet, the Local Plan must ensure a flexible approach 
to planning for the development of the Town Centre. Such an approach must 
ensure that advantage  can be taken of key assets that will enable  the Town 
Centre to remain a destination th at people continue to want to visit, enjoy and 
spend time and money.  
6.15.6  The shopping function of Melton Mowbray’s town centre is its prime activity 
and is vital in securing a competitive town centre that provides customer 
choice and a diverse retail of fer. The market place and its immediate 
surroundings are the hub of Melton Mowbray’s shopping area and a focal 
point for pedestrians, particularly on market days.  
6.15.7  Leisure facilities, restaurants, entertainment, banks and other over the counter 
servi ces also play a part in attracting people to the town centre and contribute 
to its viability and vitality. It is important that these uses are located in parts of 
the town centre which would not weaken the shopping function and 
experience.  Residential deve lopment often also plays an important role in 
ensuring the vitality of centres, but consideration of residential amenity (see 
Policy D1) and the noise and disturbance of other town centre uses will be 
important in determining appropriate locations for this . 
6.15.8  Local Planning Authorities are required to define the extent of town centres 
and primary shopping areas, based on the primary and secondary shopping 
frontages in designated centres , and to set policies that make clear which 
uses will be permitted in such locations. Figure 9 shows the extent of the 
Town Centre and primary and secondary shopping frontages , as 
recommended by the Melton Borough Retail Study 2015 .   
 
                    
92         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 Figure 9:   Melton Mowbray Town Centre Boundary and Shopping Frontage  
6.15.9 The viability and vitality of a town centre can be adversely affected by the loss 
of retail uses to non -retail uses along primary shopping frontages. The Council 
wishes to mai ntain flexibility in the mix of uses , whilst protecting the vitality, 
viability and character of the town centre.  
 
6.15.10 The Borough Council works closely with local businesses, including a 
successful BID (Business Improvement District) which was established in 
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    93 
 2011. The BID has established a number of projects tasked with improving 
business performance in the town, including a Melton Loyalty Card, Car 
Parking Campaigns, Media and Advertising Campaigns and a Business 
Directory.  
 
Policy EC5 - Melton Mowbray Town Centre  
Melton Mowbray Town Centre will be the focus for retail growth in the 
Borough of Melton. The extent of the town centre and primary retail 
frontages is defined on the Policies Map.  
As part of a wider strategy to promote and enhance the town centre, the 
Council will work proactively with business and property owners within 
and on the edge of the town cent re to identify development, 
redevelopment and site assembly opportunities to meet the identified 
needs for 12,670m2 net of additional comparison retail floorspace by 
2036.  
A sequential approach will be applied to the location of proposals for 
main town centre uses which prioritises sites within centres ahead of 
edge of centre sites. Out of centre locations will only be considered if 
sequentially preferable sites are not avai lable  within the town centre or 
on the edge of the centre and if the location is accessible and well 
connected to the town centre.  
Retail impact assessments will be required to accompany proposals in 
Melton Mowbray for main town centre uses in edge of cent re or out of 
centre locations where the gross floorspace proposed is above 200m2. 
Proposals for new retail, leisure and other ‘town -centre’ developments 
will be allowed within the defined town centre where they:  
1. Enhance the compact, legible and walkable  character of the town 
centre;  
2. Maintain a vibrant and active continuous shop frontage in and around 
the retail core;  
3. Incorporate a high quality of shop front and advertisement design;  
4. Are sympathetic to the numerous heritage assets within and adja cent 
to the town centre; and  
5. Make adequate provision for car parking where possible and 
appropriate.  
In primary shopping frontages, proposals for new, or change of use to:   
 
                    
94         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 a.  A1 retail uses will be encouraged, subject to the proposal 
incorporating a high  quality design of shop front and 
advertisements.  
b. A2 – A5 uses will be allowed where this does not have an adverse 
impact on the character and/or sustainability of the primary 
frontage.  
Outside of primary shopping frontages, but within the defined town 
centre, proposals for commercial leisure uses, restaurants, bars & pubs 
and hot food takeaways will be supported where these support day and 
evening activity and the main retail use of the town centre.  
Policy EC6 – Primary Shopping Frontages  
The Primary Sho pping Frontages of Melton Borough Council, as 
designated on the Policies Map, are where the majority of A1 retail uses 
will be focussed over the Local Plan period.  
Unless permitted development rights (or any successor) indicate 
otherwise, ground floor A1 u nits in the Primary Shopping Frontages 
should be retained predominantly for retail use. Proposals that would 
involve the loss, by change of use or re -development at ground floor 
level will be supported provided that:  
1.      It makes a positive contribution to the vitality and viability of the 
Primary Shopping Area, as shown on the Policies Map;  
2.      It would not result in non -A1 retail uses within larger units being 
grouped together in such a way that it undermines the retail role of 
the frontage;  
3.      It would not result in a loss of A1 retail floor space or frontage of a 
scale harmful to the shopping function of the area;  
4.      It would positively restore and/or enhance the character and 
appearance of the unit; and  
5.      It would allow upper floors to be effectively used, including the 
possibility of inde pendent use, where appropriate.  
6.16  Retail development in other locations  
6.16.1 A number of the larger villages in the Borough have a range of retail premises 
which help them ac t as service centres as follows:  
 Asfordby  
 Bottesford  
 Waltham on the Wolds; and  
 Long Clawson   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                        Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy    95 
 ‘Town centre’7 development located in and adjoining these centres which is of 
an appropriate scale to the existing centre and which contributes to supporting 
the sustainability of such places will be supported.  
6.16.2  The retail study  has identified a need for some small scale local retail 
provision as part of the development of the Southern Sustainable Urban 
Extension in Melton Mow bray. This should form part of the provision of a local 
centre. It may also be demonstrated that some small local retail will be 
required as part of the development of the Northern Sustainable Urban 
Extension. Any proposals for this type of development wil l need to be 
supported by a retail impact assessment.  
Policy EC7 – Retail Development in the Borough  
In other settlements with an existing retail offer that acts as a service 
centre, town centre developments will be supported where they would 
be physically  integrated, be of an appropriate scale and not have an 
adverse impact on the character of the village.  
A retail impact assessment will be required for all retail proposals in 
these locations. Assessments will be used to ensure that retail 
proposals do not adversely affect the vitality and viability of Melton 
Mowbray town centre and other retail facilities w ithin service centres. 
Small independent village shops, post offices and social enterprises and 
farm shops up to 200m2 are exempt from this requirement .  
Outside of Melton Mowbray town centre and service centres, in all cases 
a retail impact assessment wil l be required to accompany applications.  
6.17  Tourism  
6.17. 1 Tourism makes a vital contribution to the economy of Melton Borough via 
direct spending and in creating jobs. In 2015, £85.4 million was generated 
within the local economy through visitor and t ourism business expenditure 
which helps support around 1200 full -time equivalent jobs. This expenditure 
represents an increase of 6% on the previous year. Tourism in Melton 
Borough is centred on the character of Melton Mowbray as an attractive 
market town,  its food heritage, the wider quality of the rural landscape and 
heritage assets such as Belvoir Castle. This is supplemented by family 
attractions such as the Twinlakes Amusement Park. Improving Melton 
Borough’s touris m offer is integral to the wider econ omic strategy for 
Leicestershire. The Local Plan seeks to plan positively to support the growth 
of sustainable tourism in the area.  
 
                                                           
7 See glossary for ma in  town centre uses   
 
                    
96         Chapter 6: Melton’s Economy                                   Melton Local Plan, October 2018   
 
 Policy EC8 – Sustainable Tourism  
Sustainable tourism, visitor and cultural development proposals will be 
supported where they improve the facilities for visitors, including 
attractions and accommodation subject to the proposal:  
1. being of an appropriate scale in the context of the host settlement; 
and  
2. having benefits to local businesses in creating the potential to 
gene rate revenues.  
Attractions and facilities of a significant scale should be located firstly 
within the town centre, then on the edge of the town centre, and then at 
other accessible locations.  
Melton Borough Council will support, where appropriate, the res toration  
of the Grantham Canal. Moreover the Borough Council will resist 
planning applications which will have an adverse impact on tourism 
across the Borough, but with particular protection applied to valued 
attractions such as the Vale of Belvoir, Belvoi r Castle and Burrough on 
the Hill Iron Age Fort, two of the most valued tourist attractions in the 
Borough.  
Larger proposals for tourist attractions/accommodation outside of 
Melton Mowbray, Service Centres and Rural Hubs may be supported, 
provided it can be proven to add significantly and demonstrably to the 
Borough’s economic or tourist offer and can be demonstrated that a 
suitable more sustainable location is not available or practicable.  
__________________________________________________________________ ___________  
KEY EVIDENCE  
2011 Census  
Melton Retail Study 2015  – Volume 1  
Melton Retail Study 2015 – Volume 2   
Melton Retail Study 2015 – Volume 3   
Melton Employment Land Review 2015  
Leicestershire and Leicester Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment, GL Hearn, 
2017   
Towards a Housing Requirement for Melton and its addendum, GL Hearn, January and June 2017  
NOMIS Official Labour Market Statistics, Office of National Statistics  
Leicestershire Rural Economy Evidence Base, Rose Regeneration, June 2 014 
Local Futures District Profile: An Economic Social and Environmental Summary of Melton Borough, 
2013   
Leicester and Leicestershire Employment Land Study, PACEC, 2012  
Melton Economic Development Strategy 2012 -2015, Melton Community Partnership,   
Melton Growth and Prosperity Plan 2018 -2022, MBC, 2018   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       97 
 Chapter 7:  Melton Borough’s Environment – 
Protected and Enhanced   
 
7.1  Landscape   
7.1.1  The Borough of Melton  is an attractive rural area that has a rich natural 
environment and built heritage . The area is valued by residents and visitors 
for its pleasant and tranquil environment and accessible countryside. It is 
important that the Local Plan ensures that these c haracteristics are 
maintained.   
7.1.2  The gentle rolling landscape varies across the Borough as a result of 
geological conditions, farming practices and the local ecology.  The area is 
famous for its pasture, dairy and beef suckler herds and sheep, and the re is 
an extensive network of hedgerows, fox coverts and country lanes.  
7.1.3  The Melton Landscape Character Assessment study  identified 20 landscape 
character areas within the Borough. They include the Vale of Belvoir, which is 
an expansive gentle vale landscape in the north -east of the Borough; the 
Wold Scarp which is probably the most dramatic landscape in the Borough; 
the Hi gh Leicestershire Hills which is a classic landscape influenced by the 
requirements of sporting estates; and the Knipton Bowl, which is probably the 
most attractive and diverse landscape within the Borough.  
7.1.4  The ‘Areas of Separation, Settlement Fringe Sensitivity and Local Green 
Space Study’  assessed the sensitivity of the landscape as it relates to the built 
form of the settlement edges of Melton Mo wbray and th e larger villages. This 
study provides guidance about how to protect the landscape and ensure that 
the qualities of the Borough which are most valued by the community are 
retained, including tranquillity and historic features such as ridge and furrow.  
7.1.5  In the past, the countryside has been a place that has generally been free of 
noise pollution and traffic movement. Tranquil areas in the countryside allow 
us to escape the noise and stress of cities, towns and suburbs, to be inspired 
and to get refresh ed. They have generally been relatively undisturbed by light 
pollution or noise, and are prized for their recreational and amenity value. The 
Campaign to Protect Rural England has measured tranquillity and produced a 
tranquillity map  for Leicestershire (2007). The county is ranked thirty -third out 
of eighty -eight English County and Unitary local authority areas for average 
relative tranquillity , with first ranked being t he most tranquil, and last ranked 
the least.  
7.1.6  One valuable aspect of the rich, natural environment of the Borough is its dark 
skies. There are two astronomical societies in the Borough which consider  
98     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 dark skies to be a valuable asset for residents and  an important aspect of 
tranquillity. National planning policy requires local planning authorities to 
encourage good design in order to limit the impact of light pollution from 
artificial light on local amenity, intrinsically dark landscapes and nature 
conservation. Sources of light pollution can include advertisements and 
floodlighting of buildings and sports facilities.  
Policy EN1 – Landscape  
The character of Melton Borough’s landscape and countryside will be 
conserved and, where possible, enhanced by:  
I. Ensuring new development is sensitive to its landscape setting and 
that it seeks, where possible, to enhance the distinctive qualities of 
the landscape character areas (as defined in the  Landscape 
Character Assessment ); and  
II. Requiring new developments to respect existing landscape 
character and features. Proposals will be supported where they do 
not have an unacceptable adverse effect upon important landscape 
features including:  
1. Distinctive topography;  
2. Important trees,  hedges and other vegetation features;  
3. Important ponds, watercourses & other water areas;  
4. Important views, approaches and settings.  
In addition, new developments will be supported where they:  
5. Do not have an unacceptable adverse effect upon an are a’s 
sense of place and local distinctiveness; and  
6. Do not have an unacceptable adverse effect upon areas of 
tranquility, including those benefiting from dark skies, unless 
proposals can demonstrate how it is intended to contribute 
towards minimizing ligh t pollution.  
 
In order to mitigate potential harm to the built form at the settlement 
fringe and its relationship to the landscape, proposals should have due 
regard to design guidance in the individual assessments of  settlement 
fringe sensitivity in the  ‘Areas of Separation, Settlement Fringe 
Sensitivity and Local Green Space Study’  or any subsequent evidence 
document.   
Neighbourhood Plans will be encouraged to use  evidence provided in 
the ‘Areas of Separation, Settlement Fringe Sensitivity and Local Green 
Space Study’  to inform site allocations and design guidance, to ensure 
that the Borough’s landscape will be conserved and where possible, 
enhanced.    
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       99 
 7.2  Biodiversity  
7.2.1  The rural nature of the area means that there is an extensive habitat for 
wildlife in the Borough.  The Local Plan seeks to maintain and improve the 
natural environment and ensure that development proposals minimise 
negative impacts on biodiversity and pro vide net gains where possible. An 
updated Biodiversity and Geo -diversity Study  (2016) of the Borou gh identified 
the designated habitats and geological sites in the B orough.  
7.2.2  The Study surveyed the suitable site options for development in and around 
Melton Mowbray and the ten largest villages and identified notable areas 
where significant habitats are present.  This has been taken into account in 
selecting land a llocations and will shape the future design of development, to 
ensure that it will retain important habitats and mitigate any potential harm 
within the final development.  Wildlife corridors and Biodiversity Enhancement 
Sites , which could provide opportuni ties for biodiversity offsetting in the new 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods around Melton Mowbray , as well as potential 
Local Wildlife Sites which are worthy of desi gnation , are also identified. Of 
note is that Melton Country Park is identified as a potential L ocal Wildlife Site 
in its entirety.     
7.2.3  There are no designated sites located within either of the Melton Mowbray 
Sustainable Neighbourhoods or any of the small sites. The River Eye SSSI is 
the only designated site located adjacent to Melton  South Sustainable 
Neighbourhood. A protection zone will be established between the River Eye 
SSSI and any future development in Melton South Sustainable 
Neighbourhood in accordance with Policy SS4.    
7.2.4  A small number of non -statutory designated Local Wildlife Sites are located 
within the Melton orth Sustainable Neighbourhood and are assessed as 
having declined in quality to varying degrees since they were originally 
designated. In all circumstances, this is considered to be due to natural 
vegetation su ccession processes coupled with lack of management. These 
would benefit from management in order to enhance or restore them to their 
qualifying conservation status.  
Policy EN2 – Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
The Borough Council will seek to achieve net gai ns for nature and 
proactively seek habitat creation as part of new development proposals. It 
will protect and enhance biodiversity, ecological networks and geological 
conservation interests throughout the Borough and beyond its 
boundaries, by supporting proposals which:  
A)  protect, extend or strengthen the Borough’s most ecologically 
sensitive areas, including the River Wreake Valley;   
100     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 B)  contribute to the provision of coherent wildlife networks;  
C) create new habitat;  
D)   re-naturalise rivers and strea ms wherever possible through the 
removal of hard engineered structures such as reinforced banks, 
weirs and culverts;  
E)  promote the preservation, restoration and re -creation of priority 
habitats as listed in the UK Priority Habitat Species List and 
Leice stershire Local Biodiversity Action Plan; and  
F) promote the use of fencing which incorporates holes for wildlife ;  
provided they do not harm:          
G)  existing, potential or proposed internationally important sites, 
such as Rutland Water Special Prot ection Area/Ramsar either 
individually or cumulatively in association with other plans or 
projects;  
H)  nationally important sites;  
I)  Local Wildlife Sites (including candidate and potential), Local 
Geological Sites, including ancient woodlands, ancient a nd 
veteran trees, hedgerows and existing corridors such as disused 
railways, that allow movement of wildlife between sites;  
J)  river corridors;  
K) biodiversity and geo -diversity designations identified in a 
Neighbourhood Plan; and  
L)  priority habitats &  species identified in the UK Priority Habitat 
Species List and Local Biodiversity Action Plans and the Melton 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity Study , unless it can be 
demonstrated that there is no alternative site available and  there 
are clear and convincing benefits of the development that clearly 
outweigh the nature conservation or scientific interest of the site. 
In this case, adequate mitigation measures or, excepti onally, 
compensatory measures will be required at a level equivalent to 
the biodiversity value of the habitat lost. Such proposals must be 
accompanied by ecological surveys and an assessment of the 
impacts on biodiversity and geodiversity.  
Proposals for a llocated sites should be informed by the site survey 
results and the recommendations for mitigation and enhancement in the 
Biodiversity and Geo -diversity Study.  
The Borough Council will support the need for the appropriate 
management and maintenance of exi sting and created habitats through 
the use of planning conditions, planning obligations and management 
agreement.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       101 
 7.3  Green Infrastructure  
7.3.1  Green infrastructure refers to all types of open space that communities use, 
ranging from formal parks and pla ying fields to areas for informal recreation 
and wildlife habitats. It has benefits for improving health and well -being, as 
well as enhancing the physical environment and providing sites for nature 
conservation.  
7.3.2  In the past, open spaces were often pl anned to meet a single purpose, such  
as sport or flood protection. However, today it is recognised that open spaces 
can frequently combine several functions including:  
 Informal recreation and relaxation  
 Children’s play  
 Outdoor sports provision  
 Countryside access and tourism  
 Conserving wildlife habitats and creating wildlife corridors  
 Protecting landscapes  
 Managing water resources and flooding. River corridors identified as 
functional floodplains are an excellent linkage of Green Infrastructure 
and can prov ide storage during a flood event.  
 Producing useful products, such as timber, bio -crops and local food  
 Countering the ‘heat island’ effect of urban areas.  
7.3.3  This combination of uses will help develop green infrastructure as a “multi -
purpose” network of open space across the Borough.  
7.3.4  The Borough has a wide range of green infrastructure assets, including the 
Grantham Canal, the Rivers Wreake and Eye, Sit es of Special Scientific 
Interest, country parks, nature reserves and local wildlife sites.  
7.3.5  There is also a comprehensive network of public rights of way including six 
promoted routes, the most notable being the Jubilee Way. A number of 
dismantled r ailway corridors also provide some access, along with the 
opportunity for further improvement.  
7.3.6  As Melton Borough grows, it is important that its green infrastructure is 
maintained and extended to meet people’s needs as well as supporting other 
objectives including nature conservation, tourism and the use and enjoyment 
of the countryside.  
7.3.7  A sub -regional Green Infrastructure Strategy (6Cs GI Strategy ) has been 
prepared for the Three Cities and Three Counties Growth Point. This has 
been supplemented with the Melton Green Infrastructure Strategy 2011 . This 
proposes Su b-Regional Green Infrastructure Corridors, including the Wreake  
102     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 Strategic River Corridor. These generally reflect significant wildlife habitat 
corridors/areas that link at the sub -regional level.  
7.3.8  The countryside in and around Melton Mowbray is reco gnised by the 6Cs GI 
Strategy as an Urban Fringe Green Infrastructure Enhancement Zone, and 
the Melton Green Infrastructure Strategy identifies it as providing the links 
between the town, sustainable nrighbourhoods  and areas beyond. All large 
development p roposals are expected to contribute to the delivery of the 
Borough -wide Green Infrastructure Strategy.  
7.3.9  The Woodland Trust’s Access to Woodland Standard includes an aspiration 
that everyone should have a small wood of at least two hectares within 500m  
of their home and a larger wood of at least 20 hectares within 4km of their 
home. ‘Space for People’ (Woodland Trust 2015) states that in Melton, 113 
hectares of new woodland creation is needed to meet the standard for access 
to a wood of 2 hectares, and 140 hectares to meet the standard for access to 
a wood of 20 hectares. The Council aspires to meet these standards, through 
particular support for proposals which contribute towards this element of 
green infrastructure provision.   
Policy EN3 – The Melton G reen Infrastructure Network  
A strategic approach to the delivery, protection and enhancement of 
green infrastructure will be taken by the Borough Council working with 
partners, in order to deliver new assets where deficits have been 
identified in the green infrastructure strategy and to enhance the 
following primary green infrastructure areas:  
1. Melton North and Melton South Sustainable Neighbourhoods in 
accordance with Policy C1;  
2. Areas of Separation in accordance with Policy EN4;  
3. River Wreake a nd River Eye strategic corridor;  
4. Jubilee Way;  
5.        Leicestershire Round Footpath ; 
6 Melton Country Park;  
7 Grantham Canal;  
8. The Wolds Escarpment;  
9 Burrough on the Hill Country Park; and  
10. Newark to Market Harborough disused railway line.  
New development proposals will be supported where they retain and 
enhance important green infrastructure elements such as:  
11. Watercourses (including ditches) and their riparian zones with 
buffers (free from development or formal landscaping) extending 
to a minimum of 8 metres from the top of the bank (on both 
banks) of any given watercourse;   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       103 
 12.    Woodland, orchard, mature trees, hedgerows;  
13.  Local BAP Habitats and those supporting local BAP priority 
species and species in the UK Priority Habitat Spe cies List;  
14.  Access routes (public rights of way and permitted routes);  
15.  Existing public green space including sports pitches in 
accordance with the Playing Pitch Strategy,  allotments and 
designated Local Green Space;  
16. Areas of geological and archaeological interest;  
17. Green infrastructure identified in the Areas of  Separation, 
Settlement Fringe Sensitivity and Local Green Space Study ; and  
18. Historic Parkland.  
The Council will particularly support proposals which contribute 
towards:  
19. The 6Cs Green Infrastructure and Strategic Networks; and  
20. The Woodland Trust’s Access to Woodland Standards . 
New or enhanced green infrastructure corridors and assets should be as 
inclusive as possible and look to make provision for more than one of 
the following:  
A) access to employment and leisure facilities and to the 
countryside;  
B) physical activity and well -being opportunities for local residents 
such as formal sports in accordance with the Playing Pitch 
Strategy , parks and allotment provision;  
C) provide high quality bridleways, walking and cycling links 
between the corridor and towns and villages;  
D) educational resources for local residents;  
E) biodiversity opportunities including the provision of tree planting, 
shrubs and other natural features on all new development sites;  
F) mitigating and adapting to climate change, including through tree 
planting ; 
G) enhancement of landscape character in accordance with Policy 
EN1;  
H) protection or enhancement of heritage assets and their setting in 
accordance with Policy EN13; and  
 I) opportunities for sustainable leisure and tourism.  
 
Where new development has a n adverse impact on green infrastructure 
corridors or assets, alternative sites and scheme designs that have no 
or little impact should be considered before mitigation is provided 
(either on site or off site as appropriate). The need for and benefit of the  
development will be weighed against the harm caused.  
  
104     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 7.4 Areas of Separation  
7.4.1  A number of our villages are separated from a neighbouring settlement by 
only a small area of open countryside which is subject to development 
pressure. These areas are highly valued locally and are functionally important 
for maintaining the separation bet ween settlements. The Areas of Separation, 
Settlement Fringe Sensitivity Study and Local Green Space Study  assessed a 
number of areas of landscape within the Borough . It supports the overall 
principle of preventing coalescence and protecting areas of landscape 
between settlements. The study assessed a number of areas of landscape 
and concluded that the following are particularly important in terms of 
preventing coales cence and protecting important landscape settings and 
areas of tranquillity:  
 between Melton Mowbray and Burton Lazars  
 between Melton Mowbray and Thorpe Arnold  
 between Melton Mowbray and Asfordby Hill  
 between Melton Mowbray and Eye Kettleby  
 between Bottesford and Easthorpe  
 between Bottesford and Normanton  
 between Asfordby and Asfordby Valley  
 between Asfordby Hill/Valley and Kirby Bellars  
 between Old Dalby and Old Dalby Trading Estate . 
7.4.2  The study recognises that some development may be acceptabl e in these 
areas, provided that the principles of maintaining separation and tranquillity 
are retained. The study therefore provides guidance for each area. This 
should be used to inform the masterplanning of future development proposals 
and the considerat ion of planning applications in the Areas of Separation 
identified above. These principles provide advice about how development can 
be accommodated in these sensitive locations in a way which maintains the 
sense of separation, and where appropriate landsca pe settings and areas of 
tranquillity.  
7.4.3  Areas of Separation (AoS) do not have a defined boundary because their 
purpose is not to prevent all development within the AoS, but rather to prevent 
development which would result in coalescence and harm to individual 
settlement character. They are not landscape designations, but rather areas 
which are identified as being particularly vulnerable to the effects of 
development.  
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       105 
 Policy EN4 – Areas of Separation  
New development proposals will be required to:  
A. Avoid the coalescence of settlements by maintaining the principle 
of separation between them;  
B. Retain highly tranquil parts of the landscape between settlements; 
and  
C. Safeguard the individual character of settlements.  
New development proposals will be supported where they respect the 
following areas of separation as identified in the ‘Areas of Separation, 
Settlement Fringe Sensiti vity and Local Green Space Study’  as shown 
on the Policies Map:  
 Melton Mowbray and Burton Lazars  
 Melton Mowbray and Thorpe Arnold  
 Melton Mowbray and Asfordby Hill  
 Melton Mowbray and Eye Kettleby  
 Asfordby and Asfordby Valley  
 Asfordby Hill/Valley and Kirby B ellars  
 Bottesford and Easthorpe  
 Bottesford and Normanton  
 Old Dalby and Old Dalby Trading Estate  
In addition, new development proposals will be supported where they 
respect any Areas of Separation identified in a Neighbourhood Plan.  
7.5 Local Green Spaces  
7.5.1  To help protect green spaces which are important to local communities the 
NPPF has introduced the ability to designate such spaces as Local Green 
Space (LGS). The NPPF considers that this special protection would not be 
appropriate for most open spac e and should only be used under the following 
conditions:  
 a) where the green space is in reasonably close proximity to the community it 
serves;  
b) where  the green area is demonstrably special to a local community and 
holds a local significance, for example because of its historic significance, 
recreational value, tranquillity or richness of its wildlife; and  
c) w here the green area concerned is local in c haracter and is not an 
extensive tract of land.   
106     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 7.5.2  The Areas of Separation, Settlement Fringe Sensitivity Study and Local Green 
Space Study  identified sites worthy of L ocal Green Space designation which 
score well against the following criteria:  
 Proximity to local community;  
 Demonstrably special to the local community (holds particular       
significance for beauty/heritage significance/wildlife value/recreational 
value / tranquillity);  
 The green area is local in character and is not an extensive tract of     
land; and  
 Strength of character, condition and quality.  
7.5.3  The Study also identifies spaces which may have the potential for Local 
Green Space designation in fut ure but which have not met the criteria for 
designation in the Local Plan. These may be appropriate for designation 
either as part of a Local Plan Review or in a Neighbourhood Plan. The Study 
provides a management strategy for these spaces in order to make  them 
more robust with regard to the Local Green Space criteria.  
Policy EN5 – Local Green Space  
Development proposals will be required to protect designated Local 
Green Spaces in the Borough.  
Proposals should not harm the key features, value and functionality of a 
Local Green Space such that its character is protected.  
Neighbourhood Plans are encouraged to designate additional Local 
Green Space as evidenced by the Areas of Separation, Settlement Fringe 
Sensitivity and Local Green Space Study  or other up to date evidence 
document.   
 
7.6 Settlement Character  
7.6.1  In addition to Local Green Space designations there are many open areas of 
land within or adjoining the general built up area of settlements which make 
an important contribution to the character of the street scene or the physical 
environment of the settlement as a whole. These include those spaces which 
have the potential for Local Green Space  designation in future.   
7.6.2  Neighbourhood Plans are encouraged to identify features within settlements 
which contribute positively towards settlement character, for example 
important open space, gateways, approaches, views and elements of the 
local ver nacular which are important to protect and enhance.    
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       107 
 7.6.3  The guidance set out in Historic England’s Advice Note 3  should be given due 
consideration  for managing change within the settings of heritage assets 
including historic buildings, sites, areas and landscapes.  
Policy EN6 – Settlement Character  
Development proposals will be supported where they do not harm open 
areas which:  
1. contribute  positively to the individual character of a settlement;  
2. contribute to the setting of historic built form and features;  
3. contribute to the key characteristics and features of conservation 
areas; and  
4. form a key entrance and/or gateway to a settlement.  
Development proposals will also  be supported where they do not harm 
individual features of a settlement which contribute towards settlement 
character as identified in a Neighbourhood Plan, including non -
desig nated heritage assets.  
7.7  Open Space, Sport and Recreation Provision  
7.7.1  Public open space is a key element in the creation of healthy and attractive 
residential environments. New housing development will increase pressure on 
existing open space and i t is therefore important that extra open space is 
provided, where appropriate.  
7.7.2  The Melton Open Space Assessment Report (2014)  assessed all typologies 
of open space against quantity, quality and accessibility standards and made 
recommendations for the protection, enhancement and delivery of additional 
open space in the Borough up to 2036.  
7.7.3  In general, there is a good provis ion and distribution of open space in the 
Borough, though some deficits in certain types of open space, such as formal 
parks or local areas for play, can be identified in specific areas.  
7.8  Allotments   
7.8.1  Allotments can often provide important open s paces and improve the 
character and appearance of built up areas, as well as helping promote 
healthy communities and aiding self -sufficiency. However, they can frequently 
be subject to pressures for development due to their location.  
7.8.2  Most allotment sites in the Borough are owned and managed by their 
respective Parish Council , although the Borough Council owns five allotment 
sites, managing three of them. The majority of allotment sites in the Borough  
108     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 are operating at 100%  capacity with few vacant plo ts and a waiting list. 
Currently, over 200 people across the Borough are waiting for a plot.  
7.8.3  The Melton Open Space Assessment  supports the protection of allotment 
sites of high quality and value, as key forms of open space provision and the 
enhance ment of those which are currently of low quality. New strategic 
allotments provision is required where waiting lists indicate a gap, in the outer 
boundaries of Melton Mowbray, Bottesford and Waltham -on-the Wolds.  
7.8.4  Development of allotment sites is no t supported unless alternative provision of 
equivalent quality, quantity and accessibility is provided. For allotment sites 
which are identified as being of low quality and low value in the Melton Open 
Space Assessment (2014) , development wou ld only be supported if it can be 
demonstrated that enhancement would not increase the use of these sites.  
7.9  Natural and Semi -natural Green Space  
7.9.1  The Melton Open Space Assessment  encourages all new development sites 
to include the provision of tree planting, shrubs and other natural features. It 
supports the enh ancement of existing sites and spaces which are currently of 
low quality and value, where this could increase their use, such as the 
embankment paths in Melton Mowbray.  
7.9.2  The enhancement of high value sites which are currently of low quality is 
suppor ted: Stathern Road local nature reserve; Wymondham Rough Site of 
Special Scientific Interest SSSI; Cribbs Meadow SSSI and National Nature 
Reserve; and River Meadow (Lake Terrace) and Dieppe Way/Nottingham 
Road . 
7.10  Amenity Green Space  
7.10.1  The Melton Open Space Assessment  identifies a need for an additional 7.5ha 
of amenity green space in central Melton and an additional 0.25ha in west 
Melton up to 2036 as part o f new strategic development. In addition, it 
recommends the enhancement of existing sites in these areas.  
7.11  Parks and Gardens  
7.11.1  The Melton Open Space Assessment  identifies a need for an additional 
2.59ha of parks and gardens in central Melton up to 2036 as part of new 
strategic development.  
7.12  Provision for Children and Young People  
7.12.1  The Melton Open Space Assessment  suppo rts the provision of an additional 
0.44ha of facilities for children and young people in central Melton, 0.1ha of 
provision in north Melton and 0.38ha of provision in west Melton up to 20 36.  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       109 
 Provision of new teenage facilities to a minimum of 0.04ha in Buckminster and 
0.04ha in Burton & Dalby, such as an outdoor gym, skate park, BMX park or 
Multi Use Games Area is also supported.   
7.12.2  The Fields in Trust recommended minimum standards  for e quipped play 
areas are applicable to all new large scale housing developments.  
7.13  Sports Pitches and Playing Fields  
7.13.1  The opportunity to take part in formal or informal recreation can have 
significant benefits for our communities’ health and well -being, providing the 
chance for social interaction and exercise.  
7.13.2  The Melton Playing Pitch Strategy A ssessment  and Playing Pitch Strategy  
provide the evidence to support the protection and/or enhancement of existing 
facilities and the provision of new facilities.  
7.13.3  This work provides an assessment of current facilities , identifies deficits and 
sets out the requirements to accommodate future growth in the Borough. 
There is unmet demand for football pitches in the Borough and the 
assessment concludes that populat ion growth will result in demand for an 
additional 1 youth pitch, 0.5 adult pitch and three mini -pitches in the Borough. 
In addition , there is a need to improve and provide further changing 
accommodation in the Borough.  
7.14  Indoor Sport and Recreation  
7.14.1 In terms of access to indoor sports halls, much of this is delivered by the 
secondary school sites, where there is more limited access  that is often being 
used to the workable limit.  The school sites do not provide pay and play 
access during daytime a nd are only available to sports clubs and community 
associations in the evening by prior arrangement. Since achieving Academy 
status, there are no Community Use Agreements in place and there is no 
guarantee that existing access enjoyed by sports clubs will  continue in future.  
7.14.2 In the rural area, village halls and other community facilities often provide the 
space required for recreational activities, such as badminton and keep fit 
classes. Whilst these are not specifically designed sports halls, they do make 
a useful contribution towards meeting local demands for physical activity.  
7.14.3  The main provision for swimming facilities in the Borough is the Waterfield 
Leisure Pool, which was refurbished in 2014.  
7.14.4  To ensure that access to high quality open spaces and sport and recreation 
facilities is maintained, the NPPF states that existing open space, sports and 
recreational buildings and land, including playing fields, should not be built on 
unless:   
110     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
  -  an assessment has been undertaken which has cl early shown the open 
space, buildings or land to be surplus to requirements; or  
 -  the loss resulting from the propose d development would be replaced by 
equivalent or better provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable 
location; or  
 -  the de velopment is for alternative spo rts and recreational provision, the 
needs for w hich clearly outweigh the loss.  
 
7.15  Future Provision of Sport and Recreation Facilities  
7.15.1  Housing development in the Borough is likely to produce an increased 
demand for  sport and recreation facilities. The studies which have been 
undertaken have informed a number of playing space standards in the Local 
Plan which residential development will have to provide to meet future needs.  
7.15.2  The Council is committed to the de livery of a strategic sports hub , the Melton 
Sports and Leisure Village (MSLV)  at King Edward VII Community Sports 
Centre. The Melton Sports Facilities Strategy 2016 -2021  recommends that 
there is the need for refurbishment of the existing sports hall and a new 6 
court sports hall at the MSLV in order to meet the needs of the future 
population. In addition, Waterfield pool will require replacement by a larger 6 
lane pool and new learner pool at MSLV. The Strategy also identifies that a 
larger fitness suite on the site is a priority investment project.  
Policy EN7 – Open Space, Sport and Recreation  
Where there are identified local deficiencies in the quantity, accessibility 
and/or quality of open space, sports and recreational facilities, new 
residential development of 10 dwellings or more will be required to 
contribute towards their provision and/or  enhancement, in accordance 
with the table below , subject to viability considerations.  
Quantity standards and playing pitch requirements  
Open space typology  Standard (ha/1000 population)  
Parks and gardens  1.92 
Natural and semi -natural greenspace  1.38 
Amenity greenspace  0.77 
Provision for children and young 
people  0.13 
Allotments  0.38 
Playing pitches  Requirement (ha/1000 population)  
Football pitches  0.41 
New development proposals will be supported where they protect sports 
facilities and strategically important sites and key centres as identified 
in the Playing Pitch Strategy .   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       111 
 The strategic open space, sport and recreation needs of th e Borough up 
to 2036 will be met by working in partnership with Parish Councils 
through the development of Neighbourhood Plans, and with other 
partners, to deliver:  
A. New allotment space as part of new development in Melton 
Mowbray, Bottesford and Waltham  on the Wolds.  
B. Enhancement of the following natural greenspaces: Stathern 
Road Local Nature Reserve; Wymondham Rough SSSI; Cribbs 
Meadow SSSI and National Nature Reserve; and River Meadow 
(Lake Terrace) and Dieppe Way/Nottingham Road.  
C. 7.5ha of amenity greenspace in central Melton and 0.25ha of 
space in west Melton.  
D. 2.59ha of parks/gardens in central Melton.  
E. 0.44ha of facilities for children and young people in central 
Melton, 0.1ha of provision in north Melton and 0.38ha of provision 
in we st Melton.  
F. New teenage facilities to a minimum of 0.04ha in Buckminster and 
0.04ha in Burton & Dalby.  
G. Redevelopment of King Edward VII community sports centre to 
the Melton Sports and Leisure Village, a multi -sports hub, in 
accordance with the Melton  Indoor Sports Facilities Strategy 
2016 -2021.  
7.16  Tackling Climate Change  
7.16.1  There is international consensus that anthropogenic climate change is 
happening and that it presents a significant risk to society, environmentally, 
socially and economical ly. There is now almost 40% more carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere than there was before the industrial revolution, a level not 
experienced for at least the last 800,000 years.  
7.16.2  According to the Meteorological Office, global temperature records show that 
the average temperature of the planet's surface rose by 0.89 °C from 1901 to 
2012. Compared with climate change patterns throughout Earth's history, the 
rate of temperature rise since the Industrial Revolution is extremely high. The 
first decade of th is century has been, by far, the warmest decade on the 
instrumental record which started in the 1850s. The highest temperature ever 
recorded (38.5°C) occurred in August 2003 in Kent.  
7.16.3  In general, the UK climate is expected to become hotter and drier in the 
summer and warmer and wetter in the winter. Key expected changes include:  
 Average UK annual temperatures may rise by 2 to 3.5 degrees by the 
2080s.   
112     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
  Annual average precipitation across the UK may decrease slightly, by 
between 0 and 15% by the 2080s. However the seasonal distribution of 
precipitation will change significantly, with winters becoming wetter and 
summers drier.  
 An increase in the prevalence of extreme weather events. High summer 
temperatures and dry conditions will become more common. Very  cold 
winters will become increasingly rare and extreme winter precipitation 
will be more frequent. The summer heat wave experienced in 2003 is 
likely to become a normal event by the 2040s and will be c onsidered 
cool by the 2060s.  
 
   Climate Change Mitigation  
7.16.4  The UK Government is actively seeking to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions and has set targets in the Climate Change Act 2008 and Carbon 
Plan 2011 to cut GHG emissions by at least 34% by 2020 and 80% by 2050 
below the 1990 baseline. However, the Government recognises that these 
targets will not be achieved without interventions by local organisations and in 
particular, local authorities.  As such the Local Government  Association  and  
the  Department  of  Energy  and  Climate  Change  (DECC) developed a 
memorandum of understanding to work closely together to support the 
reduction  in  GHG  emissions.   Part of this agreement includes the 
replacement of  the  Nottingham  Declaration  on  Climate  Change  with  
Climate Lo cal, which requires that local authorities publish  specific  
commitments  for  which  they  are  accountable.  Melton Borough Council 
and Leicestershire County Council have signed up to Climate Local and 
Melton Borough Council is currently developing a Cl imate Local Action Plan.  
7.16.5  The  Carbon  Reduction  Target  for  Leicestershire  is  to  reduce  emissions  
by  23% between  2005  and  2020  as  measured  by  the  Department  of  
Energy  and  Climate Change , as shown in Figure 10 .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       113 
 Figure 10: Derivation of Melton  Borough’s  Carbon Reduction Strategy  
 
 
7.16.6  The Department of Energy and Climate Change’s (DECC) carbon dioxide 
emissions estimates 2014 show that total emissions in Melton Borough 
reduced by 12.4% between 2005 and 2012, which compares to a reduction of 
14% nationally. In addition, the 2012 per capita emissions in Melton were 8 
tonnes compared to 7 tonnes nationally. These differences are likely due to 
the rural nature of the Borough where opportunities to use sustainable modes 
of transport are generally fewer than in more urban areas. This emphasises 
the importance of a spatial strategy which concentrates growth around Melton 
Mowbray where existing sustainable transport infrastructure can be utilised 
and expanded (Chapter  4). 
7.16.7  The Local Plan needs to ensure that the use and development of land will 
contribute to climate change mitigation and that new developments should be 
designed to be energy efficient and to maximise the generation of renewable 
and low carbon energ y. The energy hierarchy  (see Figure 11)  is the 
recognised approach to reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Its 
implementation can also be important in meeting wider policy goals, such as 
reducing fuel poverty which is important in Melton where 18 -32% of 
hous eholds were identified as being in fuel poverty in 2012 (DECC 2014).  
 
 
 
 
 
 Melton Carbon Reduction Strategy  
Climate Local - will set a carbon reduction strategy for Melton  Leicestershire Carbon Reduction Strategy  
Climate Local - set a carbon reduction target for Leicestershire of 23% between 
2005 and 2020  2011 National Carbon Plan  
set interim targets that the UK will reduce carbon emissions by 34% by 2020 
compared to levels in 1990  2008 Climate Change Act  
set legally binding targets for UK to reduce carbon emissions by 80% by 2050 
compared to levels in 1990    
114     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 Figure 11: The Energy Hierarchy  
 
Climate Change Adaptation  
7.16.8  The planning system can help in addressing concerns about the effects of 
climate change (adaptation) by supporting design solutions that take account 
of flood risk, water efficiency and delivering green and blue infrastructure to 
aid cooling.  
7.16.9  Whils t new development in the Borough provides an opportunity for the 
introduction of such sustainable schemes, these opportunities will need to be 
balanced with retaining the Borough’s unique built heritage and natural 
character, along with the viability of de velopment.  
Trees and Woodland  
7.16. 10 Trees and woods play an important role in helping combat climate change, 
through both mitigation and adaptation. Trees can sequester carbon from the 
atmosphere and can be used as a sustainable source of fuel and build ing 
materials. Trees can also help in adaptation, by shading of buildings during 
the summer months and by cooling the atmosphere by evapotranspiration.  
Policy  EN8 – Climate Change  
All new development proposals will be required to demonstrate how the 
need to mitigate and adapt to climate change has been considered, 
subject to considerations of viability, in terms of:  
 Sustainable design and construction in accordance with Policy 
EN9 – ensuring energy efficient and low carbon development.  Conventional Energy  
Efficient conventional options  Low Carbon Energy  
Combined Heat and Power, Heat Networks  Renewable Energy  
Solar, thermal, wind, biomass, hydro  Energy Efficiency  
Insulation  Energy Reduction  
Passive Design Measures, low embodied energy/recycled materials,  minimising 
construction waste   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       115 
  Provision of green i nfrastructure in accordance with Policy EN3 – 
the Melton Green Infrastructure Network.  
 Provision of renewable and/or low carbon energy production, 
including decentralised energy and/or heat networks in 
accordance with Policy EN10 – energy generation from r enewable 
sources.  
 Flood risk in accordance with Policy EN11 – minimizing the risk of 
flooding and policy EN12 – sustainable urban drainage systems.  
 Providing opportunities for sustainable modes of transport in 
accordance with Policy IN1 – delivering infras tructure to support 
new development.  
7.17  Adaptation of Existing Buildings and Heritage Assets  
7.17.1  The provision of measures to address climate change in new development will 
be an important component of the Local Plan. However, the majority of the 
Borough’s dwelling stock is already built. To increase their energy efficiency, it 
is possible to retrofit  older dwellings through measures such as roof 
insulation, wall cladding or new windows. Beyond improving energy efficiency, 
it is also possible to retrofit small scale renewables to existing buildings such 
as solar panels, wind turbines and ground source heat pumps.  
7.17. 2 Historic buildings can provide good examples of sustainable layouts and 
construction methods along with the efficient use of energy and local 
resources; their survival reflects their success and adaptability. Conserving 
and re -using hist oric buildings retains their materials and ‘embodied energy’ 
which is the energy used in producing the materials and the building’s 
construction.  
7.17. 3 There are opportunities in most historic buildings to improve energy 
conservation without causing harm , through measures such as secondary 
glazing, improved loft insulation using natural materials, low energy lighting 
and the use of fuel efficient boilers. In some situations renewable energy 
technologies can also be installed without causing harm to the he ritage 
significance.  
7.17.4  Where conflict is unavoidable, the benefits of energy conservation measures 
should be weighed against the extent of harm to the heritage significance 
public benefits.  
7.18  Sustainable Construction Methods  
7.18.1  The construct ion process for any new development uses a significant amount 
of resources and generates construction waste and spoil. It is therefore 
important that as well as designing developments to be sustainable when  
116     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 completed, developments should take account of th e principles of sustainable 
development during the construction process.  
7.18.2 This can be done by minimizing the adverse effects generated by 
construction, through the careful management of materials already on site and 
entering the site, and maximising the reuse of materials or the recycling of 
materials on site or locally.  
7.18.3  New developments should maximise the use of energy efficiency and energy 
conservation measures in their design, layout and orientation to:  
 Reduce the overall demand for energy;  
 Reduce carbon dioxide emissions;  
 Reduce heat island effects;  
 Contribute to health and well -being; and  
 Be able to adapt to the affects of climate change.  
7.18.4  Water is a precious resource and the impacts of climate change will place 
pressure on the demands for water and its quality. The Environment Agency’s 
Water Resources Strategy for the Midlands predicts that by 2050, climate 
change could reduce summer river flows by 50 to 80 per cent. Increasing 
water efficiency will not only reduce demand for water but also reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions associated with water abstraction, treatment, 
transport, use and disposal.  
7.18.5  All major development proposals will be expected to be accompanied by a 
proportionate statement of their sustainability. The statement will show how 
these considerations have been considered and explain what sustainable 
features are proposed as part of the dev elopment. Examples may include 
renewable energy, water saving measures and green roof systems along with 
other climate change adaptations. Excellent electronic communication 
networks can also support sustainable development.  
7.18.6  Development proposals w ill be encouraged which:  
1. Incorporate exemplar renewable energy generating technology;  
2. Incorporate efficient building design/orientation;  
3. Use land efficiently; and  
4. Minimise energy demands.  
7.18.7 Design flexibility and future proofing will be encouraged fo r developments to 
be adaptable over time.  
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       117 
 Policy EN9 – Ensuring Energy Efficient and Low Carbon 
Development  
Major development proposals will be required to demonstrate how the 
need to reduce carbon emissions has influenced the design, layout and 
energy source used, subject to viability. A design and access statement 
will need to consider the following:  
Development proposals, including refurbishment, will be supported 
where they demonstrate the following, subject to viability:  
1. How effective use has been m ade of materials that have been reused, 
recycled, are renewable, locally sourced, have been transported in 
the most sustainable manner, and have low embodied energy;  
2. How the design optimises  natural sunlight and solar gain, and 
prevents overheating including providing non -mechanical means of 
ventilation and opportunities for cooling from tree planting and 
landscaping;  
3. How heat loss from all elements of the building envelope will be 
prevented;  
4. Water efficient measures to reduce demand on water resources, 
including through the use of efficient appliances, rainwater recycling,  
water butts and underground storage tanks, where technically 
feasible;  
5. How developments (dwellings and non -dwellings) h ave considered 
on-site renewable, low carbon or de -centralised energy provision, 
including connection to existing networks, where feasible, in 
accordance with Policy EN10;  
6. Space for a home office in new homes;  
7. Space for cycle storage in new homes and emp loyment sites and, 
where appropriate showers and changing facilities; and  
8. Charging points for electric cars.  
A site waste management plan which emphasizes waste minimization, 
re-use and recycling during demolition and construction will be required 
for maj or development proposals .  
 
Development should be phased to ensure sufficient waste water 
treatment capacity is available before development is complete;  
 
The retrofitting of existing buildings so as to maximise  opportunities to 
prevent heat loss from all elements of the building envelope will be 
supported where it:  
 does not harm heritage assets or their significance; and  
 protects the character of conservation areas.   
118     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 7.19  Renewable and Low Carbon Energy in Melto n Borough  
7.19.1  The UK Renewable Energy Strategy (2009)  indicates that 15% of the UK’s 
energy demand will be met by renewable or low carbon energy sources by 
2020. These include commercial and small scale wind, solar photovoltaic, 
solar thermal, ground source heat, hydroelectric, and biomass renewable 
technolo gies. This will also assist in meeting the UK’s wider targets for 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions under the Kyoto Protocol and the Climate 
Change Act 2008. The latter requires an 80% reduction in UK emissions by 
2050 with a 50% reduction having been achi eved between 2023 and 2027.  
7.19.2  The Planning for Climate Change Study , evidenced by recent planning 
applications, suggests that Melton Borough ha s a strong potent ial to develop 
renewable energy: solar, wind and biomass energy from crops and waste. 
Wood obtained from trees which are certified as being managed in an 
environmentally sustainable way provides a sustainable source of biomass 
fuel. Whilst such technologie s may be viable, they can have a significant 
impact on the landscape.   
7.20  Decentralised Renewable Energy and Large Scale Renewable 
Energy  
7.20.1  Unlike conventional power sources that rely on large power stations supplying 
the national grid, renewable energy from biomass, wind or solar power can be 
developed to supply individual communities and buildings. These may still be 
connected to the nationa l grid or can operate separately using local power 
networks.  
7.20.2  In the future, community owned decentralised schemes could benefit a whole 
settlement. For example, Hockerton in Nottinghamshire has bought and 
installed a 225kw wind turbine, with feed -in tariff profits benefitting 
shareholders and paying for projects to benefit the local community.  
7.20.3  However, it is unlikely that renewable energy alone will meet our energy 
demand. The Government has signalled its intention to investigate the 
opportun ities which shale gas fracking may offer to provide additional sources 
of energy in the future. There is a possibility that areas in the Borough , 
notably to the North and West, may be considered to have the potential for 
shale gas production. However, Leic estershire County Council would be the 
authority responsible for determining such proposals, as the Mineral Planning 
Authority.  
7.20.4  To meet the national requirements for renewable energy production it is likely 
that, subject to funding availability, the re will be continued demand for large 
scale renewable energy proposals in the Borough, with different types of 
renewable energy technology having differing impacts.   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       119 
 7.20.5  These large scale renewable proposals, especially wind energy, can have a 
significan t impact upon the character and appearance of an area through 
impacts upon the landscape and heritage assets, along with effects on the 
amenity of residents.  
7.20.6  In protecting Melton Borough’s rural character, national policy also requires 
that consider ation must be given to the need to reduce carbon emissions and 
support and deliver economic growth through low carbon energy generation.  
7.20.7  The Local Plan sets out an approach to supporting and managing these types 
of development to ensure that adverse  impacts are addressed, including 
cumulative landscape and visual impacts.   
7.20.8  The Borough Council has prepared evidence on the impact of wind energy on 
the landscape . The Melton and Rushcliffe  Landscape Sensitivity Study  2014  
indicates the areas which have the most capacity and are the least sensitive 
for renewable wind energy devel opment. This evidence has been used to 
inform policy on renewable energy such that it complies with the ministerial 
statement issued in June 2015 by t he Secretary of State for Communities and 
Local Government, which is referenced in the National Planning P ractice 
Guidance ( Paragraph: 033 Reference ID: 5 -033-150618) . This set out new 
considerations to be applied to proposed wind energy development such that 
when determining planning applications for wind energy development 
involving one or more wind turbines, local planning authorities should only 
grant planning permission  if: 
 the development site is in an area identified as suitable for wind 
energy development in a local or neighbourhood plan; and  
 following consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning 
impacts identified by affected local communities have been ful ly 
addressed and therefore the proposal has their backing.  
7.20.9  In applying these new considerations, suitable areas for wind energy 
development will need to have been allocated clearly in a local or 
neighbourhood plan. Whether a proposal has the backing  of the affected local 
community is a planning judgement for the local planning authority.  
7.20.10  The Melton and Rushcliffe Landscape Sensitivity Study  divides the 
Borough’s landscape into 15 Landscape Character Assessment Units and 
makes a judgment on the landscape sensitivity to different heights of turbine. 
Sensitivity is judged on a five -point scale as shown in Tab le 15  below:  
 
 
 
  
120     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 Table 1 5: Landscape s ensitivity levels and definitions  
Sensitivity 
level  Definition  
High The key characteristics and qualities of the landscape are highly 
sensitive to change from the type and scale of renewable energy 
being assessed.  
Moderate -High The key characteristics and qualities  of the landscape are 
sensitive to change from the type and scale of renewable energy 
being assessed.  
Moderate  Some of the key characteristics and qualities of the landscape are 
sensitive to change from the type and scale of renewable energy 
being assesse d. 
Low-Moderate  Few of the key characteristics and qualities of the landscape are 
sensitive to change from the type and scale of renewable energy 
being assessed.  
Low Key characteristics and qualities of the landscape are robust and 
are less likely to be adversely affected by the type and scale of 
renewable energy development being assessed.  
7.20.11  The assessment is applied to all forms of turbines based on the most 
common horizontal axis three -bladed turbine and cluster sizes, based on 
bandings that ref lect those most likely to be put forward by developers. These 
are set out in T able 16 . 
7.20.12  It is considered that Landscape Character Assessment Units (LCUs) judged 
as being of Low or Low -Moderate sensitivity are suitable for wind energy 
development for the turbine heights and cluster sizes defined in the Melton 
and Rushcliffe Landscape Sensitivity Study . 
 
 
Table 1 6: Most Common Horizontal Axis and Cluster Size  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.20.1 3 It should be noted that the Study is not a definitive statement on the 
suitability of a certain location, such that a site near the boundary of two LCUs 
needs to consider the assessment for both areas. The table in Policy EN10 
which identifies areas suitable  for wind energy development must be read in 
the context of the entire policy and the criteria 1 -14 within it.  Height to blade tip  
<25m  
25 to 50m  
51 to 75m  
76 to 110m  
111 to 150m  
Cluster size  
Single turbine  
Cluster of two or three turbines  
Wind farm of four or five turbines  
Wind farm of six or seven turbines  
Wind farm of eight to ten turbines   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       121 
 7.20.14  The layout and design of wind energy development proposals should be 
informed by both the generic guidance and the detailed guidance for each 
Landscape Character Unit in the Melton and Rushcliffe Landscape Sensitivity 
Study 2014.   
7.20.15  In considering the cumulative effects of wind energy development, the 
guidance for multiple developments in the Melton and Rushcliffe Landscape 
Sensitivity Study 2014  should be followed.  
Policy EN10 – Energy Generation from Renewable and Low 
Carbon Sources  
Renewable and low carbon energy proposals appropriate for Melton, 
including biomass power generation, combined heat and power (CHP), 
hydro, wind, solar and micro generation systems, will be supported and 
considered in the context of sustainable development  and climate 
change.  
Proposals for renewable and low carbon energy technology, associated 
infrastructure and integration of renewable and low carbon technology 
on existing or proposed structures will be assessed both individually 
and cumulatively on their  merits taking account of the following factors;  
1. Siting, so as to gain maximum effect from wind/solar/water 
sources;  
2. The surrounding landscape, townscape and heritage assets;  
3. Residential and visual amenity;  
4. Noise impacts;  
5. Odour impacts;  
6. Designated nature conservation, geo -diversity or biodiversity 
considerations, including potential impact on ancient woodland 
and veteran trees;  
7. Ecology;  
8. Aircraft movements and associated activities, including effects on 
radar, communications and navi gational systems;  
9. Electromagnetic transmissions;  
10. High quality agricultural land;  
11. Access for construction, maintenance and de -commissioning;  
12. Not creating demand for bio -energy fuels known to result in net 
carbon emissions through production methods, transport 
requirements and/or loss of carbon sinks;  
13. General safety in terms of highways, power lines, icing, visual 
distraction; and  
14. Transport movements for importation of biomass fuel.  
 
In the case of proposals for wind energy development  involving 
one or more wind turbines, planning permission will only be 
granted if:  
15. A bond is in place to cover de -commissioning; and   
122     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 16. The development site is in an area identified as being suitable for 
wind turbine development in a Neighbourhood Plan; or  
17. The development site is in an area identified as being of low or 
low-moderate sensitivity to wind turbine development in the 
Melton and Rushcliffe Lands cape Sensitivity Study 2014 . These 
areas and acceptable turbine requirements are set out in the table 
below. The landscape character units are indicated on the Policies 
Map; and  
18.   Following consultation, it can be demonstrated that the planning 
impacts  identified by affected local communities have been fully 
addressed and therefore the proposal has their backing.  
 
In developing proposals for new thermal generating stations, developers 
should consider the opportunities for CHP and district heating from the 
very earliest point and it should be adopted as a criterion when 
considering locations for a project. Renewable and low carbon energy 
proposals which will directly benefit a local community in the medium 
and long term and/or are targeted at residents experiencing fuel poverty 
will be particularly supported.  
7.21 Managing Water Resources and Flooding  
7.21.1  The Borough’s rivers, lakes and brooks are a valuable asset, supporting 
wildlife, recreation and tourism, as well as providing water for business, Landscape Character 
Assessment Unit  Maximum Acceptable Turbine Height (to blade tip) 
and Cluster Size  
LCU1 Vale of Belvoir  <25m as a single turbine or clusters of two/three 
in larger scale areas  
LCU3 Leicestershire Wolds: 
Dalby to Belvoir Wolds  <25m as a single turbine or clusters of two/three 
in larger scale areas  
LCU5 Leicestershire Wolds: 
Ragdale to Saltby Woods  <25m as a single turbine in the smaller vales or 
two/three turbines in elevated areas.  
LCU6 Kesteven Uplands: Saltby 
and Sproxton Limestone Edge  Up to 75m as clusters of two/three turbines in 
wooded areas or clusters of four/five in open 
arable areas  
LCU8 High Leicestershire Hil ls: 
Great Dalby and Gaddesby 
Pastoral Farmland  Up to 50m as clusters of four/five turbines and in 
areas of varied, steeply sloping  topography and 
small field patterns clusters of two/three  
LCU9 Leicestershire Wolds: 
Wreake Valley  <25m as clusters of two/ three turbines  
LCU 10 Leicestershire Wolds: 
Eye Valley  <25m as a single turbine in the east of the area 
and two/three turbines in the west.  
LCU11 High Leicestershire Hills: 
Gaddesby Valley  <25m as clusters of two/three turbines  
LCU13 Leicestershire Wolds: 
Buckminster, Wymondham and 
Freeby Farmland  Up to 50m as clusters of two/three turbines  
LCU14 Leicestershire Wolds: 
Asfordby Quarry  Up to 50m in clusters of four/five turbines  
LCU15 Leicestershire Wolds: 
Melton Farmland Fringe  Up to 50m as clusters  of two/three turbines   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       123 
 agriculture and households. Water resources require careful management to 
conserve their qual ity and value, and, to address flooding issues.  
7.21.2  The bodies responsible for water resources and flood risk are increasingly 
looking at whole river catchments as the best way of integrating the aims of 
water conservation, wildlife and flood managemen t.  
7.22  Flood Risk in Melton Borough  
7.22.1  National planning policy requires a risk based sequential approach to flood 
risk, avoiding high risk areas and steering development to areas at lower risk.  
7.22.2  As well as managing risk to the development itself, development should not 
increase flood risk elsewhere and opportunities should be taken to reduce 
downstream flooding events, for example, by reducing run -off rates.  
7.22.3  Local Plans are required to follow a “sequential approach” to development 
whereby sites at risk of flooding can only be allocated for development if there 
is insufficient land available in areas with lesser or no flood risk.  
Exceptionally, it may be appropriate to develop land at risk of flooding for 
sustainability reasons or to avoid economic or social blight in an area.  
7.22.4  Melton Borough is at flood risk from a variety of sources. Flood history shows 
the Borough has been subject to flooding from all sources of flooding in the 
past, most recently in 2007 and 2012 where Melto n Mowbray was protected 
by its defences. Melton Mowbray and Bottesford suffered flooding from canals 
in 2001, with flooding in Bottesford due to a combination of fluvial and surface 
water, as well as from the Grantham Canal. Whilst the standard of protecti on 
through Melton Mowbray is high, the current condition of many defences in 
the Borough are classed as ‘fair’ or ‘poor’ suggesting some improvement or 
remediation may be required in the future if the defence is to provide the 
desired standard of protectio n. Developer contributions towards improvement 
and/or maintenance of flood defence provision may be necessary in order to 
make development proposals acceptable where defences are deemed 
unsatisfactory.  
7.22.5  Melton Borough Council has undertaken a Level 1 and Level 2 Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (2015)  to provide evidence to make informed 
decisions on the Local Plan. This has appraised all potential sources of 
flooding including Main River, Ordinary Watercourse, sewers, canal, reservoir, 
surface water and groundwater flooding and makes an assessment of the 
potential increase in risk due to climate change.  It has updated and reviewed 
historic flooding incidents and mapped the location and extent of the 
functional floodplain.  
7.22.6  A SFRA Addendum Report (2016)  has updated the climate change mapping 
for the Borough to take account of new climate change guidance issued by  
124     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 the Environment Agency in February 2016.  This shows the potential impacts 
that climate change may have on river flows and subsequently on flood 
events in a ‘worse -case scenario’. In the 2015 SFRA , this involved applying a 
20% change factor to the 1 in 100 yea r flows. The new guidance requires that 
a 50% change factor be applied to 1 in 100 year flows. The consequences of 
this are that some areas which are currently not at risk of flooding could be in 
future. New development must therefore be designed to be flo od resistant and 
resilient for future scenarios by, for example raising floor levels or siting the 
least vulnerable parts of the development in areas most at risk.   
7.22.7  As well as assessing the impact of future large -scale developments both 
within and outside the Borough, the SFRA includes detailed assessments for 
potential large and small scale site allocations and has informed the 
assessment of the suitability of sites for allocation and informed site specific 
policies. These set out the flood risk to  the site and provide guidance for site 
specific flood risk assessments, as well as recommendations on the likely 
acceptability of different types of sustainable drainage system for managing 
surface run -off. The SFRA provides a framework for the applicatio n of the 
Sequential Test of sites and, where necessary, the Exception Test .   
7.23 Flood Risk Assessments  
7.23.1  Flood Risk Assessments (FRA) are required for all de velopment proposals 
over 1 hectare and those on sites in Flood Zones 2 and 3. The aim of the FRA 
is to demonstrate that the development is protected to the 1% annual 
probability event and is safe during the design flood event, including an 
allowance for cl imate change. Mitigation measures should only be considered 
once risk has been minimised as far as possible by planning sequentially 
across a site. Methods to reduce flood risk include:  
1. SuDS;  
2. Site layout and design;  
3. Modification of ground levels;  
4. Localised  raised defences with compensatory storage if defences 
remove storage from the floodplain or flood cell;  
5. Raised floor levels in buildings to 600mm above the maximum water 
level caused by a 1 in a 100 year flood event plus climate change;  
6. Improvement of fl ood defence provision; and  
7. Resistance and resilience through flood barriers, wet -proofing and non -
return valves.  
7.24 Sustainable Drainage Systems   
7.24.1  Surface water flooding describes flooding from sewers, drains and ditches 
that occurs during heavy rainfall in urban areas and includes overland flows 
originating from groundwater springs. Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS)  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       125 
 are used to reduce the risk of flooding caused by surface water drainage by 
copying the way that water drains in nature, instead of relying solely on 
traditional piped drainage.  
7.24.2  The design, construction and future maintenance of SuDS must be carefully    
defined and a clear and comprehensive understanding of the existing 
catchment, hydrological processes and existing drainage arrangements is 
essential. On 15th April 2015 Leicestershire County Council, as the Lead 
Local Flood Authority (LLFA), became a statutory consultee to the p lanning 
process and is responsible for reviewing the surface water drainage systems 
for all major development applications.  
7.24.3  SuDS can enhance green infrastructure and a river or stream corridor through 
the creation of wet habitats such as floodplain grazing marsh, floodplain 
meadows, wet woodland and ephemeral and permanent ponds.  
Policy EN11 – Minimizing the Risk of Flooding  
Melton Borough Council will ensure that development proposals do not 
increase flood risk and will seek to reduce flood risk to others.  The 
Council will do this by working in partnership with the appropriate 
agencies (the Environment Agency, Leicestershire C ounty Council as 
Lead Local Flood Authority, Internal Drainage Boards, Severn Trent & 
Anglian Water and the Canal and River Trust), developers and 
landowners.   
The Borough Council will follow a sequential approach to flood risk 
management with the aim of locating development on land with the 
lowest risk of flooding ( Zone 1 and outside of surface water flood risk). 
For development in Flood Zones 2, 3a & 3b, the exception test will be 
applied in accordance with Table 3 of National Planning Practice 
Guidance.  In addition:  
The development of sites in Zone 2 will be permitted where 
development:  
a) is resilient to flooding through design and layout which follows a 
sequential approach and includes hazard free access to sites for 
pedestrians and vehicles in the event of flooding;  
b) has floor levels which are above the 1 in 100 -year flood level plus 
an allowance for climate change (in line with the latest climate 
change guidance), with appropriate freeboard; and  
c) incorporates  appropriate mitigation measures, such as on -site 
flood  defence  works  and/or a contribution towards or a 
commitment to undertake  such  off -site measures  as  may  be 
necessary.   
126     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 Development in defended Zone 3a will only be considered where it can 
be demonstrated that it meets requirements A), B), & C) above, and:  
d) it is safe from residual risk of flood defences failing, e.g. 
overtopping breach and pump failure, and  
e) it does not impede flow rates or reduce flood plain storage unless 
compensatory storage is provided on a level -for-level and volume -
for-volume basis.  
Development on undefended Zone 3a will only be considered where it 
can be demonstrated that it meets requirements of A), B), C), E) above 
and:  
f) is appropriate in accordance with Table 3 of the National Planning 
Practice Guidance, or  
g) cannot be located on land at lower risk due to lack of suitable 
land, where there are exceptional reasons for the development to 
take place in that location;  
Development on the functional floodplain (Zone 3b) will be allowed for 
water -compatible uses and essential i nfrastructure only, where no 
reasonable alternative sites are available and the requirements of A), B), 
C) and E) above are met.  
All planning applications for development in Flood Zones 2 and 3, or 
which exceed one hectare should be accompanied by a flood risk 
assessment which should:  
 Be informed by the Melton Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  and 
the best available information covering all sources of flood risk;  
 Be proportionate  to  the  degree  of  flood  risk,  as  well  as  the  
scale,  nature  and location  of  the  development;  
 Include  a  Surface  Water  Drainage  Strategy  which  
demonstrates that the proposed  drainage  scheme,  and  site  
layout  and  desig n,  will  prevent  properties  from flooding from 
surface water, allowing for climate change effect and that flood 
risk elsewhere will not be exacerbated by increased levels of 
surface water runoff;  
 Incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems and  considers t heir 
ongoing maintenance unless they are demonstrated to be not 
technically feasible;  
 Demonstrate that the development will be safe during its lifetime, 
does not affect the integrity of existing flood defenses and any 
necessary flood mitigation measures ha ve been agreed with the 
relevant body;  
 Demonstrate that the adoption, ongoing maintenance and 
management of any mitigation measures have been considered 
and any necessary agreements are in place;   
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       127 
  Demonstrate how proposals have taken a positive approach to 
reducing overall flood risk and have considered the potential to 
contribute towards solutions for the wider area;  
 Demonstrate that the condition of any relevant defences and 
residual flood risk has been considered.  
 
Where appropriate the Council will require developers to restore 
watercourses to a more natural state through the removal of hard 
engineering, such as culverts and bank reinforcement, in order to 
reduce flood risk and provide local amenity and biodiversity benefits.  
 
Normally no buildings s hould be constructed within 8 metres of the 
banks of watercourses, to allow access for maintenance as well as 
providing an ecological corridor. In addition, proposals should not result 
in the loss of any existing open water features.  
 
Proposals will need t o demonstrate that there is the capacity within the 
foul water sewerage network or that capacity can made available prior to 
the occupation of the development.  
 
Proposals for flood management or other infrastructure offering 
improvements that lower the risk of flooding will be supported, subject 
to the proposal not resulting in an increase in flood risk elsewhere.  
 
Proposals for development located adjacent to the Grantham Canal will 
need to consider the residual risk in the event of overtopping and/or 
breaches of the embankment due to culvert collapse or animal 
burrowing.  
For allocated sites in areas at risk of flooding, proposals should 
demonstrate how site -specific flood risk implications identified in the 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment  have been addressed.  
 
Policy EN12 – Sustainable Drainage Systems  
For major developments, proposals should demonstrate through a 
surface water drainage strategy that properties will not be at risk from 
surface water flooding allowing for climate change effects.  
Surface water management should be undertaken, wherever pra cticable 
through the utilisation of appropriate SuDS techniques which mimic 
natural drainage patterns, and where appropriate achieve net gains for 
nature through the creation of ponds and wetlands near watercourses 
and the introduction of blue green corrid ors. For SuDS techniques 
which are designed to encourage infiltration, a site -specific infiltration 
test will be required to ensure that the water table is low enough.   
128     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 For sites which lie within or close to groundwater protection zones or 
aquifers, guidan ce should be sought from the Lead Local Flood 
Authority.  
Where SuDS are not technically feasible, the applicant is required to 
provide evidence that a connection to a public surface water sewer is 
necessary.  
All developments will be expected to be designe d to achieve, where 
appropriate, a net decrease in surface water run -off rates, including 
through green infrastructure provision such as the planting of native 
trees and bushes and the consideration of using ‘green roofs’. All 
developments on greenfield si tes will be expected to achieve greenfield 
run-off rates.  
All developments will be required to manage surface water through 
keeping to a minimum the creation of non -permeable areas.  
For allocated sites, any surface water management strategy should 
demonstrate how site -specific guidance  in the Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment  has been implemented.  
7.25  Heritage  
7.25.1  Melton Borough has a r ich and varied herit age with 702  historic buildings and 
44 designated conservation areas. Melton Borough also has 2 Registered 
Parks and Gardens at Belvoir Castle and Stapleford Park, and 35 Scheduled 
Monuments. Not all these are open to the public.  
7.25.2  Conservation Area Appraisals and Management Plans for all of the 
designated conservation areas are completed. These will help us enhance the 
historic environment and to respond sensitively to proposals for development 
within Conservation Areas and those af fecting listed buildings. In addition, the 
Melton Borough Landscape and Historic Urban Character Assessment Report 
(2011)  provides an assessment of the historic asse ts of Melton Mowbray 
which should be referenced  for all development proposals within the town.  
7.25.3  Melton Borough contains a wealth of heritage assets which play an important 
part in the local character and identity of the Borough. Therefore, it is 
important that both designated and non -designated heritage assets are 
recognised and protected. Where possible they should be enhanced through 
the new Melton Borough Local Plan . The Heritage Environment Record (HER)  
and any complementary heritage data that may be published alongside 
Neighbourhood Plans should be referenced in proposa ls for development in 
the Borough.  
  
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                                            Cha pter 7: Environment       129 
 Policy EN13 – Heritage Assets  
The NPPF provides national policy for considering proposals which 
affect a heritage asset. This includes the need to assess the effect of a 
proposal on the significance of an asset and the n eed for a balanced 
judgment about the scale of any harm or loss and the significance of the 
heritage asset.  
Melton Borough has a number of important historic assets. These 
include Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas, Scheduled Monuments 
(SMs) and non -designated heritage assets (ranging from nationally to 
locally important heritage features).  
The Borough of Melton contains heritage assets that are at risk through 
neglect, decay or other threats. These will be conserved, protected and 
where possible enhance d. 
The Council will take a positive approach to the conservation of heritage 
assets and the wider historic environment through:  
A) seeking to ensure the protection and enhancement of Heritage 
Assets including non -designated heritage assets when 
considering  proposals for development affecting their 
significance and setting. Proposed development should avoid 
harm to the significance of historic sites, buildings or areas, 
including their setting.  
B) seeking  new developments to make a positive contribution to the 
character and distinctiveness of the local area.  
C) ensuring that new developments in conservation areas are 
consistent with the identified special character of those areas, 
and seeking to identify n ew conservation areas, where 
appropriate;  
D) seeking to secure the viable and sustainable future of heritage 
assets through uses that are consistent with the heritage asset 
and its conservation;  
E) allowing sustainable tourism opportunities in Heritage As sets in 
the Borough where the uses are appropriate and would not 
undermine the integrity or significance of the heritage asset: and  
F) the use of Article 4 directions where appropriate.  
G) taking account of any local heritage assets listed in 
Neighbourhood  Plans.  
______________________________________________________________________________________  
  
130     Chapter 7: Melton Borough’s Environment              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 KEY EVIDENCE  
 
Melton Borough Landscape and Historic Urban Character Assessment Report, ADAS, 2011  
Melton Borough Landscape and Historic Urban Character Assessment Report, ADAS, 2011 – 
UPDATE REPORT 2011  
Melton Borough Areas of Separation, Settlement Fringe Sensitivity and Local Green Space Study, 
Influence, 2015; 2016  
Melton Borough Biodiversity and Geodiversity Study, WYG 2016  
The 6 Cs Green Infrastructure Strategy 2010  
A Green Infrastructure Strategy for Melton Borough, TEP, 2011  
Melton Open Space Assessment, KKP, 2014  
Melton Open Space Standards Paper, KKP, 2014  
Melton Playing Pitch Strategy Assessment, KKP, 2 014 
Melton Playing Pitch Strategy, KKP, 2014  
Melton Sports Facilities Stra tegy, 2016 -2021, MBC, 2017  
National Carbon Plan 2011  
Leicestershire Carbon Reduction Strategy 2013 -2020  
Planning for Climate Change Study, IT Power, 2008  
UK Renewable Energy Strategy HM Government, 2009  
Melton and Rushcliffe Landscape Sensitivity Study, LUC, 20L14  
Melton Strategic Flood Risk  Assessment Report and Addendum Report, JBA Consulting, 2015; 2016  
Melton Borough Council Level 1 and 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment Addendum Report 
Appendices, JB A Consulting, September 2016  
Agricultural Quality of Land in Melton Borough, Land Research Associates Ltd., 2005  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery  131 
 Chapter 8: Managing the Delivery of the Melton 
Local Plan  
8.1  Delivering Infrastructure  
8.1.1  New development in Melton Borough will need to be supported by an 
appropriate level of infrastructure. Infrastructure is all the utility needs 
generated by development, including energy and water, as well as new 
physical and social provision such as transp ort, schools, doctors’ surgeries, 
open space and leisure facilities.   
8.1.2  The type and scale of infrastructure required will depend on how development 
is distributed, as well as how existing and future residents choose to live their 
lives in the future .  
8.1.3  Where it is likely that infrastructure will be funded via contributions from 
development , we will need to check that the contribution would meet the 
following tests for planning obligations , i.e. that they are:  
 necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
 directly related to the development; and  
 fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.  
 
8.1.4  New development cannot be used to fund an existing lack of infrastructur e or 
address current shortfalls in provision , but is solely required to address the 
needs arising from new development.  
8.1.5  The Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) was introduced in April 2010  
through l egislation which allows local authorities to collect  a levy or tariff on 
specific types of development based on a cost per unit of floor area . The tariff 
is used to fund essential Infrastructure which cannot be funded through 
developer contributions. Further information on this is at Section 8.10 below.    
8.2  The Melton Borough Infrastructure Delivery Plan  
8.2.1  A high level assessment of the infrastructure that will be required to support 
new housing and employment growth within the Borough over the plan period 
is set out in the Melton Local Plan Infrastructure Delivery Plan (2017) . The 
table in that document setting out the additional infrastructure required, an 
estimate of its costs, who is expected to provide it and when , is reproduced in 
this Plan as the Infrastructure Delivery Schedule in  Appendix 4.  
8.3 Transport  
8.3.1  Melton is a rural Borough with a dispersed pattern of villages and a central 
main town of Melton Mowbray. Primary roads cross the Borough at M elton  
132            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018     
 Mowbray and pass along the northern and western parts of the Borough. 
Melton Mowbray and Bottesford in the north have rail access but overall, there 
are limited public transport services, even in and serving Melton Mowbray.  
8.3.2  Significant new hou sing and economic development is proposed in this local 
plan (Policy SS2), with new housing to be distributed mostly in Melton 
Mowbray (approx. 65%) with the remainder in the larger rural settlements 
(approx. 35%), and all new employment land identified at  Melton Mowbray or 
nearby Asfordby. When considered against other reasonable alternatives, this 
spatial strategy performed best against the Local Plan objectives and 
sustainability criteria, including levels of access to sustainable travel options 
such as walking, cycling and public transport. From a transport perspective, 
focusing housing growth in the town makes it easier to develop a coordinated 
approach to dealing with the transportation impacts of future population 
growth, as opposed to, say, a more di spersed pattern of development.  
8.3.3  Leicestershire County Council, as Local Highway Authority, has set out its 
transport priorities in the Leicestershire Local Tr ansport Plan 3 (LTP3),  and 
new development in Melton Borough should contribute towards achieving its 
goals. These are to achieve an efficient, resilient, accessible, integrated and 
sustainable transport system that:  
• supports a prosperous economy and pro vides successfully for population 
growth ; 
• is well managed and maintained ; 
• helps to reduce the carbon footprint of Leicestershire ; 
• helps promote equality of opportunity for all our residents ; 
• improves the safety, health and security of our residents ; and  
• helps to improve the quality of life for our residents and makes 
Leicestershire a more attractive place to live, work and visit.  
 
8.3.4  The spatial strategy of the local plan supports LTP3 by focusing new 
development in locations which reduce the need to travel by car and where 
there are sustainable travel alternatives, and where new development can 
maximize the use of existing services and facilities. Sustainable transport 
measures to support development proposed through the plan will be pursued 
where appropriate. However, there are currently limited public transport 
services, and few opportunities to support more cycling and walking within an 
existing highway network that is already operating close to capacity within the 
town.  
8.3.5  Whilst the pro vision and enhancement of sustainable transport alternatives 
will go some way to supporting new development, without mitigation, the 
amount of growth and its spatial distribution is likely to have severe highway 
impacts within the town and therefore hamper  its ability to grow. Melton  
  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery  133 
 Mowbray already experiences high levels of cross town and through traffic, 
with limited rail and river crossings resulting in few alternative route options. 
The heavy goods vehicle element of this traffic exacerbates the impact  of this, 
and is in addition to the vehicles serving businesses located in the Borough. It 
has given rise to increasing carbon emissions and locally significant levels of 
traffic congestion, which in turn is having a negative impact on the quality and 
vitality of places, particularly Melton Mowbray town centre. It is also causing 
unacceptable delays and unreliable journey times, affecting businesses and 
residents alike, and adversely impacting on the attractiveness of the town as a  
place to live and do busi ness.  
8.3.6  Significant new highway investment is also needed to open up the new land 
for the development that will support growth. This needs to be provided in a 
way that avoids worsening the adverse effects of traffic on the environment, 
communities and the economy, and ensures that access to services is 
maintained and journey reliability not further compromised.  
Melton Mowbray Transport Strategy  
8.3.7  As the most sustainable location for new development in the Borough, the 
local plan envisages that most new housing and employment development 
will take place within or on the edge of Melton Mowbray. Also, as the main 
place serving the needs of the Borough’s residents, it is critical that the town 
centre’s range of shops, services and visitor appeal is susta ined and 
enhanced.  
8.3.8  However, without intervention, this planned growth would worsen many 
existing transport problems. Furthermore, the problem of limited highway 
network capacity would continue to hinder the delivery of effective schemes to 
enhance p ublic transport and walking/cycling as alternatives modes of travel 
for local people, and would not alleviate the highly significant levels of 
congestion and the HGV movements through the town centre, both of which 
this local plan seeks to address.  
8.3.9  The identification and delivery of essential transport measures required to 
support the Local Plan are being pursued through the development of a 
Melton Mowbray Transport Strategy (MMTS).  The MMTS will help deal with 
existing issues and those forecast to a rise over the local plan period in a 
comprehensive and integrated way. It will support economic growth and new 
housing development, including opening up new development land, and will 
address transport issues for the town.  
8.3.10  The package of measures i n the MMTS will include a Melton Mowbray 
Distributor Road (MMDR), which is currently being planned as a crucial 
element, along with complementary sustainable and other transport measures  
134            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018     
 within the town to provide interim relief whilst the MMDR is still be ing 
completed and/or longer term benefits thereafter.  
8.3.11  The MMTS will include measures to reduce the impact of the traffic using 
routes into and within Melton Mowbray Town Centre, and measures to 
improve the existing road network within the town centr e. These could include 
increased pedestrian and cycling access to the town centre and other 
attractors.  
8.3.12  This preferred approach to supporting growth and tackling transport barriers 
preventing this within Melton Mowbray follows an options appraisal 
undertaken  in 2016, which found that a strategic highway improvement would 
deliver wider benefits for residents as part of the overall growth strategy for 
the town, particularly reducing congestion and supporting future development 
plans. The three strategic highways options considered were for an outer 
distributor road to the east of the town, an outer distributor road to the west of 
the town and a short inner relief  road, within the main urban area.  
8.3.13  This work concluded that the most appropriate way to facilitate Melton 
Mowbray’s future growth would be via a Melton Mowbray Distributor Road 
(MMDR) from the A606 Nottingham Road to the A607 Leicester Road around 
the east of the town. It was found that this would have the greatest positive 
long term effects on traffic congestion within the town centre and offer best 
value for money.  
8.3.14  It is envisaged that the MMDR would be delivered in part by developers as 
new or improved highway, designed to a specification agreed with the Local 
Highway Authority when land is brought forward for housing and employment 
in the northern and southern urban extensions (see Policies SS4 and SS5). 
Financial contributions would also  be sought from other developments in 
Melton Mowbray through mechanisms such as s106 obligations and 
Community Infrastructure Levy, and by securing significant public funding. 
£49 million has already been secured from the Department for Transport’s 
‘Large Local Major Transport Schemes Fund’ to deliver the northern and 
eastern sections of the distributor road (from the A606 Nottingham Road to 
the A606 Burton Road) to begin in 2020 and be completed by 2022.  
8.3.15  The Revised Local Plan and CIL Viability Study (May 2017)  has shown that 
assumptions used about developer contributions and/or their ability to fund 
sections of the route as part of development schemes are realistic.  
8.3.16  Work to model, engineer and cost route options for the MMDR is ongoing as 
part of the transport strategy (MMTS) . In terms of its overall design standard:  
• it will be a single carriageway all purpose ‘A’ road  
• it will have a minimum carriageway width of 7.3m;   
  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery  135 
 • the sections of MMDR adjacent to the Melton North Sustainable 
Neighbourhood (NSN) and Melton South Sustainable Neighbourhood 
(SSN) will have a design speed of at least 40mph, whereas the remaining 
sections of the road (i.e. away from developments) will have a design 
speed of 60mph;  
• the number of junctions and direct frontage accesses will be limited as 
necessary to secure and retain the required design standards and speeds 
(as set out above);  
• it will include appropriate facilities to provide for the safe movement of 
pedestrians, cyclists (and, as appropriate, horse riders); and  
• it will include measures to minimise/mitigate the scheme’s impacts on 
existing and future residents and on the environment and ecology along its 
route.  
 
8.3.17  In conjunction with these design standards, the overall length and alignment 
of the MMDR will need  to be sufficiently direct to provide an attractive 
alternative for traffic compared to existing routes through the town centre. A 
preferred corridor has been agreed and a planning application for the eastern 
and northern parts is expected in early autumn 2018. Work to prepare the 
MMDR business case also included the identification of possible opportunities 
that could be carried out as part of the MMTS to provide more travel choice 
for journeys within the town and reduce the environmental impacts and 
severa nce caused by traffic in the town centre.   
8.3.18  To ensure the MMDR can be delivered, the land that is needed for it will be 
safeguarded from other development. Those sections that would de delivered 
as part of the northern and southern sustainable neigh bourhoods must be 
identified within agreed masterplans (see Policies SS4 and SS5). For the 
eastern section that will link the A606 Burton Road in the south to Melton 
Spinney Road in the north, safeguarding will initially be applied to the corridor 
of inves tigation, and subsequently to the more limited preferred route 
alignment within this corridor, once this has been agreed and planning 
permission has been granted. Both the County Council (as Local Highway 
Authority) and the Borough Council are committed to  using their compulsory 
purchase powers, if necessary, to acquire the land needed to deliver the 
scheme as a whole in order to ensure that the full benefits of the scheme are 
realised.  
8.3.19  The Borough Council and Leicestershire County Council have agre ed in 
principle that some development should be allowed to take place prior to full 
completion of the MMDR, with the acceptance that there could be some 
localised adverse traffic impacts with vehicles using alternative routes to move 
within and through the  town until key sections of the route are completed.  
This is a pragmatic approach that will enable the growth proposed elsewhere  
136            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018     
 in the plan to start coming forward as early as possible and will facilitate an 
orderly process for delivering the MMDR. Contr ibutions to fund short term 
mitigation to minimise the interim impacts will be sought from developers 
whose schemes are contributing to increased traffic, but wherever possible, 
these funds will be spent on works that will contribute to delivering elements  
of the MMTS and/or provide long -term benefit to the town.  
Policy IN1: Melton Mowbray Transport Strategy (MMTS)  
The Borough Council will work with Leicestershire County Council, 
landowners, developers and others to deliver a transport strategy for 
Melton Mowbray . The MMTS will comprise the following key 
components, to be funded and delivered by private developers and the 
public sector:  
(a) A Melton Mowbray Distributor Road (MMDR) from the A606 
Nottingham Road to the A607 Leicester Road around the east of 
the town, in accordance with the broad design standards and 
requirements outlined in paragraph 8.3.17, for which a ‘corridor of 
investigation’ is shown on the Policies Map; and  
(b) A package of complementary measures, including enhanced 
pedestrian, cycling and public transport facilities and access to 
the town centre and the other main local journey attractors from 
the southern and northern urban extensions.  
If development is propos ed within the corridor shown on the Policies 
Map, it may be permitted provided that it has been demonstrated to the 
satisfaction of the Local Highway Authority that it would not prejudice 
the ability to deliver the MMDR as a whole.   
Where necessary, the C ouncil and/or the Local Highway Authority will 
use its compulsory purchase powers to deliver section(s) of the MMDR.  
Where a transport assessment indicates that development will add to 
the cumulative traffic and other transport problems of Melton Mowbray,  
a financial or in kind contribution will be sought towards delivery of the 
MMDR and/or complementary measures proposed through the wider 
MMTS, including appropriate mitigation necessary to reduce local traffic 
impacts whilst the MMDR is incomplete.  
  The Borough Council will also work with other bodies to explore 
opportunities to enhance the public realm in and around Melton 
Mowbray town centre arising from the development of the Strategy.  
 
     
  
  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery  137 
 Other Transport  
8.3.20  To tackle wider transport and accessibility goals and issues within the 
Borough , the Local Plan makes provision for a variety of methods to be used. 
These include the spatial distribution of development, improvements to 
footpaths, cycle and public transport networks and facilities, using design to 
minimise the need to use cars for shorter trips, measures to reduce car use, 
such as travel plans and appropriate parking provision, and the provision of 
critical new road infrastructure.   
8.3.21  New development wi ll be a key means of achieving small scale local 
improvements where the development proposed would otherwise have an 
adverse impact if not mitigated. For larger non site specific initiatives, the 
Borough Council will collect developer contributions through  CIL or Section 
106 contributions, and continue to work with the Local Highway Authority, 
neighbouring local transport authorities, Highways England and Network Rail 
to identify and secure funding for specific larger schemes.  Section 4.1 of the 
Melton Boro ugh Council Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) makes an 
assessment of existing highways and transport infrastructure provision and 
identifies planned and committed investment.  
8.3.22  The 6C’s Design Guide sets out the car parking standards to be applied in  
new developments, as well as advice on cycle parking provision. This, or any 
equivalent successor document  agreed by the Local Highway Authority, will 
form the basis for considering the adequacy of parking provision proposed as 
part of new development.  
Policy IN2: Transport, Accessibility and Parking  
The Council and its delivery partners will support and promote an 
efficient and safe transport network which offers a range of transport 
choices for the movement of people and goods, reduces the need to 
travel by car and encourages use of alternatives, suc h as walking, 
cycling, and public transport.  
All new developments should, where possible, have regard to all the 
following:  
1. be located where travel can be minimised and the use of 
sustainable transport modes maximised;  
2. Minimise additional travel dema nd through the use of measures 
such as travel planning, safe and convenient public transport, 
dedicated walking and cycling links and cycle storage/parking 
links and integration with existing infrastructure;   
138            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018     
 3. Seek to generate or support the level of dema nd required to 
improve, introduce or maintain public transport services, such as 
rail and bus services;  
4. Do not unacceptably impact on the safety and movement of traffic 
on the highway network or that any such impacts can be 
mitigated through appropriate  improvements;  
5. Support the enhancement of existing or proposed transport 
interchanges such as the railway stations at Melton Mowbray and 
Bottesford;  
6. Provide appropriate and effective parking provision and servicing 
arrangements.  
8.4  Education  
8.4.1  National policy on education provision aims to offer choice and diversity for 
the community. Leicestershire County Council, as the education authority, 
undertakes modelling work to assess the available capacity of schools in the 
Borough. This is used to i nform the requirements for primary and secondary 
school places , along with the cost of providing for these requirements.  
8.4.2  Currently, in Melton Mowbray , the cumulative impact from known housing 
development proposals would result in a significant deficit of primary school 
places , which would justify provision of a new primary school within both the 
North and South Melton Mowbray Sustainable Neighbourhoods .  
8.4.3  In the rural area , a number of schools are likely to require developer 
contributions to help meet the costs of providing additional pupil places , either 
through an extension to existing schools or through replacement with a new 
larger school . In such circumstances it would be appropriate to seek from 
developers the full costs of expanding schools rather than a contribution 
based on the yield rates and cost multipliers.  The County Council would wish 
to see the contribution paid at a very early sta ge of development to ensure the 
early availability of places as new housing becomes occupied. If this is not 
achievable or possible then the County Council may also seek an additional 
contribution to cover transport transitional costs for pupils to nearby schools 
having a place, until such time as the new accommodation is available in the 
locality.  
8.4.4  At secondary school level, the required places resulting from development 
justify additional provision, as anticipated pupil numbers cannot be 
accommodate d at existing school sites over the plan period. Extensions to 
Longfield Academy, John Ferneley College and Belvoir High School are 
required. Costs have been estimated for Longfield Academy expansion which 
are in excess of funds from developer contribution s based on the yield rates  
  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery  139 
 and cost multipliers.  To expand John Fernley College will require additional 
land. Further discussion is required between the County Council, both 
Academy Trusts and Melton Borough Council.  
8.4.5  Leicestershire County Council h as a duty to ensure that there is sufficient early 
learning and childcare for children from 0 to 14 years old for working parents. 
Leicestershire County Council’s Early Learning and Childcare Service is 
looking at how developer contributions can be sought to help provide early 
years places by, for example, adding early years provision onto new school 
builds which could be run by the school or a private provider.  
8.4.6   Section 5.2 of the Melton Borough Council Infrastructure Delivery Plan makes 
an assessme nt of existing education infrastructure provision and identifies 
planned and committed investment.  
8.5  Healthcare  
8.5.1  In April 2013 the East Leicestershire and Rutland Clinical Commissioning 
Group (ELR CCG) and South West Lincolnshire CCG (SWL CCG) took on full 
responsibility for commissioning healthcare services for residents in Melton 
Borough.  
8.5.2  The Borough Council has work ed together with the Public Health  Team at 
Leicestershire County Council  to carry out a Heath Impact Assessment of the 
Local  Plan. The outcome of this assessment has inform ed the development of 
healthcare policies in th is draft plan . As part of this work the Council, together 
with Public Health , follow ed the “Healthy Towns” concept, especially through 
the development of the two  Sustainable Neighbourhoods planned for Melton 
Mowbray . 
8.5.3  It is clear that the fo recasted population growth will  have an impact on 
healthcare provision in the Borough and additional provision will be  required , 
namely GP and primary dental care services .  A new General Dental Service 
in Melton Mowbray opened in December 2017 to provide urgent and routine 
care between 8am to 8pm, 7 days a week, 365 days a year including all bank 
holidays. Latham House Medical Practice in Melton Mowbray is currently in 
discussions with local commissioners, Melton Borough Council, and NHS 
England regarding the planned growth in the area and about which other 
services should be provided from Latham House potentially within a multi -
specialty contract. Whilst there is potential  for Latham House to expand on 
site, any potential expansions to Long Clawson would likely need a relocation. 
There are no additional new surgeries planned as the national agenda is to 
move towards care hubs rather than provision in each community.   
8.5.4  Section 5.1 of the Melton Borough Council Infrastructure Delivery Plan makes 
an assessment of existing healthcare infrastructure provision and identifies 
planned and committed investment.   
140            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018     
 8.6  Energy Supply  
8.6.1  Electricity is supplied in the Borough by  Western Power Distribution (formerly 
Central Networks) . Gas is supplied by the National Grid.  
8.6.2  Discussions have revealed the need for additional power infrastructure to 
support the extension of the Leicester Road employment site. The 
development of the employment site will therefore be expected to provide land 
to accommodate a new 5KV primary sub-station in this location. Provision of a 
new 5km power line to feed this sub -station will also be required . The delivery 
of this infrastructure by Western Power Distribution will take 2 -3 years.  The 
capacity of the power network is also an issue in some of the more rural parts 
of the Borough where there are “power hungry” employment uses . This issue 
will be addressed as and when the need arises, however busi nesses and 
developers should be aware that it may affect the delivery of development 
proposals over the plan period.   
8.6.3  The situation for the provision of utilities can rapidly change and is highly 
dependent upon the location of development. The Boro ugh Council will 
engage with the relevant companies throughout the plan period, to ensure 
that development and utilities provision remains in step.  
8.7  Water Supply and Drainage  
8.7.1  Severn Trent Water is responsible for the water supply and waste water  
treatment in most of the Borough; a small area in the east of the Borough is 
covered by Anglian Water. There is a need to provide additional sewerage 
capacity to accommodate development around Melton Mowbray, in particular 
the North and South Sustainable Neighbourhoods and additional treatment 
capacity at Melton Mowbray sewage treatment works. Through on -going 
liaison between Severn Trent Water and developers, provision of additional 
capacity upgrades will not hinder development in these areas in line with  
general regulatory duty to provide additional capacity as and when needed.  
More  detailed engagement will take place as individual sites start coming 
forward.   
8.7.2  Sustainable Drainage Systems (S uDS) are a requirement of the Flood and 
Water Management Act 2010. However, S uDS can often be seen as additions 
to development and the potential multi -functional benefits are not fully realised 
if they are not fully incorporated in the design process.  
8.7.3  On this basis , SuDS should be considered at an early s tage in the master 
planning process to allow maximum integration of drainage and open space. 
This will then maximise the opportunity to create amenity space, enhance 
biodiversity and contribute to a network of green and blue spaces.   
  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery  141 
 8.7.4  To reduce the wa ter generated by development proposals , schemes should 
make maximum use of drainage measures such as green roofs, permeable 
surfaces and water butts.  
8.8  Police  
8.8.1  Leicestershire Police is  responsible for policing within the Borough. The Police 
Authority advises that if it is to be able to adequately deal with the number of 
additional dwellings proposed in the plan, additional funding should be 
acquired through Section 106 contributions for  new housing schemes. Without 
securing additional funding , the levels of policing may drop below an 
acceptable standard when the additional housing is built, thus making it 
necessary to carry out the  Section 106 contribution tests.  
8.9 Waste  
8.9.1  The key area of concern is around household and recycling waste sites which 
are already operating over capacity. Despite the trend in waste generation per 
capita  reducing , based on the assessment of future demand , provision of new 
Household Waste Recycling fac ilities is required. These could be delivered on 
either a single site or through the expansion of existing facilities . Potentially 
one large site could be delivered in Melton Mowbray for all of Melton Borough , 
to meet the aims of sustainable waste manageme nt set out in Leicestershire 
County Council’s Pre Submission Draft Minerals and Waste Local Plan 2016.  
8.10  Developer Contributions and Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  
8.10.1 Carefully considered and sensitive development offers substantial benefits to 
society. It provides homes, employment opportunities and the facilities and 
services require d. It can also stimulate economic growth. However 
development of all scale impacts on the environment and existing 
infrastructure , and can place a burden on the community. The planning 
system exists to reconcile the benefits of a development against the costs it 
can impose.  
8.10.2 The planning system currently provides for some of these  burdens or costs to 
be addressed through planning obligations where the specific planning issues 
arising from a development proposal can be addressed on a site by site basis. 
Planning obligations can secure new or extended/enhanced existing 
infrastructure  on the site or in a location fairly and reasonably related to it.  For 
other infrastructure items, CIL pooling restrictions allow contributions from up 
to five development proposals to fund the infrastructure required. So to fund 
much of the essential inf rastructure in the Borough, which is either not site 
specific or is more costly than can be funded through the pooling of developer 
contributions, the Council intends to adopt CIL at a level that will not affect the 
viability of development in the Borough.  A viability assessment has been 
undertaken to establish appropriate charging levels for different types of  
142            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018     
 developments and locations, and the infrastructure required for which there is 
a funding gap that could be filled by CIL receipts (a Regulation 123 list) has 
been identified.  
Policy  IN3: Infrastructure  Contributions  and C ommunity 
Infrastructure Levy  
Development that provides additional dwellings or employment 
premises will be expected to help to deliver sustainable communities 
through the payment of Community Infrastructure Levy, where 
chargeable, and/or by making developer contributions to local 
infrastructure in proportion to the scale of its impacts, in the following 
order of priority:  
I. Essential infrastructure necessary to ensure adequate provision 
of essential utilities, facilities, water management and safe access, 
as identified in the Infrastruct ure Delivery Plan or Neighbourhood 
Plan.  
II. Essential infrastructure (including the Melton Mowbray Transport 
Strategy  and its key component, the Melton Mowbray  Distributor 
Road)  as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan or  any made  
Neighbourhood Plan including contributions from residential 
development towards affordable housing to meet the requirement 
set out in Policy  C4.  
III. Desirable infrastructure as identified in the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan or any made Neighbourhood Plan.  
 
8.11 Broadband  
8.11.1  Access to bro adband is a vital component of infrastructure i n today’s world. It 
is key to growing a sustainable local economy, vital for education and home 
working and an increasingly central part of community cohesion and 
resilience, particularly in rural areas.  
8.11.2  Developers can  ‘futur e-proof’ their developments by installing superfast  
broadband infrastructure. In addition to the reputational and wider economic 
benefits  of ensuring that residents are able to ac cess superfast broadband 
when they move i nto new developments, there is also the i ssue of avoiding 
the costs and frustrations to o ccup iers of future retrofitting, if the infrastructure 
is not fit for purpose.   
8.11.3  The Government recognises that reliable broadband internet  access is 
essential for homes throughout the country  if they are to benefit from online 
services and for UK b usinesses to compete globally. It aim ed to achieve a 
transformation in the country’s broadband access, with everyone in the UK  
  Melton Local Plan, October 2018                            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery  143 
 able to access broadband speeds of at least 2 megabits per second (Mbps) 
and 95% of the UK receiving far greater speeds  (superfas t broadband) of at 
least 24Mbps  by 2017 . It is also exploring opt ions to extend the benefits of 
superfast  broadband to remaining areas.  
8.11.4  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, 2012) recognises the 
importance of infrastructure in delivering su stainable economic growth, and 
states that ‘the development of high speed broadband technology and other 
communications networks also plays a vital role in enhancing the provision of 
local community facilities and services’ ( paragraph 42). The NPPF goes on  to 
say that ‘in preparing Local Plans, local planning authorities should support 
the expansion of electronic communications networks, including 
telecommunications and high speed broadband’ ( paragraph 43).  
8.11.5  Superfast broadband is currently available to 78% of homes and businesses 
in the UK. The rollout of the project has been steadily increasing since it 
began in 2012. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport, which helps 
fund the project, intended that by  2017 the fibre broadband coverage across 
the UK would be 95%. The Government has worked with Openreach – BT’s 
local access network business - and the Home Builders Federation (HBF) on 
an agreement which aims to deliver superfast broadband connectivity to new 
build residential properties in the UK. The deal sees fibre based broadband 
offered to all new developments either for free (for developments of 30 
dwellings and over) or as part of a co -funded initiative (for developments of 
under 30 dwellings). As pa rt of the agreement, Openreach has introduced an 
online planning tool for homebuilders. This tells them whether properties in a 
given development can be connected to fibre for free, or if a contribution is 
needed from the developer to jointly fund the depl oyment of the local fibre 
network.  
 
8.11.6  Superfast Leicestershire (Leicestershire County Council and partners, 
including Melton Borough Council and BT) is  responsible for the 
implementation of superfast broadband in Leicester City and Leicestershire. 
Phase 1 of implementation from June 2014 to March 2016 saw coverage 
increase from 83% to 92%.  Phase 2 was to increase coverage to 96% by 
December 2017, with a target of 90% for Melton Borough. Funding is 
available beyond Phase 2 with the aim of increasing s uperfast coverage 
further.  
8.11.7  In order to guarantee a fixed fibre solution (which is more reliable than 
wireless) for superfast broadband of at least 30 Mbps, new developments 
must be served by either:  
i) fixed fibre to premises technology (FTTP);  or    
144            Chapter 8: Managing Delivery                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018     
 ii) fixed fibre to cabinet technology (FTTC) which provides speeds of up to 80 
megabits per second.  
 
Policy IN4: Broadband   
Information  communication  networks,  such  as  superfast broadband,  
will  be  supported  across  the  whole  of  Melton Borough to reduce  the  
need  to  travel  and  will be  a requirement for new developments.  
Proposals of 30 dwellings or more will be required to provide fixed fibre 
superfast broadband.  
Proposals for residential development of less than 30  dwellings and 
commercial development  will be required to provide fixed fibre  
broadband where this is technically feasible, subject to viability.  
New developments must be served by either:  
i) Fibre  to  the Premises  ( FTTP )  technology; or  
ii) Fibre to the Cabinet ( FTTC ) technology  enabling access to 
broadband speeds of up to  80 megabits per second.  
________________________________________________________________________________________  
KEY EVIDENCE  
Melton Infrastructure Assessment: Infrastructure Delivery Plan; Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule and Regulation 123 List, Arup, April 2017.  
Leicestershire Local Transport Plan 3, Leicestershire CC, 2011  
Melton Mowbray Distributor Road Option  Appraisal Report (Phase 2), Jacobs 2016  
Report to LCC Cabinet: Melton Mowbray Transport Strategy and Distributor Road – 
Development of a Business Case and Identific ation of a Preferred Route, 10th March 
2017  
Revised Melton Local Plan and CIL Viability Assessment, Cushman and Wakefield, 
May 2017.  
 
  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                     Chapter 9: Managing Development           145 
 Chapter 9: Managing Development  
9.1 Introduction  
9.1.1  Development Management is the process of working with developers to 
facilitate development8 whilst protecting the environment through the granting 
or refusal of planning permission and controlling unauthorised developments.  
9.1.2  The Local Plan sets out strategic policies based on the outcomes of evidence 
and consultation. These overarching policies will guide the future 
development of the Borough but will not provide the level of detail required to 
adequately assess planning applications. It is therefore necessary to develop 
more detailed polic ies to support the implementation of the Local Plan vision 
and objectives and to pick up on issues that that are not adequately 
addressed by the strategic policies.  
9.1.3  However the Borough Council is not starting from scratch. The Melton 
Borough Local Plan 1999  contain ed policies that were used as the basis for 
assessing planning applications, but these have now been replaced by 
policies in this new Melton Boro ugh Local Plan; the superseded previously 
‘saved’ policies are set out in Appendix 2.  
9.2 Design  
9.2.1  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF ) requires that planning 
should “always seek to secure high quality design and a good standard of 
amenity for all existing and future occupants of land and buildings”.  
9.2.2  Many of the policies included in this plan will affect the design of development 
proposals. These policies address the following factors:  
 How sustainable drainage systems have been incorp orated into the 
design from the outset;  
 Materials, quality and local character;  
 Setting, impact on the settlement and views to and from the 
development;  
 Landscaping, setting;  
 Context/character how it relates to existing but creates its own 
character and a  strong sense of place, reflecting heritage assets whilst 
being innovative;  
 Designing out crime, including lighting, natural surveillance and 
defensible space;  
 Open space and Green Infrastructure, running through the 
development and connecting into the dev elopment;  
                                                           
8 Development includes: housing, commercial, industrial buildings working and the use of land and buildings.   
146      Chapter 9: Managing Development                           Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
  Biodiversity, impacts and opportunities;  
 Sustainability (energy efficiency and low carbon generations, carbon 
emissions, sustainable drainage etc.);  
 Scale of development and relationship with its surroundings;  
 Entrance and exit design, creating g ateways and attractive routes; and  
 Accessibility for all potential users of the development.  
9.2.3  A specific design policy has been included in the plan to help address the 
objective set out in the NPPF.  A Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) 
will be p repared to provide more detailed advice and guidance about what is 
considered to be good design in a local context.  
 Building for Life 12  
9.2.4  Building for Life 12  (BfL12)  is a government and industry -endorsed tool which 
can help create well -designed homes and neighbourhoods. It is designed to 
reflect the requirements of the NPPF and National Planning Practice 
Guidance (NPPG) by asking 12 questions which determine how well a 
residential proposal delivers  high quality design and a good standard of 
amenity . Based on a traffic light system, the aim is to achieve as many 
‘greens’ as possible, challenge ‘ambers’ and avoid ‘reds’. A red indicator 
suggests that one or more aspects of the design need to be considered and 
resolved; ambers indicate a need for further discussion or refinement; and 
greens indicate one or more aspect of the scheme have been well considered 
and resolved.  
9.2.5  It is recommended that BfL12 is used as early  in the design process as 
possible in order to identify aspects of a proposal that are of concern or those 
that need some attention. The Council encourages its use as a basis for pre -
application discussions for residential proposals.  
 Active Design  
9.2.6  Active Design  is a set of design guidelines to get people moving through 
suitable design and layout of new housing developments. It has been 
developed by Sport England and Publ ic Health England in response to an 
increasing prevalence of obesity and inactivity amongst both adults and 
children nationally. Active Design consists of the following ten principles:  
 Activity for All: neighbourhoods, facilities and open spaces should be 
accessible to all users and should support sport and physical activity 
across all ages.  
 Walkable Communities: homes, schools, shops, community facilities, 
workplaces, open spaces and sports facilities should be within easy 
reach of each other.   
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                     Chapter 9: Managing Development           147 
  Connected Wa lking and Cycling Routes: all destinations should be 
connected by a direct, legible and integrated network of walking and 
cycling routes.  
 Co-location of Community Facilities: the concentration of retail, 
community and associated uses to support linked trip s should be 
promoted.  
 Network of multi -functional open space in order to support a range of 
activities including sport, recreation and play plus other landscape uses 
including SuDS, woodland, wildlife habitat, allotments and orchards.  
 High quality streets  and spaces: employment of high quality, durable 
materials, street furniture and signage.  
 Appropriate infrastructure to enable sport and physical activity to take 
place across all contexts including workplaces, sports facilities and 
public space.  
 Active bu ildings: the internal and external layout, design and use of 
buildings should promote opportunities for physical activity.  
 Management, maintenance, monitoring and evaluation: long -term 
maintenance and viability of sports facilities and public spaces should  
be considered in their design.  
 Activity promotion and local champions: health promotion measures 
and local champions should be supported to inspire participation in 
sport and physical activity across neighbourhoods, workplaces and 
facilities.  
9.2.7  Active  Design can be used as a tool to inform the design and layout of 
development and assist in pre -application discussions.  The Council will use 
its design guidelines in the determination of planning applications.  
Policy D1 – Raising the Standard of Design  
All new developments should be of high quality design. All development 
proposals will be assessed against all the following criteria:  
a)  Siting and layout must be sympathetic to the character of the area;  
b)  New development should meet basic urban design principles 
outlined in this plan;  
c)  Buildings and development should be designed to reflect the wider 
context of the local area and respect the local vernacular without 
stifling innovative design;  
d)  Ameni ty of neighbours and neighbouring properties should not be 
compromised;  
e)  Appropriate provision should be made for the sustainable 
management of waste, including collection and storage facilities for 
recyclable and other waste;   
148      Chapter 9: Managing Development                           Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 f)  Sustainable means of communication and transportation should be 
used where appropriate;  
g)  Development should be designed to reduce crime and the 
perception of crime.  
h)  Existing trees and hedges should be utilised, together with new 
landscaping, to negate the effects of de velopment;  
i)  Proposals include appropriate, safe connection to the existing 
highway network;    
j) Performs well against Building for Life 12 or any subsequent 
guidance and seeks to develop the principles of 'Active Design' for 
housing developments;  
k) Makes adequate provision for car parking; and  
l) Development should be managed so as to control disruption 
caused by construction for reasons of safeguarding and improving 
health well -being for all.  
 
Siting and Layout  
9.2.8  The siting and layout must be sympathetic to the character of the area in 
terms of its street layout and appearance (in terms of urban form, architecture 
and hard and soft landscaping).  
9.2.9  All new developments should meet the basic ‘urban design’ principles:  
a) Connections with the e xisting urban structure:  well related to the 
traditional street pattern and allowing for future links. Developments 
that preclude future development of adjoining land or prevent potential 
links to wider networks should be avoided;  
 
b) Legible places:  New development should allow places to be easily 
understood by their users, particularly when moving around. Legible 
places can be created by:  
 Locating landmark buildings in prominent locations;  
 Creating groups of buildings with strong character (includin g 
residential and commercial uses);  
 Creating open spaces and use of street trees and vegetation  
 Using topography and important features in the landscape 
(watercourses and other water areas, feature trees and hedges, 
manmade and natural features) to help g ive an area a strong 
character and distinctiveness;  
 Enable a variety of uses to create character areas and features.  
Anonymous estates with ‘off the peg’ house types and which rely on a 
standardised hierarchy network of loop roads and cul -de-sacs should 
be avoided unless there are no other solutions. Innovative street design   
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                     Chapter 9: Managing Development           149 
 that uses high quality materials, street trees, street form and floorspace 
will be encouraged where these are safe and can be adequately 
maintained;  
(c)   Permeable streets:  Streets sho uld be ‘permeable’ for all users and 
ensure ease of movement between homes, jobs and services, 
pedestrians and cyclists should normally be given priority. All schemes 
should have safe, easy access to the existing network of streets and 
footpaths. Large sca le schemes, such as sustainable urban extensions, 
will be required to create links that maximise sustainable transport 
modes and seek to minimise journey distances to important services 
and facilities. Direct links should be a fundamental part of the desig n 
process and not inserted as an afterthought;  
    d) Active streets:  All new developments should have ‘active edges’ of 
new buildings fronting the street. Residential developments should 
have their ‘fair face’ fronting streets and other public spaces. 
Developments that ‘turn their back’ on public areas (streets, parks, 
footpaths etc.) should be avoided;  
e)  Mix of uses:  Creating a mix of uses on large sites to include 
residential, retail, employment and community uses (schools / health 
facilities / librari es / community halls) etc. will help to create character 
areas and will encourage activity in the street at various times of the 
day; 
 
f)   Scale and massing: The scale and massing of buildings (in terms of 
height, bulk and relationship with the street) is  a key consideration in 
creating effective spaces. Buildings of inappropriate scale and mass 
can have an adverse impact on the amenity of streets, spaces and 
other buildings by adversely affecting the sense of openness or 
creating an inappropriate relation ship with the street in terms of: 
enclosure; loss of aspect; loss of light; or loss of privacy. In some cases 
continuity and enclosure of building frontages are important to reflect 
the character of the area;  
 
g) Density:  Density of new development should be sympathetic to its 
context but should also seek to maximise the use of land as a scarce 
resource;  
 
h)  Design and materials:  Building materials in new developments should 
be sympathetic to the character of the area in terms of detail, 
craftsmanship, texture, colour and treatment . Materials should be hard 
wearing and capable of being maintained in good order. The use of 
innovative materials will not be discouraged unless their use would 
cause demonstrable harm to the cha racter of the area;   
150      Chapter 9: Managing Development                           Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
  
i) Landscape and streetscape:  Landscaping (hard and soft) and 
creation of public spaces should be an integral part of the design of 
new schemes. High quality landscape helps to make new 
developments more attractive and also has benefit s to the  
microclimate (through shading and planting) and addressing surface 
water drainage through creation of swales or similar. The use of  street 
‘floorscape’ and high quality surfacing materials can help to create 
distinctive areas.  
Buildings and development in context  
9.2.10 New development must respect the character of the local area and the wider 
setting and the qualities that make it distinct from other areas. New 
development should sympathetic to the local area in terms of scale, massing, 
design, materials, landscaping and architectural detailing.  
Protecting amenity  
9.2.11 The development should not adversely affect neighbours and nearby uses 
and occupiers by reason of being overbearing, overlooking, loss of privacy, 
loss of light, pollution (i ncluding that from artificial light) and other forms of 
disturbance.  
Waste facilities  
9.2.12 New development should incorporate appropriate facilities for the storage and 
sustainable management of recyclable and other waste.  
Sustainable communication and t ransport  
9.2.13 New developments should make adequate provision for the storage of 
bicycles, the potential to create ‘hook -up’ facilities for electric cars and 
connecting to broadband networks.  
Crime prevention  
9.2.14 The potential to reduce the risk of cr ime and anti -social behaviour and to 
promote public safety should be maximised through the design and layout of 
new development. Opportunities for  safe and active streets and natural 
surveillance should be explored and ‘hard’ measures should be a last reso rt. 
Crime prevention measures must not be at the expense of overall design 
quality or social inclusivity. Gated communities, for example, will not normally 
be permitted.  
Landscaping and existing trees and hedges  
9.2.15 New development should include adequ ate landscaping in the interests of 
visual amenity, softening the impacts of development, providing new   
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                     Chapter 9: Managing Development           151 
 opportunities for bio -diversity, having a positive impact on surface water 
drainage and resilience to climate change.  
9.2.16 Landscaping should use app ropriate native and local species of plants which 
are, where possible, resilient to climate change.  
9.2.17 Development proposals should not result in the loss of trees and hedgerows 
which are  important features.  
Impact on the highway network  
9.2.18 New de velopment should be designed and located so that it is able to provide 
suitable access and can be accommodated without adverse impact on the 
local and wider highway  network. Where on or off -site works are required to 
mitigate the transport impacts of devel opment, the applicant will be required to 
demonstrate the impacts of these measures in ameliorating any problems, 
and that the scheme is technically possible and is viable. Development that 
would have severe residual cumulative impact on the highway networ k will not 
be permitted.  
 
9.3.1 Design Review is a tried and tested method of promoting good design and is 
a cost effective way to improve quality. Applicants will be encouraged to 
engage in design review for all new major developments.  
9.4  Equestrian Development  
9.4.1  Horse riding is a popular activity in the Borough and can be a good means of 
diversifying the rural economy. Equestrian use is an appropriate use in the 
countryside but care is needed to minimise the impact of developmen t 
proposals on the character of the rural area.  
9.4.2  The NPPF 2012 states at paragraph 73 that access to high quality 
opportunities for sport and recreation can make an important contribution to 
the health and wellbeing of communities.  Melton Borough, being 
predominantly rural in nature, has a number of equestrian businesses and 
individuals  with an interest in taking part in equestrian activities.  
9.4.3  The requirement for formal planning permission is dependent upon the 
proposed use of the land. The use of land for grazing , for example, does not 
require planning permission, as per Section  336 of the Town and Country 
Planning Act 1990. Planning permission would , however, be required where 
horses are kept on the land. Kept, in this instance refers to the existence of a 
built shelter (be it stable or field shelter) or where horse -feed is supp lemented 
beyond grazing. Where this is the case, planning permission would be 
required for a change of use from agricultural to equestrian.  9.3 Design Review   
152      Chapter 9: Managing Development                           Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 Policy D2 – Equestrian Development  
Extensions to existing equestrian operations or development of new 
equestrian fac ilities in open countryside locations will be granted, where 
it can be demonstrated that:  
a) The development will not have an adverse effect on the landscape or 
the character of the area;  
b) The development, or effects resulting from the development, will not 
have an unacceptable impact on residential amenity;  
c) The development is grouped where possible with new/existing 
structures;  
d) The development would not result in the loss of best quality 
agricultural land; and  
e) Size, scale, design and construction materials a re appropriate to its 
setting and function.  
f) Where possible, it should link with the existing Bridleway network.  
g) The development will not have an overly adverse impact on the 
highway network.  
In assessing the proposals, the Council will consider the justifi cation 
given, the sustainability  credentials of the development and the 
cumulative impact when formulating its decision.  
Where possible, proposals should make use of existing buildings and/or 
where possible use sites within or adjoining settlements.  
 
9.5  Agricultural Workers’ Dwellings  
9.5.1  The close relationship between the town and country means that in special 
circumstances , it will be necessary to provide new agricultural dwellings in the 
rural areas. This is especially true in a rural Borough such as Melton which 
has a large and diverse agricultural sector. In some instances, some 
agricultural, fishery or forestry operations require a worker to live on or close 
to the site, in locations where in normal circumstances a dwelling would be 
unacceptable.   
9.5.2  Beyond the remit of the defined settlements in the spatial hierarchy , in open 
countryside location s, proposals for dwellings will be restricted. When a 
proposal is in accordance with a predominant land use such as farming/  
forestry/fishery and the re is a provable demonstrable need, a dwelling for the 
specific use of agricultural or other rural workers may be permitted, subject to 
it meeting the criteria of Policy D3.  
 
 
  
 
Melton Local Plan, October 2018                     Chapter 9: Managing Development           153 
 Policy D3 – Agricultural Workers’ Dwellings  
Proposals for the development/creation of agricultural/forestry and other 
rural workers dwellings will be granted so long as it is demonstrated 
that:  
a) the proposal can be proven to be economically viable;  
b) the need for the labour is essential, permanent and full time;  
c) the nec essity for workers to live on or in close proximity to the 
premises can be adequately demonstrated;  
d) It can be shown that there are no existing dwellings that could meet 
the requirements of the enterprise near to the premises which would 
be available and s uitable;  
e) the proposal is close to the agricultural/forestry operation, and in 
circumstances where this cannot be achieved, the development must 
be in a logical location which will not have a detrimental impact on 
the landscape and amenity;  
f) the development  of a new dwelling would not provide an obvious 
opportunity for infill development;  
g) the design of the dwelling, including scale, materials and curtilage 
would be in keeping with design Policy D1;  
h) satisfactory access and services can be provided;  
i) public sector expenditure on the provision of infrastructure will not 
be required;  
j) Applications for agricultural / rural workers’ dwellings should be of 
an appropriate size and scale. Applications for dwellings with 
extensive facilities which are deemed t o be excessive and beyond the 
remit of the operation will be refused.  
9.5.3   In situations where existing dwellings in the ownership of the applicant have 
been sold off within the previous 24 months, applications for agricultural/rural 
workers dwellings may be refused.  
9.5.4   The Council may use its powers to remove permitted deve lopment rights 
when approving an agricultural/rural workers dwelling, to prevent future 
development having a detrimental effect on the local area. Furthermore, on 
farms which have recently been fragmented, or are soon to be fragmented, 
planning obligations  may be used to tie the dwellings to the farm to prevent 
them being sold separately.   
_______________________________________________________________________________  
 
 
 
  
154      Chapter 9: Managing Development                           Melton Local Plan, October 2018  
 KEY EVIDENCE  
 
Melton Borough Local Plan 1999  
Melton Borough Areas of Separation, Settlement Fringe Sensitivity and Local Green Space 
Study, Influence 2016  
Building for Life 12 2016, Built for Life  
Active Design 2015, Sport England   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Melton Local Plan, October  2018                       Glossary                                           155 Glossary of Terms  
 
Adopted/ Adoption - The final confirmation of a Local Plan being given full status by a local 
planning authority.  
Affordable Housing  - Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided 
to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined with 
regard to local incomes and house prices.  
Areas of Local Separation - An area of open countr yside that separates two neighbouring 
settlements, whose main purpose is preserving settlement identity, and which is based on 
landscape character and visual appearance of the area.  
Authority Monitoring Report (AMR) - The Annual Authority Monitoring Report  will monitor 
and assess development in the area to help determine whether policies are being achieved. 
The Sustainability Appraisal has specific monitoring requirements which can be used in 
developing AMR contextual indicators.  
Biodiversity  - 'Biodiversit y' is a term commonly used to describe the variety of life on Earth 
which encompasses the whole of the natural world and all living things with which we share 
the planet. It includes plants, animals, even invisible micro -organisms and bacteria which, 
toget her, interact in complex ways with the inanimate environment to create living 
ecosystems.  
Brownfield Land  - Land which has previously been developed encompassing vacant or 
derelict land, infill sites and land occupied by redundant or unused buildings.  
Building for Life - Building for Life is the industry standard, endorsed by Government, for 
well-designed homes and neighbourhoods so that new developments can be attractive, 
functional and sustainable places.  
Business Improvement District - An arrangement w hereby businesses get together to plan 
how to improve their trading environment and the public realm. They decide what 
improvements they want to make, what it will cost them and how they are going to manage 
the process.  
Carbon Footprint - A carbon footprin t is the total set of greenhouse gases (including carbon 
dioxide) produced by the things we do.  
Chain of Conformity - This term describes the relationship between documents, plans and 
policies and how closely they must correspond with one another and refle ct other planning 
strategies and policies. 'Conformity' can take a number of forms ranging from 'having regard 
to' to 'must conform to'.  
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) - The levy allows local authorities to raise funds from 
owners or developers of lan d undertaking new building projects in their area.  
Community Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule - The Charging Schedule sets out 
the rates that will be charged for different types of development.   
156                                    Glossary                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  Conservation Area - Areas of special architectural or historic interest. Conservation area 
designation does not prevent change but is intended to help preserve and enhance the 
character and appearance of the area.  
Development Control/ Development Management (DC/DM) - The pro cess whereby a 
local planning authority receives and considers the merits of a planning application and 
whether it should be given permission, having regard to the development plan and all other 
material considerations.  
Development Plan - A document or doc uments which set out the policies and proposals for 
development and use of land in the area. This includes adopted Local Plans and made 
Neighbourhood Plans and is defined in section 38 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase 
Act 2004.   
Development Plan Doc uments (DPD) - Statutory development plan documents are now 
termed Local Plans in the 2012 Regulations and must be subject to rigorous procedures of 
community involvement, consultation and independent examination, and are adopted after 
receipt of the inspe ctor's binding report. Once adopted, development control decisions must 
be made in accordance with them unless material considerations indicate otherwise.  
Duty to Cooperate (DtC)  - A requirement, introduced by the Localism Act 2011 for local 
planning aut horities to work collaboratively with neighbouring authorities and other public 
bodies across local boundaries on strategic priorities, such as development requirements 
which cannot wholly be met within one local authority area.  
Edge of centre - For retai l purposes a location that is well connected and up to 300 metres 
of the primary shopping area. For all other main town centre uses, a location within 300 
metres of a town centre boundary.  
Examination - An Examination chaired by an independent inspector t o consider if the 
development plan is sound.  
Geodiversity:  The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms.  
Greenfield Land - Greenfield land is land that has never been built on or where the remains 
of any structure or activity have blended i nto the landscape over time. Greenfield land should 
not be confused with green belt land which is a term for specially designated land around 
large built up areas to prevent settlement coalescence. There is no Green Belt in Melton 
Borough.  
Green Infrastruc ture - A network of multi -functional green space, urban and rural, which is 
capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality life benefits for local 
communities.  
Heritage Asset - A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identifie d as having a 
degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage 
interest. Heritage assets include designated assets and assets identified by the local 
planning authority (including local listing).  
Housing Associat ions (HA)  - in England , these are independent societies, bodies of 
trustees or companies established for the purpose of providing low -cost social housing for  
Melton Local Plan, October  2018                       Glossary                                           157 people in housing need on a non -profit -making basis. Any trading surplus is used to maintain 
existing homes and to help finance new ones.  Housing associations has been used as the 
generic  name for all social landlords not covered by local authorities (see below). In previous 
editions housing associations were referred to as Registered Social Landl ords, although the 
term (private) Registered Provider  of social housing is now commonly used.  
Housing Market Area (HMA) - A geographical area which is relatively self -contained in 
terms of housing demand , also  in terms of economic growth.  
Infrastructure - Basic services necessary for development to take place, e.g. roads, public 
transport, electricity, sewerage, water, education and health facilities.  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan - A regularly updated supporting document which includes 
details of the infr astructure needed to support the delivery of the Local Plan.   
Landscape Character Assessment - A tool that is used to help understand, and articulate, 
the character of a landscape, helping to identify the features that gives a locality its 'sense of 
place'  and pinpoints what makes it different from neighbouring areas.  
Listed Building - Statutory Listed Buildings are protected for their architectural and historic 
value as part of the nation’s heritage.  
Local Development Scheme (LDS) - The Local Development  Scheme sets out the 
timetable, targets and milestones for the preparation of development plan d ocuments.  
Local Enterprise Partnership - A body designated by the Secretary of State for 
Communities and Local Government, established for the purpose of improving the conditions 
for economic growth in an area.  
Local Nature Reserve - To qualify for Local Nature Reserve status, a site must be of 
importance for wildlife, geology, education or public enjoyment. Some are also nationally 
important Sites of Special Scientific Interest. All district and county councils have powers to 
acquire, declare and manage sites.  
Local Plan - The Local Plan establi shes a local planning authority's policies for meeting the 
economic, environmental and social aims for their area as it affects the development and 
use of land. In law this is described as a development plan document adopted under the 
Planning and Compulso ry Purchase Act 2004.  
Local Strategic Partnership - A multi -agency partnership which brings together at a local 
level, the different parts of the public, private, community and voluntary sectors; allowing 
different initiatives and services to support one a nother so that they can work together more 
effectively.  
Local Transport Plan - Statutory documents which set the strategy for the management, 
maintenance and development of the area's transport system explaining how funds will be 
used to deliver improved transport and help meet transport objectives. LTPs are prepared by 
the Local Highways Authority which for Melton is Leicestershire County Council.   
158                                    Glossary                              Melton Local Plan, October 2018  Local Wildlife Site - Local Wildlife Sites are identified and selected for their local nature 
conservation va lue. They protect threatened species and habitats acting as buffers, stepping 
stones and corridors between nationally -designated wildlife sites.  
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) - This sets out the Government’s planning 
policies for England and ho w these are expected to be applied, replacing previous Planning 
Policy statements and Guidance (PPS/PPGs). It must be taken into account in the 
preparation of local plans and is a material consideration in planning decisions.  This plan 
was examined against  the provisions of the NPPF 2012.  
Neighbourhood Plan - A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a 
particular neighbourhood area.  
Objectively assessed housing need (OAN) – national planning policy requires local 
planning  authorities t o identify their objectively assessed needs for market and affordable 
housing in the housing market area. The OAN for Melton Borough comes from the Leicester 
and Leicestershire Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment . 
Out of Centre - A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but not necessarily 
outside the urban area.  
Out of Town - A location out of centre that is outside the existing urban area.  
Ridge and Furrow - An archaeological pattern of ridges and troughs created b y a historical 
system of ploughing.  
Policies Map (formerly  Proposals Map ) – This illustrates the policies and proposals of the 
Local Plan that ha ve a geographic designation or specific land use implication. The map is 
an Ordnance Survey base map and where necessary includes inset maps.  
Scheduled Monument - 'Scheduling' is shorthand for the process through which nationally 
important sites and monuments are given legal protection by being placed on a list, or 
'schedule'. Historic England takes the lead in ide ntifying sites in England which should be 
placed on the schedule by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport.  
Section 106 Agreement - A legally enforceable obligation entered into under Section 106 of 
the Town and Country Planning Act 1990, to mitigate the impacts of a development 
proposal.  
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  - A site identified under the Wildlife and 
Countryside Act 1981 (as amended by the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000) as an 
area of special interest by reason o f any of its flora, fauna, geological or physiographical 
features.  
Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) - A Statement of Community Involvement 
establishes a local authority's strategy on community and stakeholder consultations on the 
LDF and planning a pplications.  
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) - A Strategic Environmental Assessment is a 
required under European Union regulations and will assess the policies and proposals of  
Melton Local Plan, October  2018                       Glossary                                           159 DPDs likely to have a significant environmental impact. It will be inc orporated within the 
Sustainability Appraisal process.  
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA)  – Evidence which assess es 
the suitability, availability and achievability of land for development of housing and potentially 
other uses.  Anyone c an submit sites into assessment and the evidence makes no decisions 
about whether development should take place, which is a decision for the Local Plan 
process.  
Strategic Road Network  - Highways England is responsible for the construction and 
maintenance o f motorways and major trunk roads in England used to move people and 
freight around the country which is known as the strategic network of roads.  
Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) - Supplementary planning documents will 
elaborate on policies and propo sals in DPDs. They will not have development plan status. 
They will be considered as a material planning consideration s and their weight will be 
reflected by their status. SPDs are likely to take the form of design guides, development 
briefs for a Melton S ustainable Neighbourhood or thematic based documents.  
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) - Sustainability Appraisal assess ed the social, economic and 
environmental impacts of the policies and proposals of Local Plans. It was an iterative 
process that commence d at the outset of document preparation.  In Melton Borough this was 
combined with health and equalities to create and Integrated Impact Assessment.  
Sustainable Community Strategy -The Local Government Act 2000 placed a duty on local 
authorities to prepare ' community strategies'  for promoting or improving the economic, social 
and environmental well -being of their areas, and contributing to the achievement of 
sustainable development in the UK. It also g ave authorities broad new powers to improve 
and promote lo cal well -being as a means of helping them to implement those strategies.  
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems  - A sequence of management practices and control 
structures designed to drain surface water in a more sustainable fashion than some 
conventional tec hniques.  
Sustainable Neighbourhood (SN) - A sustainable neighbourhood which enables 
sustainable patterns of living to be built into all stages of planning and implementation 
including high quality design, well -planned infrastructure and sustainable transpo rt options 
facilitating easy access to a wide range of facilities and services.  
Town centre uses  - Main uses include retail development  (including warehouse clubs and 
factory outlet stores); leisure, entertainment facilities, the more intensive sport and recreation 
uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive through restaurants, bars and pubs, night clubs, 
casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres and bingo halls), offices and arts, 
culture and tourism development (including theatres, mus eums, galleries and concert halls, 
hotels and conference facilities) , and housing.  
Windfall sites  - Sites which have not been specifically identified for housing development 
through the planning process but which may come forward over the course of the pla n 
period.  
 