Mid Sussex  
District Plan 
2014 – 2031
Adopted
March 2018Contents
      Adopted District Plan      1. Background
2. Vision and Objectives
3. Overall Strategy
4. Policies
5. Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan
Appendix A: Housing Trajectory
Appendix B: List of evidence base documents
Appendix C: Saved Local Plan Policies
Appendix D: GlossaryList of Policies
      Adopted District Plan      DP1:   Sustainable Economic Development         24
DP2:   Town Centre Development          26
DP3:   Village and Neighbourhood Centre Development       28
DP4:   Housing            30
DP5:   Planning to Meet Future Housing Need        33
DP6:   Settlement Hierarchy           34
DP7:   General Principles for Strategic Development at Burgess Hill     38
DP8:   Strategic Allocation to the east of Burgess Hill at Kings Way      40
DP9:   Strategic Allocation to the north and north-west of Burgess Hill     43
DP10: Strategic Allocation to the east of Pease Pottage       48
DP11: Strategic Allocation to the north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks      52
DP12: Protection and Enhancement of Countryside        56
DP13: Preventing Coalescence          58
DP14: Sustainable Rural Development and the Rural Economy      59
DP15: New Homes in the Countryside         60
DP16: High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty       62
DP17: Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  63
DP18: Setting of the South Downs National Park        65
DP19: Sustainable Tourism           66
DP20: Securing Infrastructure          67
DP21: Transport            68
DP22: Rights of Way and other Recreational Routes       70
DP23: Communication Infrastructure          71
DP24: Leisure and Cultural Facilities and Activities        73
DP25: Community Facilities and Local Services        74
DP26: Character and Design           75
DP27: Dwelling Space Standards          76
DP28: Accessibility            77
DP29: Noise, Air and Light Pollution          79
DP30: Housing Mix            81
DP31: Affordable Housing           83
DP32: Rural Exception Sites           84
DP33: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople       85
DP34: Listed Buildings and Other Heritage Assets        87
DP35: Conservation Areas           89
DP36: Historic Parks and Gardens          90
DP37: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows         90
DP38: Biodiversity            92
DP39: Sustainable Design and Construction         94
DP40: Renewable Energy Schemes          95
DP41: Flood Risk and Drainage          96
DP42: Water Infrastructure and the Water Environment       97
Appendix A:  Housing Trajectory          111
Appendix B:  List of evidence base documents        112
Appendix C:  Saved Local Plan Policies         117
Appendix D:  Glossary           117List of Figures
      Adopted District Plan      Figure 1: Main destinations of Mid Sussex residents commuting to jobs outside the district  4
Figure 2: Main locations of non-residents commuting to jobs inside Mid Sussex    4
Figure 3: Mid Sussex Economic Context         11
Figure 4: Mid Sussex Environmental Constraints        12
Figure 5: Key Diagram           13
Figure 6: Strategic allocation to the east of Burgess Hill at Kings Way (Policy DP8)   42
Figure 7: Strategic allocation to the north and north-west of Burgess Hill (Policy DP9)   47
Figure 8: Strategic allocation to the east of Pease Pottage (Policy DP10)     51
Figure 9: Strategic allocation Land north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks (DP11)    55
This Plan was adopted by Mid Sussex District Council on 28th March 2018Foreword
      Adopted District Plan      
Foreword by Cabinet member for Housing and Planning
Mid Sussex District Council is a rural District with 3 main towns and 24 
parishes located between the South Downs National Park and the High 
Weald AONB. It has a high quality environment, beautiful countryside 
and a number of smaller settlements which each have their own unique 
characteristics. The District benefits from good connectivity to London, 
the South Coast and Gatwick. 
This Plan is a significant document for the Council and residents of Mid 
Sussex. It will shape the future of Mid Sussex up to 2031 by providing 
a framework for new development, employment growth, infrastructure, 
and measures to ensure the protection of the countryside. The District 
Plan will also guide other planning documents, such as Neighbourhood 
Plans and Site Allocations Plans. 
The policies and strategy set out in the District Plan conform 
with national planning guidelines, and are the result of extensive 
consultation with local people, close working with our neighbouring 
authorities, and a thorough examination process. 
The Plan seeks to address a number of local issues, including housing 
provision, and commuting patterns. This is one of the highest quality places to live in the country, and 
housing is relatively unaffordable to many with high numbers of people travelling outside the District for 
work. The District Plan makes provision for more homes and jobs, to make homes more affordable and 
accessible to enable people to live and work in the District. 
This Plan presents a sustainable future for our District, by providing the homes and jobs needed in a way 
that respects the unique built and natural environment of Mid Sussex. 
I would like to thank all those who contributed to the development of the District Plan. 
Cllr Andrew MacNaughton
Cabinet Member for Housing and Planning
Mid Sussex District Council
Chapter 1  
Background1
Background   Adopted District Plan      1This District Plan has been prepared in the context of the Localism Act and the National Planning 
Policy Framework. It reflects the aspirations of Central Government and the District Council to give 
local people more ownership and control over the planning of their area so that development is 
viewed positively to help communities maintain a high quality of life, increase economic prosperity 
and protect the environment to meet current needs and the needs of future generations. 
The Plan sets out a vision for how Mid Sussex wants to evolve and a delivery strategy for how 
that will be achieved. It supports the National Planning Policy Framework’s ‘presumption in favour 
of sustainable development’. As such, it sets out broad guidance on the distribution and quality 
of development in the form of ‘higher level’ strategic policies. It also provides the framework for 
all subsequent planning documents, including Neighbourhood Plans. The District Plan covers the 
period up to 2031 and will replace the majority of the Mid Sussex Local Plan adopted in 2004. The 
Local Plan policies that will continue to apply are listed in Appendix C.
The District Plan does not apply to that part of the District within the South Downs National Park. 
The South Downs National Park Authority is preparing its own Local Plan for that area.
Mid Sussex is fully covered by Town and Parish Councils, and a particular feature of the Plan is the 
desire of the District Council to involve Town and Parish Councils in its preparation and delivery. It is 
vital that there is local influence over where and what development happens, and the infrastructure 
that is provided over the next 17 years. The Plan encourages all Town and Parish Councils, 
individually or working together in clusters, to prepare and maintain up-to-date local Neighbourhood 
Plans as envisaged in the Localism Act and the National Planning Policy Framework. These 
Neighbourhood Plans will need to be in conformity with the District Plan and national policy 
guidance. There is almost complete Neighbourhood Plan coverage across the District.
The Plan is informed by the discussions the District Council has had with neighbouring authorities 
regarding their needs and planning issues of cross-boundary importance in line with the ‘duty to 
co-operate’ requirements in the National Planning Policy Framework.
The Plan should be read in conjunction with the Sustainability Appraisal report. This shows which 
options have been considered for the strategy and policies, assessed against sustainability 
objectives, and explains why the options chosen are preferred over those rejected.
A Habitats Regulations Assessment has been prepared to identify the Plan’s potential impacts 
on the Ashdown Forest, a European designated nature conservation site. A Policies Map also 
accompanies the Plan. The documents that comprise the evidence base are listed in Appendix B.
Finally, the Plan has been prepared on the principle that further housing development must be 
accompanied by suitable and timely infrastructure investment. To this end, the District Council will 
refresh its Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) that will identify the infrastructure required to support 
the planned development in the District Plan, Neighbourhood Plans and any subsequent Site 
Allocations Development Plan Document (DPD). In addition, the Council will consider implementing 
the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) and has published a CIL Charging Schedule. The Charging 
Schedule and other sources identified in the IDP will be a mechanism for delivering the necessary 
infrastructure to accompany new development.1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8Chapter 2  
Vision and 
Objectives2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     3Mid Sussex – An Attractive Place to Live, Work and Visit
2.1
 
 
 
 
2.2
 
 
2.3
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.4Mid Sussex is a rural District in the South East of England. It is a desirable place to live, benefiting 
from a high standard of living and a superb and easily accessible natural setting. The District 
is consistently ranked highly on quality of life measures. The Halifax Quality of Life Survey of 
2015, (which ranks how good an area is in which to live based on measures such as housing, 
environment, health and education), places Mid Sussex 16th out of 405 local authority areas in the 
country. Mid Sussex scored more highly than any other area in Sussex. It is also one of the least 
deprived areas in the country according to the Index of Multiple Deprivation (ranked 321 out of 
326 in 2015); crime levels are low; health levels are generally good; and there is a strong sense of 
community.
The District has three towns – Burgess Hill, East Grinstead and Haywards Heath – and a good 
mix of large and smaller villages/hamlets. These are distinct communities with their own heritage, 
characteristics and aspirations for the future. According to the 2011 Census, the District is home 
to 139,860 residents – 62% of these live in the three towns, with the remaining 38% living in the 
villages. The District has a higher than average number of retired residents (aged over 65) – 18.1% 
compared to 17.1% for the South East, and 16.4% nationally.
Mid Sussex is set in beautiful countryside. Nearly 50% of the District is within the High Weald Area 
of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and over 10% is within the South Downs National Park. Between 
them is an area of small-stream valleys and hedgerows within a gently rolling landscape known as 
the Low Weald. Mid Sussex is the tenth most wooded District in the South East and two-thirds of 
this woodland is classified as ‘ancient’. It also has many sites valued for their biodiversity including 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest, Sites of Nature Conservation Importance, Local Nature Reserves 
and Biodiversity Opportunity Areas. The Ashdown Forest is within the neighbouring Wealden 
District Council area but, as a European designated Special Protection Area and Special Area of 
Conservation, its proximity to Mid Sussex means that a Habitats Regulations Assessment of the 
District Plan is required.
The District is rich in heritage, which contributes to the unique character and identity of Mid 
Sussex and attracts many visitors to the area. The heritage assets of the District include many 
Listed Buildings, and Conservation Areas, ranging from the historic town centre of East Grinstead 
through to parts of the smaller villages and settlements, and sites of archaeological interest, some 
of which are Scheduled Ancient Monuments. There are Registered Parks and Gardens of Special 
Historic Interest and a large number of unregistered Parks and Gardens which appear on West 
Sussex County Council’s Sites and Monuments Record. The District also includes many other 
buildings which, whilst not statutorily listed, are of architectural merit or of local historic interest, 
making a valuable contribution to the character of the area. Unsurprisingly, the District’s attractive 
natural environment and rich heritage makes it highly valued by its residents and a popular tourist 
destination.2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     4
Figure 1: Main destinations of Mid Sussex residents commuting to jobs outside the district
Figure 2: Main locations of non-residents commuting to jobs inside Mid Sussex2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     52.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9Economically, the District is generally successful with high levels of employment. The number of 
people economically active (i.e. people who are available to work) is over 75,000, which accounts for 
over 50% of the population of the District and remains at a higher percentage than the national figure. 
According to the latest Census (2011) there are around 73,000 people in the District in employment. 
Over 13% of these work from home and 17% are self-employed. Around 44% of workers (31,745 as 
at 2011) commute out of the District and over 20,000 people living outside the district commute in to 
Mid Sussex to work (as shown in Figures 1 and 2 above).
Mid Sussex District has a very low level of unemployment and this remains the lowest in the 
County. It has a relatively skilled and educated workforce and has access to further educational 
establishments within the District and two universities in Brighton (University of Brighton and 
University of Sussex).
In 2010, Mid Sussex was identified by Experian as the most economically resilient local authority 
area in the region. It is the location for a number of innovative and nationally known businesses with 
a third of businesses in the professional, scientific and technical, and information and communication 
sectors. There is a range of smaller businesses across sectors such as finance, service industries 
and light manufacturing. The Mid Sussex area has approximately 7,300 businesses. Over 85% of 
these employ fewer than 10 people with the majority employing fewer than four employees. Over 
2,600 of these businesses have been operating for over 10 years; however, there is also a large 
number (nearly 1,000), which have only been running for two years or less.
The nature of the local economy is strongly influenced by the wider regional context in which it 
sits.   Mid Sussex is close to Crawley and London Gatwick Airport and within commuting distance 
of London and Brighton and the south coast. The District Council is an active partner in the Gatwick 
Diamond Initiative (an economic area centred upon the airport but covering nine local authority 
areas) and the larger ‘Coast to Capital’ Local Enterprise Partnership which stretches from Chichester 
in the west to Brighton in the south through to Croydon in the north. The District is well connected 
with good links by road and rail to London, Brighton and Gatwick and is within easy travelling 
distance of the Channel Tunnel, Southampton and Dover.
The Challenge Facing the District
Whilst Mid Sussex generally offers a high quality of life, it will need to manage a series of issues over 
the lifetime of this Plan if the District is to continue to be economically successful and the negative 
impacts of development are to be properly mitigated. These issues include:
• Whilst the District is economically resilient, this cannot be taken for granted and there is a  
 need to ensure the local economy is supported and businesses district-wide are able to thrive  
 and grow in the future;
• Mid Sussex has a relatively high level of in and out commuting, which impacts on traffic   
 levels and environmental quality. While it is recognised that commuters make a significant  
 financial contribution to the District, it is important that appropriate employment opportunities  
 are promoted within the District to ensure people who live locally have the opportunity to work  
 locally;
• There are already infrastructure deficits in sewerage and water supply , open space and   
 sports/play provision. There are public concerns that further development will exacerbate  
 these problems;
• Transport infrastructure is under particular strain with high levels of car ownership and car  
 usage combining with narrow, winding rural roads and congested towns and major junctions.   
 East Grinstead in particular has acknowledged congestion problems along the A22/A264;2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     62.10
2.11
2.12
2.13• An important element of achieving sustainable communities is the regeneration and renewal  
 of the three town centres so that they can be attractive and thriving retail, leisure and   
 commercial hubs each with their own distinctive character;
• House prices in Mid Sussex are high relative to average incomes, and this causes affordability  
 issues, particularly for young people;
• According to the 2011 Census, 18.1% of the Mid Sussex population are aged 65 and over,  
 and the Office of National Statistics has projected that this will increase to 21.2% by 2021.  
 There is also a projected increase in people aged over 85 years living in Mid Sussex from  
 2.8% to 3.3% by 2021 and new development will need to meet the changing needs of   
 residents;
• While overall the District is a generally affluent one, there are small areas where income   
 levels are significantly lower and/or access to local community services is not as good and  
 this can create social exclusion;
• There is a need to achieve sustainable, attractive and inclusive communities to ensure that  
 the District continues to benefit from low crime levels, good health and an attractive natural  
 and built environment; and,
• There is a need to promote development that is energy and resource efficient and increases  
 the environmental as well as economic sustainability of communities within Mid Sussex, and  
 its ability to adapt to climate change.
A Vision for Mid Sussex
The Plan is based on the vision for the District set out in the ‘Mid Sussex Sustainable Communities 
Strategy’ (originally published in 2008 and refreshed in 2012):
“A thriving and attractive District, a desirable place to live, work and visit.  Our aim is to maintain, and 
where possible, improve the social, economic and environmental well-being of our District and the 
quality of life for all, now and in the future.”
The vision is underpinned by four priority themes that promote the development of sustainable 
communities:
• Protecting and enhancing the environment;
• Promoting economic vitality;
• Ensuring cohesive and safe communities; and,
• Supporting healthy lifestyles.
The Sustainable Communities Strategy was drawn up by the Mid Sussex Partnership, whose 
membership includes over 100 local organisations from the public, business and voluntary, and 
community sectors.
The District Plan seeks to achieve sustainable development in accordance with paragraph 10 of the 
National Planning Policy Framework, which requires Plans to take local circumstances into account 
so that they respond to the opportunities for achieving sustainable development.
 2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 In Mid Sussex, sustainable development means that which:
Social
• improves quality of life, wellbeing and the conditions in which people live, work, travel and  
 take leisure;
• provides housing that meets the needs of present and future generations in locations that are  
 consistent with other policies in the Plan;
• contributes to the creation of balanced communities that meet the needs of all residents with  
 appropriate infrastructure and public facilities that are accessible to all;
• increases the opportunity for people to spend more time within their communities so they  
 can build stronger relationships with neighbours, leading to safe and socially inclusive places  
 with a greater sense of social responsibility;
• increases opportunities to walk, cycle or use public transport, including as part of the green  
 infrastructure network;
Economic
• supports the local economy in both towns and villages and in rural areas;
• creates jobs in towns and villages, minimises the need to travel to other areas for   
 employment and gives people the opportunity to access jobs, shops and leisure facilities  
 close to home;
Environmental
• protects, enhances, restores and utilises natural and environmental assets, including special  
 protections for irreplaceable habitats;
• respects the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside;
• maximises the use of previously developed land and buildings within the built-up areas and  
 reduces the environmental impacts of development; and
• reflects the need to adapt to the impacts of climate change.
 2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     8 
 
2.14Strategic Objectives for the District Plan
The following table shows how the District Plan will take forward the above vision and apply it to 
planning issues.
Priority themes Strategic Objectives for the District Plan
Protecting and enhancing 
the environment1. To promote development that makes the best use of resources 
and increases the sustainability of communities within Mid Sussex, and 
its ability to adapt to climate change 
2. To promote well located and designed development that 
reflects the District’s distinctive towns and villages, retains their 
separate identity and character and prevents coalescence
3. To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and 
biodiversity qualities
4. To protect valued characteristics of the built environment for 
their historical and visual qualities
5. To create and maintain easily accessible green infrastructure, 
green corridors and spaces around and within the towns and villages 
to act as wildlife corridors, sustainable transport links and leisure and 
recreational routes
6. To ensure that development is accompanied by the necessary 
infrastructure in the right place at the right time that supports 
development and sustainable communities.  This includes the 
provision of efficient and sustainable transport networks
Promoting economic 
vitality7. To promote a place which is attractive to a full range of 
businesses, and where local enterprise thrives
8. To provide opportunities for people to live and work within their 
communities, reducing the need for commuting
9. To create and maintain town and village centres that are 
vibrant, attractive and successful and that meet the needs of the 
community
10. To support a strong and diverse rural economy in the villages 
and the countryside
11. To support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a 
visitor destination
Ensuring cohesive and 
safe communities12. To support sustainable communities which are safe, healthy 
and inclusive
13. To provide the amount and type of housing that meets the 
needs of all sectors of the community
14. To create environments that are accessible to all members of 
the community 
Supporting healthy 
lifestyles15. To create places that encourage a healthy and enjoyable 
lifestyle by the provision of first class cultural and sporting facilities, 
informal leisure space and the opportunity to walk, cycle or ride to 
common destinations2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     9 
 
2.15
 
2.16
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.17
 
2.18
2.19
 
 
 
2.20Wider Context
The District Council has cooperated with neighbouring authorities on planning issues that cross 
administrative boundaries. Most of Mid Sussex lies within the Gatwick Diamond – an area centred 
upon the airport, which has a key role to play in the economic strength of the area, both as a direct 
employer and through its influence on the location of businesses that provide services to it or have 
international connections.
The Gatwick Diamond forms one of five sub-areas of the larger Coast to Capital Local Enterprise 
Partnership. The Coast to Capital mission is:
“to provide joint public and private sector leadership to drive sustainable private sector led growth 
and job creation across an area reaching from Brighton & Hove to Croydon and including the 
Gatwick Diamond and West Sussex. We will do this by boosting enterprise and embedding an even 
stronger enterprise culture. We will also increase international trade by helping current international 
traders to trade more and inspiring more businesses to trade internationally. In so doing we will 
realise every person and place’s potential.” 
(John Peel, Chairman of Coast to Capital).
The Coast to Capital LEP is governed by a strategic Board, on which the Leader of Mid Sussex 
District Council represents the Gatwick Diamond district authorities, and a Joint Committee 
comprising all of the Leaders of the local authorities in the LEP area. It agreed a Strategic Economic 
Plan in March 2014, which resulted in a successful Growth Deal with Government.
The Gatwick Diamond has its own governance structure, with an Overview Forum of business and 
local authority Leaders, including the Leader of Mid Sussex District Council.  The strategy set by the 
Overview Forum is implemented by the Management Board, which includes the Chief Executives 
of the six District/Borough Councils and two County Councils within the Gatwick Diamond. The 
strategic direction set by the Gatwick Diamond includes a Local Strategic Statement, which is 
accompanied by a ‘memorandum of understanding’ setting out how the local authorities will work 
together to address the wider planning issues and to secure strategic infrastructure provision. This 
local strategic statement is being reviewed to improve the clarity of the strategic priorities for growth 
and investment in the Diamond.
Within the Gatwick Diamond area, the three West Sussex local authority areas of Crawley, 
Horsham and Mid Sussex form the ‘Northern West Sussex’ area. The 2009 West Sussex Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) identified two distinct housing market areas in the County, 
the Northern West Sussex HMA and the Coastal HMA, and this is confirmed in the Mid Sussex 
Housing and Economic Development Assessment (February 2015). The authorities in West Sussex 
have been working broadly within these two groupings and the Northern West Sussex authorities 
have collaborated on housing and economic evidence to inform their respective local plans. These 
authorities have detailed the outcomes of their joint working in the Northern West Sussex Position 
Statement.
Whilst the strongest housing and economic links are between Mid Sussex, Horsham and Crawley, 
the southern part of Mid Sussex also has links with the coastal area. In October 2013 the Council 
signed up to the Greater Brighton City Deal, which covers the administrative areas of Brighton & 
Hove, Lewes, Mid Sussex, Adur and Worthing Councils. The City Deal identifies a number of growth 
areas, including support for the development of the proposed Business and Science Parks at 
Burgess Hill. The City Deal aims:
• To build on the success of Brighton’s creative-tech cluster, and help its many small   
 businesses translate their success onto a larger scale;
• To unlock growth across other areas of the City Region outside Brighton, by giving private  
 sector investors the confidence and space they need to invest;2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     10 
 
 
2.21
2.22
2.23
2.24
2.25• To create effective governance structures for Greater Brighton, so that local authorities,   
 businesses and universities across the City Region can work together in a seamless fashion.
In October 2014 Mid Sussex District Council joined the ‘Coastal West Sussex and Greater Brighton 
Strategic Planning Board’, which includes Adur and Worthing Councils, Arun District Council, 
Chichester District Council, the South Downs National Park Authority, Brighton & Hove City Council 
and Lewes District Council. The Board’s most recent update to the Local Strategic Statement 
(January 2016), now includes the area of Mid Sussex.  
The complex economic context of the district is shown diagrammatically in Figure 3.
Part of Mid Sussex District lies within the South Downs National Park. The National Park Authority 
is the local planning authority for this area. Whilst the National Park Authority currently uses the Mid 
Sussex Local Plan policies to determine planning applications, it is now producing its own Local 
Plan. Therefore, in agreement with the National Park Authority, the Mid Sussex District Plan area 
excludes the part of the District which lies within the National Park.
To the east of the district is Ashdown Forest which is classified as a Special Protection Area 
(SPA) and designated as a Special Area of Conservation (SAC) (European nature conservation 
designations). Whilst Ashdown Forest is outside Mid Sussex, its proximity means that a Habitats 
Regulations Assessment is required by legislation to assess if the Mid Sussex District Plan will 
adversely affect the ecological integrity of Ashdown Forest. The Habitats Regulations Assessment 
identified likely significant effects on the Ashdown Forest SPA, as a result of recreational 
disturbance. Mitigation measures have been identified for recreational disturbance and these are 
being delivered. Recreational disturbance mainly affects development proposals within 7km of the 
SPA boundary (which includes the settlements of East Grinstead, Ashurst Wood, Ardingly, Horsted 
Keynes and Crawley Down). Mid Sussex District Council is working jointly with neighbouring local 
authorities to ensure that a consistent and robust approach to mitigation is adopted. In terms of the 
impact on the Ashdown Forest SAC as a result of atmospheric pollution, the Habitats Regulations 
Assessment concludes that adverse effects on the ecological integrity of the Ashdown Forest 
SAC are unlikely and no further measures are necessary. Ongoing work with neighbouring local 
authorities will monitor and review this position as necessary.
The environmental constraints of the district and the immediately surrounding area are shown in 
Figure 4.2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     11
Crawley
HorshamCroydon
Sevenoaks
Tunbridge
WellsEast
Grinstead
UckfieldBillingshurstGuildford
Midhurst
Chichester
Bognor
RegisWorthingBrighton
& HoveLewes
Newhaven
EastbourneRedhillLondon
Haywards
Heath
Burgess
HillM20M25
Coast to Capital LEP
Mid Sussex District
Gatwick DiamondDistrict boundaries
Greater Brighton City DealCrawley
HorshamMole
ValleyTandridgeSevenoaks
Wealden
Lewes
AdurBrighton
and Hove
EastbourneTonbridge
and MallingDartford
Reigate
and
BansteadEpsom
and
EwellElmbridgeSpelthorne
Runnymede
WokingSurrey
Heath
Guildford
ArunChichesterWaverley
WorthingMid
SussexM3 M25M25Map showing
Economic 
Context
Figure 3: Mid Sussex Economic Context2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     12
±
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping. Mid Sussex District Council. 100021794. 2014.Hassocks
HurstpierpointSayers
Common
Poynings
FulkingPyecombeBolneyWarninglidHandcrossBalcombePease
Pottage
Cuckfield
AnstyArdingly
Lindfield
Scaynes
HillHorsted
KeynesWest
Hoathly
Haywards
Heath
Burgess
HillTurners
HillCrawley
Down Copthorne
Ashurst
WoodEast
GrinsteadA264
B2028
B2110
B2110B2036
B2110A23
B2115
B2114B2036
A272A272
A273
B2036
A23B2117
B2112B2116A272
A23A2300A22Map showing 
Environmental 
Constraints
Key
Ashdown Forest (DP14)
Ashdown Forest 7km buffer (DP14)
Built Up Area Boundaries
South Downs National Park 
High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (DP13)
Countryside Area (DP9) Protection and Enhancement of Countryside (DP12)Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area (SPA)
and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) (DP17)Key
7)
6)
Figure 4: Mid Sussex Environmental Contraints2
Vision and Objectives   Adopted District Plan     13
^_Text
Hassocks
HurstpierpointSayers
Common
Poynings
FulkingPyecombeBolneyWarninglidHandcrossBalcombePease
Pottage
Cuckfield
AnstyArdingly
Lindfield
Scaynes
HillHorsted
KeynesWest
Hoathly
Haywards
Heath
Burgess
HillTurners
HillCrawley
Down Copthorne
Ashurst
WoodEast
GrinsteadA264
B2028
B2110
B2110B2036
B2110A23
B2115
B2114B2036
A272A272
A273
B2036
A23B2117
B2112B2116A272
A23A2300A22
Lewes
Brighton
and HoveAdurHorshamCrawleyTandridge
Wealden
Proposed strategic housing allocation (DP8, DP9, DP10 and DP11)
Proposed employment (DP9)
Centre for Community Sport (DP9)
Science Park (DP1)
Plan Area
Railway line
District Boundaries
Built Up Area Boundaries
East Court & Ashplats Wood, East Grinstead Strategic SANG (DP17)
Ashdown Forest 7km Zone of Influence (DP17)
High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (DP16)
South Downs National Park
Protection and Enhancement of Countryside (DP12)Key Diagramro
pM23M23
Figure 5: Key DiagramChapter 3  
Overall 
Strategy3
Overall Strategy            Adopted District Plan     153.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6Introduction
This chapter sets out the overall strategy for achieving the vision and strategic objectives referred 
to in the previous chapter. It demonstrates how the Council will meet the challenge of balancing 
economic growth with protecting and enhancing the high quality environment of the District. It 
shows how it will meet the National Planning Policy Framework requirement to plan positively for 
sustainable development. The Plan’s overall strategy is shown in illustrative form in the Key Diagram 
(Figure 5 above).
The District Plan provides clarity to communities, developers and other interested parties on what, 
where, when and how development should take place in Mid Sussex until 2031. In doing so, it 
shows how the Council will balance the need to protect the unique environment and heritage of the 
District with the equally important need to ensure that communities can be increasingly aspirational 
and promote local business activity and employment. However, the Plan is flexible enough to enable 
Neighbourhood Plans to reflect the individual characteristics and requirements of their localities. 
It enables those making planning decisions to respond to changing circumstances, and take 
advantage of any unforeseen opportunities to promote the vision and strategic objectives of the 
Plan.
The following chapter sets out the strategic policies that will guide the nature and quality of 
development in the District. These cover issues which apply to the whole District, or have 
implications beyond individual parish boundaries. Other town or village specific policies will 
come forward through Neighbourhood Plans. Neighbourhood Plans are required to be in general 
conformity with the policies of the District Plan.
Protecting the Unique Character of Mid Sussex
Mid Sussex has a high quality environment that is greatly valued by those who live, work and visit 
the District. Its towns and villages include many historic buildings and conservation areas, and 
they are surrounded by attractive countryside, much of which is protected by national and local 
designations. The countryside offers a wide range of social, economic and environmental benefits 
to residents and visitors. The location, nature and quality of new development is therefore of the 
utmost importance to ensure that this environment is protected, and where possible enhanced.
Independent consultants (LUC) were commissioned to undertake a study on the capacity of Mid 
Sussex to accommodate new development. The overall aim of the study was to provide a detailed 
and robust assessment of the constraints to development in the District in order to understand its 
capacity to accommodate development and to identify the most sustainable areas for development.  
The “Capacity of Mid Sussex to Accommodate Development” study was published in June 2014. 
Its key finding is that Mid Sussex is heavily constrained by environmental designations and by its 
attractive countryside and high quality landscape character in particular. The study highlights that 
almost two-thirds of the District is covered by primary level constraints, i.e. areas that are afforded 
the highest protection under national policy such as the National Park and Area of Outstanding 
Natural Beauty. In the remaining parts of the District, just 4% of the area is not covered by either one 
or more secondary constraints or is not already built upon. Secondary constraint areas are those 
which are sensitive to development pressures, but have less weight afforded to them by national 
policy.
 
Increasing the Sustainability of the District 
A central aim of the District Plan is to increase the sustainability of communities within Mid Sussex 
and reduce the need to travel to other areas for employment and other facilities. This gives people 
the opportunity to access jobs, shops and leisure facilities close to home and makes communities 
more sustainable by:3
Overall Strategy            Adopted District Plan     163.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11• Reducing the environmental impacts of increased traffic and congestion on air pollution and  
 quality of life;
• Increasing the amount of time people spend within their communities so they can build   
 stronger relationships with neighbours, leading to safer and more inclusive places and a   
 greater sense of social responsibility;
• Supporting the local economy because people who live and work within the community are  
 more likely to spend money in local shops and businesses, build local supply chains and  
 thereby reduce leakage of expenditure outside of the area.
Supporting Economic Growth
The Plan seeks to support sustainable communities and a robust local economy by encouraging 
opportunities for residents to work within their towns and villages and access other necessary 
services and facilities close to home. The Plan has strong links with the Council’s Economic 
Development Strategy. This sets out the actions being undertaken by the Council to support 
the local economy. These include facilitating the delivery of new business space; supporting the 
regeneration of the three town centres; and direct support to businesses through specific Council 
services.
The location of Mid Sussex within the Gatwick Diamond brings potential to enhance the economic 
prosperity of the area and it is important that Mid Sussex benefits fully from those opportunities.  
The District Plan’s spatial policies seek to continue to support the economic role and function 
of Burgess Hill and to expand this, not only to better meet local employment needs, but also to 
recognise the wider economic and inward investment role which the town can fulfil. The Plan 
promotes strategic development at Burgess Hill and includes proposals for high quality employment 
floorspace to enable the towns of Mid Sussex to become more sustainable through reducing long 
distance commuting and to boost the economy of the area generally. There is a clear commitment 
from developers to bring forward sites for business use and these will help to create a revitalised 
and sustainable 21st century town. The wider benefits of these developments will support high-end 
economic and business growth across the Coast to Capital LEP and Gatwick Diamond areas.
It is also important that economic development opportunities are taken up elsewhere in the District, 
particularly through the regeneration of town centres and other existing employment areas, 
and the development of new employment areas in the towns and villages. In developing their 
Neighbourhood Plans, Town and Parish Councils are being encouraged to take full account of the 
economic needs of their area, and to seek to reduce commuting by providing for these needs. The 
Plan also includes policies to support existing businesses and allow them to grow and encourage 
inward investment especially by knowledge-driven, creative or high technology industries.
Meeting Housing Needs
Another central aim of the Plan is to ensure that housing needs can be met over the Plan period. 
This is in accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF, paragraph 47) which 
requires authorities to demonstrate that they are meeting the “full, objectively assessed” housing 
needs of their housing market area so far as that is consistent with the other policies in the NPPF. 
The Mid Sussex Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA) (February 
2015), its Update (November 2015) and Addendum (August 2016), provide the evidence for the 
objectively assessed housing need for Mid Sussex, drawing on evidence from the 2009 and 2012 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment and the Affordable Housing Needs Update (2014). The latter 
documents were prepared jointly with Crawley and Horsham Councils and cover the whole Northern 
West Sussex Housing Market Area.
The most recent Department for Communities and Local Government (DCLG) district-level 3
Overall Strategy            Adopted District Plan     17 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.12
 
 
 
 
 
3.13
 
 
 
3.14
3.15
3.16
3.17household projections for the period to 2039 were published in July 2016. These project that an 
average of 714 new households will be formed each year over the plan period 2014-2031. The 
Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) indicates that these household projections should provide the 
starting point for the estimate of overall housing need. The DCLG projections have been subjected 
to sensitivity testing using development-industry recognised POPGROUP modelling software.  
Using this methodology maintains the robustness of the DCLG projections such that an objective 
assessment of the district’s housing need of 714 homes per year is produced. It should be noted 
that approximately 1% of this figure (or 7 dwellings per annum) relates to the South Downs 
National Park which is outside the Plan area.
The PPG advises that housing need numbers suggested by household projections should be 
adjusted if market signals or other market indicators point to an imbalance between the supply and 
demand for housing. The evidence and other factors detailed in the HEDNA Update (November 
2015) conclude that it would be appropriate to make an adjustment in the form of an uplift of 
2.3% (16 dwellings per year) in response to vacancies. In addition, the examination of the District 
Plan identified that an uplift of 20% (146dpa) should be applied to account for ‘market signals’  in 
accordance with Planning Practice Guidance. This establishes the Objectively Assessed Need for 
Mid Sussex as 876 dwellings per year.
The Localism Act 2011 introduced a ‘duty to cooperate’ on planning issues that cross administrative 
boundaries, and this duty is clarified further in National Planning Policy Framework paragraphs 
178-181. Paragraph 182 says that Local Plans should be positively prepared based on “a strategy 
which seeks to meet objectively assessed development and infrastructure requirements, including 
unmet requirements from neighbouring authorities where it is reasonable to do so and consistent 
with achieving sustainable development.”
Accordingly, Mid Sussex District Council asked all its neighbouring authorities to submit details 
of any unmet requirements. Six of the eight neighbouring authorities identified unmet housing 
requirements and two authorities identified unmet employment floorspace requirements. This 
information was then used to carry out a ‘Sustainability Assessment of Cross-Boundary Options 
for the Mid Sussex District Plan’ which looked at the sustainability impacts on Mid Sussex of taking 
some or all of its neighbours’ unmet needs, and the sustainability impacts on those neighbouring 
authorities if it did not assist in meeting their needs.
In addition, further work was undertaken on the available supply of sites within Mid Sussex 
evidenced within the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA). A new ‘call for 
sites’ was carried out in the summer of 2014. Site assessments were rigorously tested to assess 
whether constraints could be overcome. This included commissioning independent consultants to 
review judgements on the suitability of sites on landscape grounds when this was the only factor 
that was preventing sites from being considered part of the supply. A workshop was also held with 
representatives of the housebuilding industry to test whether the methodology and assumptions in 
the SHLAA were correct, in particular with respect to delivery rates and the five year supply.
As a result of this work, there is an overall palette of sites that could deliver approximately 13,000 
homes within Mid Sussex. It is considered that the Plan needs to retain some flexibility should 
some sites not come forward or are delivered at a slower rate than anticipated, particularly in the 
first five years of the plan period. The Plan therefore allocates strategic sites to the east of Pease 
Pottage and north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks which are capable of early delivery and proposes that 
work will commence on a Site Allocations document with anticipated adoption in 2020, to identify 
remaining sites for the plan period.  
The consequence of this proposed provision figure and the latest DCLG 2014-based household 
projections, adjusted to take account of vacancies and market signals, is that Mid Sussex is able 
to contribute approximately 1,500 dwellings during the plan period towards meeting neighbouring 
authorities’ housing needs. The evidence indicates that any supply in excess of local need is most 3
Overall Strategy            Adopted District Plan     183.18
3.19
3.20
3.21likely to be absorbed by those authorities which have the strongest economic and functional links 
with Mid Sussex.  The employment space needs of neighbouring councils are addressed in the 
preamble to Policy DP1: Sustainable Economic Development.
Ensuring Housing Development is in Suitable Locations
The Sustainability Appraisal for the District Plan has shown that the District can accommodate 
the level of housing required, taking into account environmental and other constraints. In terms 
of location, the most sustainable strategy for the District is to allocate a significant proportion of 
the proposed development to Burgess Hill. Located in the south of the District, Burgess Hill is the 
largest of the three towns in Mid Sussex with a population of around 29,000 (Census 2011). There 
are two main line stations which allow access to London and Brighton, town centre facilities and 
existing employment opportunities. Burgess Hill has fewer constraints than Haywards Heath and 
East Grinstead and other potential locations identified in the Sustainability Appraisal. The remainder 
of development will be delivered by the other towns and villages to support their economic, 
infrastructure and social needs. The scale of growth at these settlements will be guided by the 
Settlement Hierarchy set out in Policy DP6: Settlement Hierarchy.
Locating homes and employment opportunities as part of development at Burgess Hill will bring 
improvements in infrastructure and contribute to the renewal and regeneration of the town 
centre. Over the last five years, work has been progressing in Burgess Hill on a proposal to 
develop between 3,500-4,000 new homes to the north and the east of the town, new high quality 
employment development, new sporting facilities and other infrastructure benefits. This work has 
been led by Burgess Hill Town Council, in consultation with adjacent Parish Councils (Ansty and 
Staplefield Parish Council and Hurstpierpoint & Sayers Common Parish Council), the District 
Council and West Sussex County Council, and interested developers. This work has been the 
subject of public consultation, and the results incorporated into the Burgess Hill Town Wide Strategy. 
The Town Wide Strategy was adopted by Burgess Hill Town Council in 2011.
The District Council supports this work, which is seen as a leading example of the ‘bottom-up’ 
approach to planning now being promoted through the Localism Act and National Planning Policy 
Framework (paragraphs 183-185). It reflects the Council’s aspirations to support sustainable growth 
where this is accompanied by infrastructure benefits. The principles and development proposals set 
out in the Burgess Hill Town Wide Strategy are included as strategic development locations in this 
Plan.
Supporting Neighbourhood Plans
The District Council’s preference is that the location and nature of additional development is 
identified through Neighbourhood Plans. This reflects the Government’s localism agenda, and 
its view that giving power and responsibility to local communities will give them the confidence 
to accept appropriate development and the corresponding benefits that can come with it. This 
view is confirmed in the National Planning Policy Framework (paragraph 16), which sets out that 
neighbourhoods should “develop plans that support the strategic development set out in Local 
Plans… and plan positively to support local development”.3
Overall Strategy            Adopted District Plan     193.22
3.23
3.24
3.25
3.26All of the town and parish councils within the District Plan area have prepared or are preparing 
Neighbourhood Plans. The following table indicates the stage their plans had reached as at March 
2018.
Stage Neighbourhood Plan
Made Albourne
Ansty and Staplefield
Ardingly
Ashurst Wood
Balcombe
Bolney
Burgess Hill
Crawley Down
Cuckfield
East Grinstead 
Haywards Heath 
Hurstpierpoint & Sayers Common
Lindfield and Lindfield Rural
Turners Hill
Twineham
West Hoathly
Referendum No Plans currently at Referendum
Examination No Plans currently at Examination
Submitted Hassocks 
Horsted Keynes
Consultation on draft plan Slaugham
Copthorne
The Town and Parish Councils are shaping sustainable neighbourhoods with their communities by 
allocating land for a variety of uses including housing, business and Local Green Spaces that reflect 
distinct local character, needs and aspirations. 
Ensuring Housing Delivery
The identification in the District Plan of where new homes will be delivered (and the subsequent 
detailed allocations and policies in Neighbourhood Plans) is essential to demonstrate delivery of 
the new homes that Mid Sussex requires for its communities to become more sustainable and 
meet their needs. This will then protect the District from other development proposals outside of the 
areas identified in the District Plan and Neighbourhood Plans; ensure the Plan has local community 
support; and that the overall aims of the District Plan are not undermined.
Despite recent national economic difficulties, Mid Sussex has continued to receive development 
proposals and has permitted a significant number of planning applications.  As at 1st April 2017, 
there were approximately 7,091 new homes already ‘committed’ on sites that are allocated in the Mid 
Sussex Local Plan, the Small Scale Housing Allocations Document, made Neighbourhood Plans; or 
have been granted planning permission, but not yet implemented.
The national economic situation had an impact on housing delivery, but there are local factors 
in some cases that have prevented some sites from being delivered. These include landowner 
disputes, development viability and delays in providing necessary infrastructure. The District Council 
will continue to work with landowners, developers and statutory agencies to try and remove such 
barriers. Progress on these matters will be reflected in the Council’ s updates to its five-year housing 
land supply position.3
Overall Strategy            Adopted District Plan     203.27
 
 
 
3.28
 
3.29
3.30
 
 
 
3.31
 
3.32
3.33
3.34
3.35
3.36The delivery of the Burgess Hill Town Wide Strategy is being progressed by a Development Board 
comprising representatives from the District and County Councils. Mechanisms for delivery include 
Planning Performance Agreements, one of which was signed for the strategic allocation to the 
east of Burgess Hill granted planning permission for 480 homes. The first of the outline planning 
applications for the remainder of the strategic development proposed for Burgess Hill have been 
submitted to the Council. The Plan assumes the strategic developments proposed for around 
Burgess Hill will yield approximately 5,000 homes over the lifetime of the Plan.
The allocation of a strategic site is proposed to the east of Pease Pottage for 600 dwellings, a 
primary school and hospice. The allocation of a strategic site is proposed to the north of Clayton 
Mills, Hassocks for 500 dwellings and a primary school.
The remaining new homes are proposed to be delivered through a combination of the 
Neighbourhood Planning process and a Site Allocations DPD for the District.
For Neighbourhood Plans still in preparation, if communities wish to promote more development 
above their own needs (indicated in policy DP4: Housing) through their Neighbourhood Plans to 
achieve additional local infrastructure improvements then the District Plan will not prevent this, 
provided the proposed developments meet with the vision, strategic objectives and policies of this 
Plan and the requirements of the National Planning Policy Framework.
In addition to the housing provision in Neighbourhood Plans, the District Council will produce its 
own Site Allocations DPD for the District. Such a document has been programmed into the Local 
Development Scheme to ensure its implementation to maintain a five-year supply of housing land.
There will be no necessity for the current generation of Neighbourhood Plans to increase their 
housing numbers.  However, if Town and Parish Councils wish to review their made plans to 
increase numbers, this will reduce the amount of sites that need to be found in the Site Allocations 
DPD.
The Plan also acknowledges that the level of housing and other development will need to be spread 
over the Plan period rather than it all coming at the beginning or end. However, it is accepted the 
timing of developments coming forward is partly in the hands of the developers themselves and will 
depend on the timely delivery of infrastructure.
Meeting Local Infrastructure Needs
In the short term, Section 106 planning obligations will be the main mechanism for delivering the 
necessary infrastructure to accompany new development, including affordable housing and on-site 
infrastructure. Longer term, the Council is considering implementing the Community Infrastructure 
Levy (CIL). This would be supplemented by section 106 agreements to secure site specific 
infrastructure, and section 278 agreements to secure site-specific highway works.
An Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) was prepared in 2016, which identifies all types of 
infrastructure needed to support the planned amount of new homes and businesses’ economic 
growth in the District over the plan period. It has been prepared in collaboration with the County 
Council, Town and Parish Councils and other infrastructure providers to reflect the holistic needs 
of the District. The IDP sets out the estimated costs, who is responsible for infrastructure provision 
and when it should be provided. The District Council will work with infrastructure providers and 
impose conditions on planning permissions to ensure that essential infrastructure is brought forward 
at the appropriate time. The IDP will be refreshed to ensure that it focuses on the provision of 
infrastructure to support planned growth in the District Plan, Neighbourhood Plans and the Site 
Allocations DPD.
In January 2013, the Government announced that Town and Parish Councils that take a proactive 
approach, by drawing up Neighbourhood Plans that are endorsed by local people in a referendum, 
will receive 25% of the revenues from the Community Infrastructure Levy arising from the 3
Overall Strategy            Adopted District Plan     21 
 
 
3.37
3.38
3.39
3.40
3.41
3.42development that they choose to accept. In areas not covered by an agreed Neighbourhood Plan, 
the Town or Parish Council will receive up to 15% of the Community Infrastructure Levy, capped at 
£100 per dwelling in the parish at the time the Levy is collected. The District Plan goes further than 
this, and proposes that the Community Infrastructure Levy collected from developers by the District 
Council will normally be spent on infrastructure needs in the locality of the scheme that generated 
it. The prospect of seeing real infrastructure improvements and other benefits to their area as a 
result of new development has been key to encouraging Mid Sussex communities to take a positive 
approach to planning for growth. It is therefore vital that County, District and Town and Parish 
Councils work together effectively to secure the right infrastructure at the right time to accompany 
new development.
Gatwick Airport
Gatwick Airport is a single runway, two-terminal airport just to the north-west of the District. The 
airport has ambitious plans for growth and development, utilising the existing runway and terminals, 
to support up to 45 million passengers by 2021. The Council will work with partners across the 
Gatwick Diamond area, through the Gatwick Diamond Initiative, to encourage sustainable economic 
growth to support this expansion. This will include supporting Gatwick as an economic and transport 
hub, and seeking to improve access to and from the airport by a range of modes of transport.
The Council will also work with adjoining local authorities to minimise the environmental impact of 
existing development at the airport and actively seek to ensure that the environmental effects of 
expansion proposals (within agreed limits) are minimised, and where necessary mitigated, and that 
wherever possible additional environmental benefits are secured.
The airport’s proposals for an additional parallel runway were not supported by the Airports 
Commission, and in 2017, the Government announced its intention that additional airport capacity in 
the South East would be provided by a third runway at Heathrow airport.  However, land has been 
safeguarded for a second runway at Gatwick, in case it should be needed in the future. 
The District Plan is based upon the airport functioning within the legal limits defined by the Gatwick 
Airport legal agreement (that is, without additional runway development before 2019). Any growth of 
the airport beyond that allowed in the legal agreement would require an early review of the strategy 
and policies in the Plan.
Duty to Co-Operate
The ongoing cooperation between local authorities in the area has been positive and effective 
during the preparation of this Plan, as evidenced in the Council’s ‘Duty to Cooperate Statement’.  
These relationships and joint working practices will need to continue to be effective and constructive 
on an ongoing basis to address the very significant challenges for the wider area in meeting housing 
and other development needs.  The main mechanisms for this cooperation will be the Gatwick 
Diamond Initiative, the Coastal West Sussex and Greater Brighton Strategic Planning Board and 
the Greater Brighton Economic Board.  The outcomes from these discussions and any underpinning 
technical work will be taken into account and progressed through Local Plan reviews.  Mid Sussex 
District Council is fully committed to continuing to work positively and proactively with partners 
to plan strategically for the wider area in the longer term.  This will include exploring long term 
opportunities to work together with others to narrow the gap between the planned housing provision 
and the assessed needs of the wider area.  An example of such work is the refreshing of the 
Local Strategic Statement for Coastal West Sussex and Greater Brighton, which now includes Mid 
Sussex, agreed in January 2016.  Policy DP5: Planning to Meet Future Housing Need sets out how 
Mid Sussex District Council will work with neighbouring and other authorities on strategic priorities.
As noted above, the Plan’s housing provision includes a contribution of approximately 1,500 
dwellings towards the unmet needs of neighbouring authorities, and the strategic allocation at 
Pease Pottage is proposed as a direct response to those of Crawley Borough Council.Chapter 4  
Policies4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     23Quantity and Type of Development
DP1: Sustainable Economic Development
The District Plan strategy is based on the Council’s aspiration for 
sustainable economic growth. This aspiration will contribute towards 
enhancing the prosperity of the Gatwick Diamond and Greater Brighton 
City Region, providing the opportunity for the residents of Mid Sussex 
to work locally and reduce the need to commute. The joint Economic 
Growth Assessment (2014) highlights a high degree of economic 
inter-relationship between Crawley, Horsham and Mid Sussex. Overall 
economic strength is dependent on ongoing and continued joint-working 
and effective management of strategic issues across the economic 
sub-region, particularly with those authorities whose economies are 
critically interrelated to Mid Sussex. The Council will continue to support the Mid Sussex economy and 
wider economic sub-region in collaboration with other local authorities and alongside the work of the Coast 
to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership over the Plan period.
The District Plan reflects the requirements of the National Planning Policy Framework paragraph 21, by 
setting out a clear economic vision and strategy, identifying strategic sites and criteria for supporting inward 
investment and existing businesses. Policy DP1: Sustainable Economic Development encourages new 
businesses to the District in order to meet aspirations for economic growth and the wider benefits this would 
bring.
The Mid Sussex Economic Development Strategy (2013) supports the delivery of Policy DP1: Sustainable 
Economic Development in a number of ways; by supporting the economy through facilitating new 
development, delivering starter units and the revitalisation of the town centres. It enables business growth 
and resilience through the Council delivering key services, procuring locally and paying invoices quickly. 
There will be support through the Gatwick Diamond Initiative and working with other partners including the 
County Council on specific initiatives. 
The Economic Growth Assessment (2014) indicates a need for additional employment land in the 
sub-region to maintain a high quality and competitive business offer. It is important that the District Plan 
allows for economic development opportunities that arise within the District, particularly for high quality, 
knowledge based or high-tech industries which the Economic Development Strategy recognises as a viable 
market for the District.
The level of housing growth proposed in Policy DP4: Housing would result in the need to create an average 
of 543 new jobs per year. This is in line with the findings of the Economic Growth Assessment.
Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership has identified Burgess Hill as a spatial priority in its Strategic 
Economic Plan (SEP) (2014). The spatial priorities in the SEP are defined as “locations with the most 
current growth or where there are opportunities to create the most capacity for future growth”. Coast to 
Capital has committed to making significant investment in the Burgess Hill area between 2015/16 and 
2020/21 to deliver new jobs, homes and employment space. 
The Burgess Hill Employment Sites Study (2015) assessed the deliverability of the business park at 
Burgess Hill. This study sets out scenarios for job targets and commensurate floorspace provision 
for business park developments and updates the employment forecasts for Mid Sussex within the 
Economic Growth Assessment. The baseline assessment suggests an employment land demand figure 
of approximately 24 hectares between 2014 and 2031. The study states that this is best viewed as a 
realistic minimum and that a demand figure of 25-30 hectares should be used. However , the extent of 
unmet employment land needs from neighbouring local authorities in the Gatwick Diamond and wider 
Coast to Capital LEP area is projected to be significant and there are evident economic and sustainability 
consequences if an insufficient supply of employment land and floorspace is not secured.  £
year4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     24Policy DP1: Sustainable Economic Development therefore takes account of the recommendations in the 
evidence base by proposing an allocation of 25 hectares of new employment land between Burgess Hill 
and Cuckfield Road.
The Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan (2014) supports both the business park proposal and the 
proposal for a high quality Science and Technology Park1 , the latter creating 100,000m2 of employment 
floorspace and 2,500 new jobs (around 50% of which would be for new graduates). The Strategic Economic 
Plan (page 50) states that provision of these developments “will create more sustainable communities 
within Mid Sussex by improving job prospects within the District and reducing the need for commuting”.
Paragraph 22 of the National Planning Policy Framework states that planning policies should “avoid the 
long term protection of sites allocated for employment use where there is no reasonable prospect of a 
site being used for that purpose”, so Policy DP1: Sustainable Economic Development also sets out the 
circumstances in which changes of use could take place. 
DP1: Sustainable Economic Development
Strategic Objectives: 7) To promote a place which is attractive to a full range of businesses, and where 
local enterprise thrives; and 8) To provide opportunities for people to live and work within their communities, 
reducing the need for commuting.
Evidence Base: Burgess Hill Employment Sites Study; Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan; Gatwick 
Diamond Strategy; Mid Sussex Economic Development Strategy, Northern West Sussex Economic Growth 
Assessment, Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment.
The total number of additional jobs required within the district over the plan period is estimated to 
be an average of 543 jobs per year. This will be achieved by:
• Encouraging high quality development of land and premises to meet the needs of 21st   
 century businesses;
• Supporting existing businesses, and allowing them room to expand;
• Encouraging inward investment, especially the location, promotion and expansion of   
 clusters or networks of knowledge, creative or high technology industries; and
• Seeking the provision of appropriate infrastructure to support business growth – in   
 particular high speed broadband connections.
Provision for new employment land and premises will be made by: 
• Allocating 25 hectares of land as a high quality business park at Burgess Hill to the east of  
	 Cuckfield	Road;	
• Allocating further sites within the Site Allocations DPD;
• Incorporating employment provision within large scale housing development as part of a   
 mixed use development where it is appropriate; and
• Allowing new small-scale economic development, in the countryside, including tourism (in  
 accordance with Development in the Countryside policies). 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     25The development of a Science and Technology Park has been proposed to support research and 
development and provide high quality employment for the wider area. The Coast to Capital Strategic 
Economic	Plan	identifies	a	broad	location	to	the	west	of	Burgess	Hill.	This	broad	location	is	
indicated on the Policies Map. The Council would consider any such proposals taking into account:
• how the proposal demonstrates that it would contribute to meeting the overall objectives of  
 this policy;
• how the proposal demonstrates that the development would comprise uses falling within  
	 the	definition	of	a	‘Science	Park’ 	as	set	out	by	the	UK	Science	Park	 Association,	alongside		
 appropriate ancillary uses required to serve the development and its employees;
• how the proposal would secure the objectives of policy DP21: Transport, particularly in   
 terms of delivering sustainable transport; and
•	 the	identification	of	and	response	to	environmental,	ecological	and	landscape	constraints		
 on and around the site and how the proposal demonstrates that it would achieve a high   
 quality of design, layout, ecological protection and enhancement, and landscaping to 
 address the objectives of Policies DP26: Character and Design, DP37: Trees, Woodlands and  
 Hedgerows, and DP38: Biodiversity 
Effective use of employment land and premises will be made by:
• Protecting allocated and existing employment land and premises (including tourism) unless  
 it can be demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of its use or continued use   
 for employment or it can be demonstrated that the loss of employment provision is   
	 outweighed	by	the	benefits	or	relative	need	for	the	proposed	alternative	use;
•	 Permitting	appropriate	intensification,	conversion,	redevelopment	and/	or	extension	for		 	
 employment uses providing it is in accordance with other policies in the Plan;
• Giving priority to the re-use or adaptation of rural buildings for business or tourism use and  
	 to	the	diversification	of	activities	on	existing	farm	units	(in	accordance	with	Development	in		
 the Countryside policies).
Neighbourhood Plans should:
• Identify the needs of local businesses and their local residents for employment opportunities  
 and any areas requiring economic regeneration, infrastructure provision or environmental  
 enhancement as required by paragraph 21 of the National Planning Policy Framework; and
•	 Allocate	sufficient	land	within	their	towns	and	villages	to	meet	these	needs.
If	monitoring	indicates	that	there	is	an	insufficient	supply	of	allocated	employment	sites	to	meet	the	 	
District’s	jobs	needs,	then	the	Council	will	consider	allocating	sites	through	a	Site	 Allocations	
Development Plan Document, produced by the District Council.
1   The UK Science Park Association (UKSPA) describes a Science Park as “a business support environment that encourages and 
supports the start-up, incubation and development of innovation-led, high-growth, knowledge-based businesses; initiatives called 
by other names such as Research Park, Innovation Centre, Technology Park, Technopole or technology-based Incubator – where 
they aspire to meet the essential criteria set out above are also included within the definition.”4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     26DP2: Town Centre Development
The Council supports the regeneration and renewal of the three key 
town centres of Burgess Hill, East Grinstead and Haywards Heath. The 
town centres provide a range of shops and other facilities which play 
a key role in serving each town and the surrounding villages and rural 
areas.  
The Mid Sussex District Council Retail Study (September 2008, 
updated November 2014 and May 2016) indicated that while the 
three towns are performing reasonably well as shopping destinations, 
they are not meeting their full potential, with a need to improve their 
attractiveness to minimise competition from other towns outside the District. 
The Retail Study Update 2016 found that for convenience goods, there is no district-wide capacity 
for new retail floorspace  over the Plan period until 2031 as the supermarket permitted as part of the 
Haywards Heath railway station redevelopment will effectively ‘soak up’ any quantitative need for new retail 
floorspace.
For comparison goods, the study forecasts that there is no short to medium term capacity (up to 2025) 
as a result of planned new comparison retail floorspace, particularly due to the new retail schemes in 
Haywards Heath (the station redevelopment) and Burgess Hill (The Martlets redevelopment). However, 
capacity for new floorspace emerges towards the end of the forecast period in 2029 for 5,781m2 net and is 
forecast to increase to 8,643m2 by 2031. This capacity is distributed between Haywards Heath (3,675m2), 
Burgess Hill (396m2) and East Grinstead (4,254m2). There is more limited capacity forecast for Hassocks, 
Hurstpierpoint and the district’s other main village centres (525m2).
Because of this lack of quantitative need for new floorspace until 2029 and the prospect of town centre 
redevelopment in East Grinstead, it is not considered necessary to include specific targets for retail 
floorspace within the policy.
Policy DP2: Town Centre Development supports the regeneration of the town centres and seeks to 
maintain the overall objective of improving the services and attractiveness of the district’s town centres by 
encouraging developments of mixed uses to meet the needs of the community.
Proposals for retail, leisure and office and other main town centre uses should be in a town centre location 
in accordance with the sequential test for town centre uses. Where planning applications are for main 
town centre uses proposed on the edge of town, outside the town centre or out of town and are not in 
accordance with the District Plan or Neighbourhood Plan, the Council will apply a sequential test and 
require an impact assessment as set out in the National Planning Policy Framework (paragraphs 24-27).
When assessing planning applications for retail developments outside a town centre, the Retail Study 
Update 2014 considers that a local impact threshold of 500m² would be justified as an alternative to 
the default threshold of 2,500m² identified by the National Planning Policy Framework. The level of 
detail included within a Retail Impact Assessment should be proportionate to the scale and type of retail 
floorspace proposed, and should be agreed between the Council and the applicant on a case-by-case 
basis.
DP2: Town centre development
Strategic Objectives: 9) To create and maintain town and village centres that are vibrant, attractive and 
successful and that meet the needs of the community.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     27Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Retail Study Update 2014; Neighbourhood Plans; Town Centre Masterplans 
and accompanying work.
Town Centres
These	are	defined	as	the	town	centres	of	Burgess	Hill,	East	Grinstead	and	Haywards	Heath	which	
meet the needs of their communities and those of the surrounding large and small villages and 
countryside areas.
To support the regeneration and renewal and environmental enhancement of the town centres as 
defined	on	the	Policies	Map	–	development,	including	mixed	use	and	tourism	related	development,	
will be permitted providing it:
• is appropriate in scale and function to its location including the character and amenities of  
 the surrounding area;
• has regard to the relevant Town Centre Masterplans and is in accordance with the relevant  
 Neighbourhood Plan.
Primary Shopping Frontages
Primary shopping frontages are areas considered to be the principal shopping areas, predominantly 
for retailing. Proposals should enhance the shopping facilities available and not undermine the 
retail	function	of	the	area.	Within	primary	shopping	frontages	as	defined	on	the	Policies	Map	
change of use will be permitted where:
• A clear predominance of Class A1 shop uses would be maintained;
• The nature of the proposed use would sustain and enhance the vitality and viability of the  
 centre; and
•	 The	 location 	and	prominence	 of	the	proposed 	use	would	not	lead	to	a	significant	break	 in	the		
 continuity of the shopping facilities.
Changes	of	use	to	B1a	offices	or	residential	use	at	ground	floor	level	will	be	resisted.
Secondary Shopping Frontages
Secondary shopping frontages are the smaller areas on the edge of, or beyond, the primary 
shopping frontages. A high proportion of Class A1 – A5 uses appropriate to a shopping area, 
which	contribute	to	the	pedestrian	flow	and	attractiveness	of	the	area,	should	be	retained.	Within	
secondary	shopping	frontages	as	defined	on	the	Policies	Map	change	of	use	will	be	permitted	
where:
• The proposal would sustain and enhance the vitality and viability of the shopping area;
• The cumulative effect of non-Class A1 – A5 shop uses is not so great as to undermine the  
 attractiveness of the shopping area.
In	exceptional	circumstances	change	of	use	to	B1a	office,	health	or	medical	use	or	residential	use,	
at	ground	floor	level,	will	be	permitted	where:
• It can be shown that an A1 – A5 use is no longer viable;
• An unacceptable break in the frontage of A1 – A5 uses would not occur; and4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     28• The cumulative effect of the proposal would not be so great as to undermine the vitality and  
 viability of the shopping area.
The town centre boundaries and Primary and Secondary Shopping frontages in the three towns are 
shown on the Policies Map. These may be revised through Neighbourhood Plans for those areas.
Sequential Test for Town Centre Uses
A sequential test must be applied to planning applications for main town centre uses that are not in 
an existing centre and are not in accordance with the District Plan and the relevant Neighbourhood 
Plan. The sequential test will require:
• Applications for main town centre uses to be located in town centres; or, if suitable sites are  
 not available
• In edge of centre locations where the site is accessible and well connected to the town   
 centre; or, if suitable sites are not available
• At accessible out of centre sites that are well connected to the town centre 
Where an application fails to satisfy the sequential test, or fails to meet other requirements of this 
policy, it should be refused. 
For the purposes of the sequential test, Neighbourhood Centres do not perform the same function 
as	Town	Centres.	Proposals	in	Neighbourhoods	should	reflect	their	role	in	meeting	the	day	to	day	
needs of the local community.
Local Threshold for Retail Impact Assessments
Planning	applications	proposing	the	construction	of	500m²	or	more	gross	floorspace	for	the	sale	of	
convenience or comparison goods outside a town centre must be accompanied by a Retail Impact 
Assessment	in	order	to	demonstrate	that	they	would	not	have	a	significant	adverse	impact	on	a	
town centre, either on their own or cumulatively in the area.
DP3: Village and Neighbourhood Centre Development
The Plan seeks to support a prosperous rural economy in accordance with paragraph 28 of the National 
Planning Policy Framework. 
The Mid Sussex Retail Study Update (2014) focused on the 
three town centres and the village centres of Hassocks and 
Hurstpierpoint, indicating that the two village centres were 
performing relatively well in their role. However, all the main 
village centres including Crawley Down, Cuckfield, Hassocks, 
Hurstpierpoint and Lindfield have an important range of services 
and facilities that supply the day-to-day requirements of local 
residents, neighbouring small villages and the countryside areas 
surrounding the villages. People may have to travel further to gain 
access to some services that are not provided by these villages 
and it is important that these and other smaller centres remain 
vibrant and successful. 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     29DP3: Village and Neighbourhood Centre development
Strategic Objectives: 9) To create and maintain town and village centres that are vibrant, attractive and 
successful and that meet the needs of the community; and 10) To support a strong and diverse rural 
economy in the villages and the countryside.
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Retail Study Update 2014; Neighbourhood Plans; Town Centre Masterplans 
and accompanying work.
Village Centres
These	are	defined	as	the	village	centres	of	Crawley	Down,	Cuckfield,	Hassocks,	Hurstpierpoint	
and	Lindfield	which	meet	the	needs	of	their	own	communities	and	neighbouring	small	villages	and	
countryside areas.
To support the village centres, development, including for mixed uses, will be permitted providing 
it:
• helps maintain and develop the range of shops and services to enable the village centre to  
 meet local needs; and
• is appropriate in scale and function to its location including the character and amenities of  
 the surrounding area; and
• is in accordance with the relevant Neighbourhood Plan.
Small Village Centres, Neighbourhood Centres (in the towns)
These	are	defined	as	the	various	small	village	and	neighbourhood	shopping	centres	which	meet	
the needs of their own communities and countryside areas. To support these, changes of use from 
Class A1 shop uses to other uses will be resisted.
In	exceptional	circumstances,	a	change	of	use	to	Class	 A2,	A3,	A4,	A5	and	B1a	offices	use,	health	
or medical use will be permitted providing:
• it can be shown that the existing use is no longer viable; and
• is appropriate in scale and function to its location including the character and amenities   
	 of	the	surrounding	area	and	will	not	give	rise	to	increased	problems	of	traffic	generation	and		
 car parking; and
• is in accordance with the relevant Neighbourhood Plan.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     30DP4: Housing
The Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) for housing has been 
established as 14,892 (an average of 876 dwellings per annum). This 
OAN reflects household projections for the district and an uplift of 
20% to improve affordability (the evidence that underpins this figure is 
explained in Chapter 3 under ‘Meeting Housing Needs’).
The District Plan sets a minimum housing provision figure of 16,390 
homes in the 17-year period 2014 – 2031 to meet the OAN as well 
as contributing towards the unmet need of neighbouring authorities, 
primarily the unmet need arising in the Northern West Sussex Housing 
Market Area from Crawley.  For the purposes of calculating the 5 year supply a ‘stepped trajectory’ will be 
applied through the calculation of a 5-year rolling average.  The annual provision in this stepped trajectory 
is 876 dwellings per annum (dpa) for years 2014/15 until 2023/24 and thereafter, from 1st April 2024 1,090 
dpa until 2030/31. 
In conformity with the National Planning Policy Framework (Paragraph 47) the plan makes provision for a 
five year supply of housing with an additional 20% buffer to safeguard against under-delivery. The Council 
will work to maintain a rolling five year supply against the need suggested by the stepped trajectory . The 
status of the 5 year supply and the housing trajectory is initially set out in the evidence base for the plan 
and will subsequently be published in the Authority Monitoring Report (AMR).
The start date of the Plan is 1st April 2014. A total of 2,410 new homes (dwellings) were built between 1st 
April 2014 and 31st March 2017. As at 1st April 2017, there were 7,091 commitments within the planning 
process. Some 3,500 new homes will be delivered as part of the strategic development to the north and 
northwest of Burgess Hill. This leaves sites for a minimum of 3,389 dwellings to be delivered through further 
site allocations or windfalls. 
The spatial strategy of the District Plan is to focus the majority of housing and employment development 
at Burgess Hill as it has greater potential to deliver sustainable communities and to benefit from the 
opportunities that new development can deliver than at East Grinstead and Haywards Heath. A smaller 
scale development is allocated in this plan and was granted outline planning permission in 2016 at Pease 
Pottage as a contribution towards meeting the needs of the Northern West Sussex Housing Market 
Area. A smaller scale development is allocated at north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks. The remainder of 
development will be delivered as sustainable developments, including possible new strategic developments 
and development in other towns and villages. These will also aim to support economic, infrastructure and 
social needs whilst maintaining the settlement pattern and protecting the quality of the rural and landscape 
character of the District. 
The National Planning Policy Framework allows local planning authorities to make an allowance for windfall 
sites in the housing supply if there is compelling evidence to do so. A Windfall Study has been prepared 
to provide the evidence for such an allowance based on past delivery. This demonstrates that 45 units per 
year could be delivered on small windfall sites from year 6 of the Plan period onwards, providing a further 
450 units. This allowance has been identified as a source of supply to meet the overall target. No allowance 
is made for large windfall sites to avoid double counting within the SHLAA. 
The District Council will prepare a Site Allocations Development Plan Document (DPD). This will allocate 
non-strategic and strategic sites of any size over 5 dwellings (with no upper limit), in order to meet the 
remaining housing requirement over the rest of the Plan period as reflected in the ‘stepped trajectory’  of 
876dpa until 2023/24 and 1,090dpa thereafter, and with the aim of maintaining a 5 year land supply to meet 
this requirement. Town and parish councils may also bring forward revisions to their Neighbourhood Plans. 
 
In preparing the DPD, the Council will liaise with town and parish councils and undertake further 
consultation.  The Council will continue to work closely with its neighbouring authorities, particularly those 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     31which form the Northern West Sussex (NWS) Housing Market Area (HMA), in exploring opportunities 
and resolving infrastructure and environmental constraints in order to meet housing need in sustainable 
locations. The Council will also explore the potential to realise brownfield land housing capacity through 
the preparation of a Brownfield Sites register. The Council also intends to undertake a review of the Plan 
after the adoption of the Site Allocations DPD which will reconsider need and allocate further dwellings if 
required. This will be submitted to the Secretary of State in 2023. 
The Habitats Regulations require that the competent authority (Mid Sussex District Council) assess the 
effects of land use plans on European sites to determine whether there will be likely significant effects 
(LSEs) on European sites as a result of the plan’s implementation (either on its own or ‘in combination’ with 
other plans or projects). The European site of interest is Ashdown Forest, which is located in neighbouring 
Wealden district.
This plan has assessed the effects of its allocations together with Neighbourhood Plan allocations and 
an allowance for windfall sites to the period 2023/24, based on 876dpa. At the time of adoption there is 
insufficient available information about the nature and location of development being proposed to meet the 
step in trajectory to 1,090dpa.
The Site Allocations DPD will aim to identify the nature, scale and location of development to meet the full 
plan requirement (inclusive of the uplift to 1,090dpa from 2024/25 onwards). As part of the preparation of 
the Site Allocations DPD, the Council will need to undertake further Habitats Regulations Assessment of 
identified housing sites for the rest of the plan period. 
While the Council reasonably anticipates that the uplift in housing growth to 1,090dpa will be possible 
without causing further harm to the integrity of the Ashdown Forest SAC, the level of future growth will 
depend on the identification of further allocations that do not cause further harm to the integrity of the SAC.
The subsequent review of the plan, to be submitted in 2023, will also be subject to HRA. 
DP4:  Housing
Strategic Objectives: All.
Evidence Base: Burgess Hill: A Town Wide Strategy; Burgess Hill: Visioning the Future; Feasibility Study for 
Development Options at Burgess Hill; Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment; Mid Sussex District 
Council Windfall Study; Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment; Capacity of Mid Sussex 
District to Accommodate Development; Sustainability Assessment of Cross-boundary Options.
The	District’s	OAN	is	14,892	dwellings	over	the	Plan	period.	Provision	is	also	made	of	1,498	
dwellings to ensure unmet need is addressed in the Northern West Sussex Housing Market Area.  
There	is	a	minimum	District	housing	requirement	of	16,390	dwellings	between	2014	–	2031.	
The	Plan	will	deliver	an	average	of	876	dwellings	per	annum	(dpa)	until	2023/24.	Thereafter	an	
average	of	1,090	dpa	will	be	delivered	between	2024/25	and	2030/31,	subject	to	there	being	no	
further harm to the integrity of European Habitat Sites in Ashdown Forest. 
The Council commits to commencing preparation of a Site Allocations DPD in 2017 to be adopted 
in 2020. The DPD will identify further sites which have capacity of 5 or more residential units. The 
Council will review the District Plan, starting in 2021, with submission to the Secretary of State in 
2023.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     32District Plan minimum Requirement 16,390
Completions 2014/15 630
Completions 2015/16 868
Completions 2016/17 912
Total Housing Commitments (including sites with planning permission, strategic 
development at Kings Way, Burgess Hill (DP8)  and Pease Pottage (DP10) and 
allocations in made Neighbourhood Plans)7,091
Strategic development north and north-west of Burgess Hill 3,500
Land north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks 500
Windfall Allowance 450
Elsewhere in the District, as allocated through future Neighbourhood Plans and 
the Site Allocations document2,439
 
Spatial Distribution of Housing Requirement
Settlement 
CategorySettlements Minimum Requirement 
over Plan PeriodMinimum Residual from 2017 
onwards (accounting for 
completions and 
commitments)
1 Burgess Hill, 
East Grinstead, 
Haywards Heath10,653 1,272
2 Copthorne, 
Crawley Down, 
Cuckfield, 
Hassocks and Keymer, 
Hurstpierpoint and 
Lindfield3,005 838
3 Albourne, 
Ardingly, 
Ashurst Wood, 
Balcombe, 
Bolney, 
Handcross, 
Horsted Keynes,  
Pease Pottage, 
Sayers Common,  
Scaynes Hill, 
Sharpthorne, 
Turners Hill and 
West Hoathly2,200 311
4 Ansty, 
Staplefield, 
Slaugham, 
Twineham and 
Warninglid82 19
5 Hamlets such as Birch Grove, 
Brook Street, 
Hickstead, 
Highbrook and 
WalsteadN/A N/A2
Windfall: 450
Total 16,390 2,4394
Policies              Adopted District Plan     33A Housing Trajectory is set out in Appendix A. This will be updated annually through the Monitoring 
Report.
2  Assumed windfall growth only
DP5: Planning to Meet Future Housing Need
The Council commits to working with the neighbouring authorities in the 
HMA to resolve unmet needs over the full plan period.
The provision of housing identified within Policy DP4: Housing seeks to 
meet the Objectively Assessed Need identified for the Northern West 
Sussex Housing Market Area in the current generation of sound and 
consequently adopted Local Plans. These are:
• Crawley Local Plan (2015-2030)
• Horsham District Planning Framework (2011-2031)
It is recognised, however, that Crawley’s Local Plan finishes a year before the Mid Sussex and Horsham 
plans. There will therefore be housing need generated in Crawley for 2031 which is within the District Plan 
period, but is not being planned for at present as it has yet to be established or tested. The review of the 
District Plan (commencing in 2021) will seek to address this need, and any further unmet need arising 
within the Housing Market Area.
The District Plan housing requirement established by Policy DP4: Housing may result in a residual unmet 
need of 35dpa arising within the Northern West Sussex (NWS) HMA, based on the combined provision 
planned within the NWS authorities’ adopted Local Plans against the combined objectively assessed 
housing needs. The amount of this outstanding unmet need will be monitored throughout the plan period 
and, if necessary, accounted for in future reviews of the District Plan to ensure the HMA can meet its 
housing need as far as is consistent with the policies set out in the National Planning Policy Framework. 
The Council recognises that there is also a shortfall of housing in the neighbouring coastal West Sussex 
area, caused in particular by the inability of Brighton & Hove, and some of the other coastal authorities, to 
meet their own needs. The level of unmet need is high and the Council is taking steps, with its neighbouring 
authorities and those in the sub-region, to address the issue. The scale of the issue requires a sub-regional 
response. 
The Council is a participant in the Coastal West Sussex and Greater Brighton Strategic Planning Board 
which is addressing the issue of unmet housing needs in the coastal area through the Local Strategic 
Statement 3 (LSS3). The Council will participate in that process. 
The LSS3 work is progressing and the Council has committed to support this work including financial 
support to commission the necessary associated evidence base material. The exact timing of the LSS 
process is difficult to predict but the Council is committed to a proactive role within it. 
DP5: Planning to Meet Future Housing Need
Strategic Objectives: All.
Evidence Base: Burgess Hill: Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment; Mid Sussex District Council 
Windfall Study; Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment; Capacity of Mid Sussex District 
to Accommodate Development; Sustainability Assessment of Cross-boundary Options.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     34The	Council	will	continue	to	work	under	the	‘Duty-to-Cooperate’ 	with	all	other	neighbouring	local	
authorities on an ongoing basis to address the objectively assessed need for housing across the 
Housing Market Areas, prioritising the Northern West Sussex HMA as this is established as the 
primary HMA.  
The Council will work jointly and proactively with the Gatwick Diamond and the West Sussex and 
Greater Brighton Strategic Planning Board to address unmet housing need in the sub region. 
The	Council’s	approach	will	ensure	that	sites	are	considered	and	planned	for	in	a	timely	manner	
and will be tested through a robust plan-making process, as part of a review of the Plan starting in 
2021, with submission to the Secretary of State in 2023.
DP6: Settlement Hierarchy
The approach of the District Plan is to focus the majority of 
housing and employment development at Burgess Hill as it 
has greater potential to deliver sustainable communities and to 
benefit from the opportunities that new development can deliver 
than at East Grinstead and Haywards Heath. A smaller scale 
development is proposed at Pease Pottage as a contribution 
towards meeting the needs of the Northern West Sussex 
Housing Market Area. A smaller scale development is also 
proposed at north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks. The remainder of 
development will be delivered at the other towns and villages 
to support economic, infrastructure and social needs whilst maintaining the settlement pattern and where 
possible enhancing the quality of the rural and landscape character of the District. 
Mid Sussex has a distinctive settlement pattern, containing three main towns and a large number and wide 
variety of villages. A settlement hierarchy has been developed which identifies five categories of settlement 
within Mid Sussex.
The amount of development planned for in each settlement will need to have regard to this hierarchy, 
but also take account of local development needs including housing and any significant local constraints 
to development. The availability of suitable housing sites and localised infrastructure constraints and 
opportunities will also be factors which will legitimately influence the amount of development planned for 
individual settlements.
Within defined built-up area boundaries, development is accepted in principle whereas outside these 
boundaries, the primary objective of the District Plan with respect to the countryside (as per Policy DP12: 
Protection and Enhancement of Countryside) is to secure its protection by minimising the amount of land 
taken for development and preventing development that does not need to be there. It is recognised that in 
order for the villages to continue to grow and thrive, in many cases, it is necessary to expand beyond the 
existing built-up area boundaries. By allocating housing sites, such as through Neighbourhood Plans, it will 
be possible to meet local needs by providing sufficient market and af fordable housing and to support and 
develop local services and facilities such as local schools and shops. 
The evidence supporting the settlement hierarchy is documented in the Settlement Sustainability Review.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     35DP6:  Settlement Hierarchy
Strategic Objectives: 2) To promote well located and designed development that reflects the District’s 
distinctive towns and villages, retains their separate identity and character and prevents coalescence; 
8) To provide opportunities for people to live and work within their communities, reducing the need for 
commuting; 9) To create and maintain town and village centres that are vibrant, attractive and successful 
and that meet the needs of the community; 12) To support sustainable communities which are safe, healthy 
and inclusive; and 13) To provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of the 
community.
Evidence Base: Settlement Sustainability Review.
Development	will	be	permitted	within	towns	and	villages	with	defined	built-up	area	boundaries.	 Any	
infilling	and	redevelopment	will	be	required	to	demonstrate	that	it	is	of	an	appropriate	nature	and	
scale (with particular regard to DP26: Character and Design), and not cause harm to the character 
and function of the settlement.
The	growth	of	settlements	will	be	supported	where	this	meets	identified	local	housing,	employment	
and	community	needs.	Outside	defined	built-up	area	boundaries,	the	expansion	of	settlements	will	
be supported where:
1. The site is allocated in the District Plan, a Neighbourhood Plan or subsequent Development  
 Plan Document or where the proposed development is for fewer than 10 dwellings; and
2. The site is contiguous with an existing built up area of the settlement; and
3. The development is demonstrated to be sustainable, including by reference to the settlement  
 hierarchy.
The developer will need to satisfy the Council that:
• The proposal does not represent an underdevelopment of the site with regard to Policy   
 DP26: Character and Design; or
• A large site is not brought forward in phases that individually meet the threshold but   
 cumulatively does not.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     36Category Settlement characteristics and function Settlements
Category 1 Settlement with a comprehensive range of 
employment, retail, health, education leisure 
services and facilities. These settlements 
will	also	benefit	from	good	public	transport	
provision and will act as a main service 
centre for the smaller settlements.Burgess Hill, East Grinstead, 
Haywards Heath
Category 2 Larger villages acting as Local Service 
Centres providing key services in the rural 
area of Mid Sussex. These settlements serve 
the	wider	hinterland	and	benefit	from	a	good	
range of services and facilities, including 
employment opportunities and access to 
public transport.Copthorne, Crawley Down, 
Cuckfield,	Hassocks	and	
Keymer,	Hurstpierpoint	and	
Lindfield
Category 3 Medium sized villages providing essential 
services for the needs of their own residents 
and immediate surrounding communities. 
Whilst more limited, these can include key 
services such as primary schools, shops, 
recreation and community facilities, often 
shared with neighbouring settlements.Albourne, Ardingly, Ashurst 
Wood, Balcombe, Bolney, 
Handcross,	Horsted	Keynes,		
Pease Pottage, Sayers 
Common,  Scaynes Hill, 
Sharpthorne, Turners Hill and 
West Hoathly
Category 4 Small villages with limited services often only 
serving the settlement itself.Ansty,	Staplefield,	Slaugham,	
Twineham and Warninglid
Category 5 These small settlements have very limited or 
no services.Hamlets such as Birch Grove, 
Brook Street, Hickstead, 
Highbrook and Walstead.
Neighbourhood Plan Strategy
The preparation of Neighbourhood Plans is a part of the strategy for the delivery of housing.  Twenty 
Neighbourhood Plan Areas have been designated in Mid Sussex, covering all of the Towns and Parishes 
within the District Plan Area. As at April 2017, 16 of these plans have been ‘made’.  The adopted 
Neighbourhood Plans have contributed 1,770 new dwellings to the housing supply, with many of these 
allocations delivering completions during the first 5 years. 
The following table gives clarity between the District housing requirement and the role of individual 
Neighbourhood Plans in meeting this. It shows the minimum residual amount of development for each 
settlement over the rest of the plan period, as at April 2017. 
During the life of the plan it is likely that the settlement requirements will need to change in response to: 
• The allocation of additional sites by the District Council 
• Under or over-delivery by settlements – albeit the figures are assumed to be minima 
• The identification of future constraints 
Therefore this position will be updated annually within the Authority Monitoring Report (AMR).4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     37Cat. Settlement Minimum 
Requirement 
over Plan Period
(Based on 
stepped 
trajectory)Minimum 
Requirement 
to	2023/24
(Based on 
876dpa)Commitments		/	
Completions3 
(as at April 1st 
2017)Minimum 
Residual from 
2017 onwards 
(accounting for 
commitments and 
completions)
1Burgess Hill 5,697 3,351 5,697 N/A
East Grinstead 2,445 1,020 1,300 1,145
Haywards Heath 2,511 1,403 2,385 127
2Cuckfield 320 125 120 200
Hassocks 882 519 882 N/A
Hurstpierpoint 359 211 359 N/A
Lindfield4571 190 31 540
Copthorne 437 228 388 49
Crawley Down5437 228 388 49
3Albourne 57 21 16 41
Ardingly 73 31 44 29
Ashurst Wood 102 60 102 N/A
Balcombe 79 34 49 30
Bolney 113 48 64 49
Handcross60 0 0 N/A
Horsted	Keynes 69 25 16 53
Pease Pottage6929 546 929 N/A
Sayers Common 63 27 40 23
Scaynes Hill4462 272 462 N/A
Turners Hill 167 71 96 71
West Hoathly 43 21 36 8
Sharpthorne 43 21 54 N/A
4Ansty 54 32 54 N/A
Staplefield 3 2 3 N/A
Slaugham60 0 0 N/A
Twineham 25 9 6 19
Warninglid60 0 0 N/A
15,940 8,496 13,501 2,439
3Commitments here defined as Allocations within the District Plan, Neighbourhood Plans, Small Scale Housing Allocations DPD (2008) and planning 
permissions.
4Note that Lindfield and Scaynes Hill (Lindfield Rural) are currently within  the same Neighbourhood Plan area (the Lindfield and Lindfield Rural 
Neighbourhood Plan). A number of commitments/completions shown above at ‘Scaynes Hill’ are adjacent to the built-up-area of Lindfield.
5Note that Copthorne and Crawley Down form Worth parish, therefore these figures should be read in conjunction with one another.
6The required minimum provision at Pease Pottage (Slaugham Parish) is  significantly greater than other settlements within Category 3 due to the 
allocation and subsequent permission granted for 600 homes within this settlement. Due to this, the other settlements within Slaugham Parish 
(Handcross, Slaugham and Warninglid) will not be required to identify further growth through the Plan process on top of windfall growth although 
may wish to do so to boost supply.
Based on the overall housing requirement, the minimum housing requirement for each settlement for the 
first 8 years of the Plan (until 2021/22) can be calculated; this is the 5-year supply period at the time of 
adoption.  On this basis, the majority of settlements have sufficient commitments to meet their need until 
at least 2021/22. Therefore, the District Plan requirement at 876dpa to 2023/24 does not suggest that 
Neighbourhood Plans will necessarily need to be reviewed within the next 5 years (as at April 2017) to meet 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     38housing supply, although Town and Parish Councils may choose to do so in order to boost supply, or to 
meet need for the full plan period to 2031.
Some settlements (Burgess Hill, Hassocks, Hurstpierpoint, Ashurst Wood, Handcross, Pease Pottage, 
Scaynes Hill, Ansty, Staplefield, Slaugham and Warninglid) have already identified sufficient commitments/
completions to meet their minimum housing requirement for the full plan period and will not be expected to 
identify further sites within their Neighbourhood Plans. However, this does not preclude Town and Parish 
Councils from identifying further sites within their Neighbourhood Plans should they wish to do so, in order 
to boost supply. Similarly, further sites may be allocated in the future to ensure that the minimum residual 
for each settlement category (set out in DP4: Housing) is met, based on monitoring. 
The Council will provide updated guidance on the future need and requirements during the life of the plan, 
as part of the Monitoring Report. The amount of development planned for in each settlement will need 
to have regard to the settlement hierarchy, and also take account of existing delivery, local development 
needs including any significant local infrastructure, and other constraints to development. 
DP7: General Principles for Strategic Development at Burgess Hill
The Burgess Hill Town Wide Strategy (2011) identifies a wide range 
of improvements that are required for Burgess Hill to become a 
fully sustainable, 21st century town focused around a high quality, 
vibrant and accessible town centre, supported by necessary 
community facilities, employment opportunities and access to green 
open space underpinned by a state of the art transport network and 
modern supporting infrastructure.
Coast to Capital Local Enterprise Partnership has identified Burgess 
Hill as a spatial priority in its Strategic Economic Plan (2014). The 
spatial priorities in the Plan are locations with the most current 
growth or where there are opportunities to create the most capacity 
for future growth. Coast to Capital has committed to investing in the Burgess Hill area between 2015/16 and 
2020/21 to deliver new jobs, homes and employment space and secured £17 million from the Local Growth 
Fund for improvements to the A2300 Burgess Hill Link Road.
Mid Sussex District Council is a partner in the Greater Brighton City Deal. The City Deal document, agreed 
with Government and partners including the University of Brighton in March 2014, identifies Burgess Hill as 
a Growth Centre for a new Business and Science Park.
The general principles set out in this policy are primarily based on the vision and objectives of the Burgess 
Hill Town Wide Strategy. The objectives for the town are: 
• A better town centre with a greater range of shops and a more attractive pedestrian environment;
• Improved public transport, walking, cycling links as well as better roads;
• New and improved community and cultural facilities;
• Additional high quality and suitably located business park development; and
• New, improved and well connected sports, recreation and open space in and around Burgess Hill  
 (Town Wide Strategy page 16).
A number of potential infrastructure and other projects were set out in the Burgess Hill Town Wide Strategy 
and included town centre public realm enhancements, transport and public transport improvements, new 
educational facilities, and new sports, arts and community facilities. All proposals for strategic development 
will be required to meet the criteria set out below. 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     39DP7: General Principles for Strategic Development at Burgess Hill
Strategic Objectives: All.
Evidence Base: Burgess Hill: A Town Wide Strategy; Burgess Hill Employment Sites Study; Burgess Hill 
Town Centre Masterplan; Burgess Hill:  Visioning the Future; Feasibility Study for Development Options at 
Burgess Hill; Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan; Greater Brighton City Deal; Mid Sussex Landscape 
Capacity Study; Mid Sussex Playing Pitch Strategy; Mid Sussex Transport Study; West Sussex Transport 
Plan 2011-2026.
All strategic development at Burgess Hill, as shown on the inset map, is required to support the 
general principles set out in this policy.  
Strategic development will:
• Be designed in a way that integrates it into the existing town providing connectivity with all  
 relevant services and facilities;
• Provide additional, high quality employment opportunities including suitably located   
 Business Park developments accessible by public transport;
• Improve public transport, walking and cycling infrastructure and access to Burgess Hill   
	 and	Wivelsfield	railway	stations	and	Burgess	Hill	Town	Centre,	including	the	provision	of,	or		
 contributions to enhancing transport interchanges;
• Provide necessary transport improvements that take account of the wider impact of the   
 development on the surrounding area;
• Provide highway improvements in and around Burgess Hill including addressing the   
	 limitations	of	the	 A2300	link	road	and	its	junction	with	the	 A23	and	east-west	traffic		 	
 movements across Burgess Hill and, where necessary, improvements across the highway  
 authority boundary in East Sussex;
• Provide new and improved community, retail, cultural, educational, health, recreation, play  
 and other facilities to create services and places that help to form strong local communities  
 and encourage healthy lifestyles;
•	 Provide	new	and/or	improved	and	well	connected	sports,	recreation	and	open	space	in	and		
	 around	Burgess	Hill,	including	the	continuation	of	the	existing	‘Green	Circle’ 	of	linked		 	
 areas of informal open space around the town along with its associated network of 
 multi-functional  paths, the Green Circle network, and links into the town centre;
• Support the delivery of a multi-functional7 route between Burgess Hill and Haywards Heath;
• Provide a Centre for Community Sport in the vicinity of the Triangle Leisure Centre;
• Provide a range of housing including affordable housing, in accordance with policy DP31:  
 Affordable Housing and housing for older people;
• Identify and respond to environmental, landscape and ecological constraints and    
 deliver opportunities to enhance local biodiversity and contribute to the delivery of green  
 infrastructure in and around the town in accordance with policies elsewhere in the Plan   
 including DP38: Biodiversity; Provide an effective telecommunications infrastructure,   
 including provision for broadband; and
7  In this context multi-functional means able to be used by walkers, cyclists and horse-riders4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     40•	 Wherever	possible,	incorporate	on-site	‘community	energy	systems’,	such	as	Combined	
 Heat and Power or other appropriate low carbon technologies, to meet energy needs   
 and create a sustainable development.  The development shall also include appropriate   
	 carbon	reduction,	energy	efficiency	and	water	consumption	reduction	measures	to		 	
 demonstrate high levels of sustainability. 
DP8:	Strategic	 Allocation	to	the	east	of	Burgess	Hill	at	Kings	Way
This site lies to the east of Kings Way and is a greenfield site between 
the railway running through Burgess Hill and Ditchling Common Site of 
Special Scientific Interest in East Sussex. 
The Sustainability Appraisal for the District Plan assesses this site 
alongside other proposed alternatives for strategic development 
in Mid Sussex. Although concerns over landscape capacity were 
identified, it scores favourably overall. The Sustainability Appraisal 
concludes that the development principles ensure that infrastructure 
(community facilities, transport, water, etc.) are programmed and 
delivered alongside the development. The policy includes a specific 
requirement to protect, manage and enhance the Ditchling Common 
Site of Special Scientific Interest, which will have a positive impact on 
the sustainability objective concerned with conserving and enhancing biodiversity. The Council’s Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (2015) provides specific advice on the flood risk characteristics of the site.
The Burgess Hill Town Wide Strategy identified this site as a preferred location for housing development as 
a mixed use site for homes, with open space and community facilities amongst other requirements. 
In May 2013 the Council granted planning permission for 480 new homes on this site. The application 
includes a neighbourhood centre, informal open space and measures to mitigate the impact on Ditchling 
Common Site of Special Scientific Interest. 
DP8:	Strategic	allocation	to	the	east	of	Burgess	Hill	at	Kings	Way
Strategic Objectives: All.
Evidence Base: Burgess Hill: A Town Wide Strategy; Burgess Hill: Visioning the Future; Feasibility Study for 
Development Options at Burgess Hill; Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan; Mid Sussex Landscape 
Capacity Study; Strategic Flood Risk Assessment; Mid Sussex Playing Pitch Strategy; West Sussex 
Transport Plan 2011-2026.
Strategic	development,	as	shown	on	the	inset	map,	is	allocated	to	the	east	of	Burgess	Hill	at	Kings	
Way for:
•  Up to 480 new homes;
•  High quality and accessible informal public open space;
•  A local hub serving the site and the wider community;
The strategic development in this location will:4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     41•		 Provide	infrastructure,	as	set	out	in	the	Burgess	Hill	Town	Wide	Strategy	and	identified	in		
 technical assessments, implemented before or alongside development to an agreed 
	 programme	of	delivery.	This	will	include	financial	contributions	to	the	provision	of	education		
 facilities for all ages;
•		 Address	the	limitations	of	east-west	traffic	movements	across	Burgess	Hill;	
•		 Implement	long-term	management	of	the	Ditchling	Common	Site	of	Special	Scientific	
 Interest (SSSI) and protect and enhance this adjoining area from the impacts of strategic   
 development (on site provision together with appropriate mitigation measures);
•  Consider the close proximity of the South Downs National Park;
•		 Consider	the	opportunities	with	the	Keymer	Tile	Works	site	and	other	developments	in	the		
 vicinity to ensure complementary provision of infrastructure and facilities for the east 
 side of Burgess Hill;
•  Provide additional informal open space on site; and 
•		 Avoid	unnecessary	damage	to	the	characteristic	field	pattern	and	historic	hedgerow	and	tree		
 lines.
 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     42
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping. Mid Sussex District Council. 100021794. 2018I
Land at Kings WayStrategic allocation to the east
of Burgess Hill at Kings Way (DP8)
Figure 6: Strategic allocation to the east of Burgess Hill at Kings Way (Policy DP8)4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     43DP9:	Strategic	 Allocation	to	the	north	and	north-west	of	Burgess	Hill
This strategic allocation is a greenfield site lying between Bedelands 
Nature Reserve on the east side of Burgess Hill and the Goddards 
Green Waste Water Treatment works to the west and largely comprises 
land known as the Northern Arc. 
The Sustainability Appraisal for the District Plan assesses this site 
alongside other proposed alternatives for strategic development in 
Mid Sussex and this site scores favourably overall. The site contains a 
number of ancient woodlands that must be protected and areas of flood 
risk that will need to be adequately mitigated. The Council’s Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment (2015) provides specific advice on the flood risk 
characteristics of the site.
The Burgess Hill Town Wide Strategy (2011), identified this site as a preferred location for housing 
development as a mixed use site for homes, with neighbourhood facilities, major education facilities 
(primary and secondary schools), a Centre for Community Sport, extension of the Green Circle network, 
and sustainable transport amongst other infrastructure requirements.  The Strategy has informed this 
strategic policy and the Council’s District-wide Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
The development to the north and northwest of Burgess Hill is an essential part of the delivery of the overall 
housing numbers for the District Plan and infrastructure for Burgess Hill and the surrounding area. The 
scale of development proposed is significant and the allocation will be required to meet a number of criteria. 
These include a phasing strategy and programme of delivery for housing (including for Gypsy and Traveller 
needs), employment and infrastructure as well as specific principles relating to the site. The development 
should also meet the general principles of development outlined in policy DP7: General Principles for 
Strategic Development at Burgess Hill. 
The area between Maple Drive and the ‘Northern Arc’ is included within the allocation because it is 
important that the new development is integrated with the existing town and that there are good public 
transport and pedestrian links between the development and Wivelsfield station. 
The Council views the allocation to the north and north-west of Burgess Hill as a single strategic 
development. If it is the subject of multiple planning applications, it is important that these are led by and 
accord with an allocation wide masterplan, infrastructure delivery strategy, including a fair and reasonable 
mechanism for apportioning the in-kind provision of infrastructure and/or costs, and an allocation 
wide phasing strategy. This is necessary to secure a comprehensive approach to masterplanning and 
infrastructure delivery for the allocation area as a whole and to ensure that proposals for part of the 
allocation area help deliver a high quality cohesive place that meets overall policy objectives and do not 
prejudice future phases of development or infrastructure provision. To the extent that required Financial 
Appraisals contain confidential information and are provided on a commercially confidential basis, 
appropriate measures in relation to confidentiality will be put in place.
In November 2015, the Council granted outline planning permission for the development of up to 
50,000sqm employment floorspace to the north-west of Burgess Hill that will form part of a proposed 
business park.
DP9:	Strategic	allocation	to	the	north	and	north-west	of	Burgess	Hill
Strategic Objectives: All.
Evidence Base: Burgess Hill: A Town Wide Strategy; Burgess Hill Employment Sites Study; Coast to Capital 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     44Strategic Economic Plan; Greater Brighton City Deal; Burgess Hill: Visioning the Future; Feasibility Study 
for Development Options at Burgess Hill; Mid Sussex Landscape Capacity Study; Mid Sussex Playing Pitch 
Strategy; Strategic Flood Risk Assessment; West Sussex Transport Plan 2011-2026; Mid Sussex Transport 
Study; Mid Sussex District Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment.
Strategic mixed-use development (which will need to conform to the general principles in Policy 
DP7:General Principles for Strategic Development at Burgess Hill), as shown on the inset map, is 
allocated to the north and north-west of Burgess Hill for the phased development of:
• Approximately 3,500 additional homes and associated new neighbourhood centres,   
 including retail, education, health, employment, leisure, recreation and community   
	 uses,	sufficient	to	meet	the	day	to	day	needs	of	the	whole	of	the	development	and	located		
	 as	far	as	possible	so	at	least	one	new	neighbourhood	centre	is	within	10	minutes’ 	walk	of		
 most new homes;
• 25 hectares of land for use as a high quality business park south of the A2300 and served by  
 public  transport;
• Two new primary schools (including co-location of nursery provision and community use  
 facilities as appropriate) and a new secondary school campus, in each case in locations well  
 connected with residential development and neighbourhood centres;
•	 A 	Centre	for	Community	Sport	in	the	vicinity	of	the	Triangle	Leisure	Centre	and	St	Paul’s			
 Catholic College;
• Provision of permanent pitches for settled Gypsies and Travellers to contribute, towards   
	 the	additional	total	identified	need	within	the	District	commensurate	with	the	overall		 	
 scale of residential development proposed by the strategic development; or the provision of  
	 an	equivalent	financial	contribution	towards	off-site	provision	of	pitches	towards	the	
	 additional	total	identified	need	within	the	District	(or	part	thereof	if	some	on-site	provision	is		
 made) commensurable with the overall scale of residential development proposed 
 by the strategic development, if it can be demonstrated that a suitable, available and 
 achievable site (or sites) can be provided and made operational within an appropriate 
	 timescale;	unless	alternative	requirements	are	confirmed	within	any	Traveller	Sites	
 Allocations Development Plan Document or such other evidence base as is available at the 
 time the allocation-wide masterplan is approved (as appropriate); and
• A new Northern Link Road connecting through the Strategic Allocation Area from the A2300  
	 to	the	 A273	Isaacs	Lane.	New	junctions	will	be	provided	on	the	 A2300,	B2036	Cuckfield	Road		
 and A273 Isaacs Lane. A road link across the river corridor will be required to facilitate a   
 public transport route to Maple Drive.
Strategic mixed-use development in this location will:
• Progress in accordance with an allocation-wide masterplan, Infrastructure Delivery Strategy,  
 Phasing Strategy and Financial Appraisal which will have been submitted to and approved  
 by the  local planning authority. Each planning application to be determined should accord  
 with such approved documents unless otherwise agreed by the local planning authority.
The Allocation-wide Infrastructure Delivery Strategy will demonstrate that the development of 
the	Strategic	 Allocation	 Area	will	deliver,	in	a	timely	manner,	sufficient	infrastructure	to	cater	for	
the needs of the Strategic Allocation Area as a whole and also mitigate to an acceptable level the 
effects of the whole development upon the surrounding area and community; this will include 
provision of:
(a)	the	infrastructure,	as	set	out	in	the	Council’s	Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan,	the	Burgess	Hill	Town	4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     45Wide	Strategy	and	identified	in	technical	assessments	to	be		implemented	before	or	alongside	
development in accordance with a Phasing Strategy approved by the local planning authority;
(b) sustainable transport measures and other infrastructure requirements, including measures to 
mitigate impacts upon the local and Strategic Road Network in Burgess Hill and the surrounding 
area.  This will include (i) the new Northern Link Road through the Strategic Allocation Area helping 
to	alleviate	additional	traffic	to	the	town	and	offering	an	alternative	route	around	Burgess	Hill;	
the road will be designed as a central boulevard offering a highly attractive and functional route 
through	the	Strategic	 Allocation	 Area;	(ii)	improved	links	across	the	 A2300	and	 A273	Sussex	Way/
Jane Murray Way to improve integration with the remainder of Burgess Hill; (iii) improved east-
west connections across the strategic site; (iv) provision of new bus routes or diversion of existing 
routes to connect with key hubs including railway and bus stations and Burgess Hill and Haywards 
Heath town centre; (v) a legible and permeable network and hierarchy of safe streets and public 
rights of way including pedestrian cycleways and appropriate high quality street furniture; (vi) 
streets and spaces that are attractive and pedestrian friendly; and (vii) appropriate of-street car 
parking and secure cycle parking in accordance with relevant standards.
The Allocation-wide Phasing Strategy will set out the proposed phasing of the Strategic Allocation 
Area, including the relevant land uses and infrastructure delivery for each phase:
• Identify and take account of environmental, landscape and ecological constraints    
 including where possible avoiding or minimising harm to sensitive receptors and    
 appropriately responding to the landscape setting including retention of woodland.   
 hedgerows and other important natural features wherever possible and appropriate 
	 landscaping	and	safe	design	of	balancing	ponds	and	water/drainage	features;	and	deliver		
 opportunities and requirements as set out in Policy DP7: General Principles 
 for Strategic Development at Burgess Hill and DP38: Biodiversity including new publicly   
	 accessible	open	space	and	routes	including	the	continuation	of	the	existing	‘Green	Circle’ 		
 comprising multi-functional paths and areas, mostly within a 20 metre to 30 metre    
 corridor along the stream running through the Strategic Allocation Area, with spokes to 
 the north and south which incorporate and respond to ecological constraints, topography, 
	 flooding	issues	and	landscaping	features;	links	into	the	town	centre;	provision	of	natural	
	 and	semi-natural	green	space,	children’s	play	space	and	community	allotments;	and	
 provision of pedestrian and cycle links to such spaces;
•	 Take	account	of	on-site	flood	plains	and	avoid	areas	of	current	and	future	flood	risk	through		
 a sequential approach to site layout to comply with Policy DP41: Flood Risk and 
 recommendations in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment;
• Identify, avoid, mitigate and manage the risks posed to water quality associated with the   
	 historic	land	uses	and	support	the	delivery	of	‘Good’ 	ecological	status	of	the	River	 Adur	
 and Copyhold Stream in accordance with DP42: Water Infrastructure and the Water 
 Environment;
• Consider the relationship between the Goddards Green Waste Water Treatment Works and  
 the Strategic Allocation Area  including appropriate measures to avoid or mitigate odour
 impacts from the Treatment Works including the appropriate location of sensitive land uses;  
 and
• Ensure access to existing sewerage infrastructure for maintenance and improvements 
 An Allocation-wide Financial Appraisal in a format to be agreed in advance with the Council 
	 and	in	accordance	with	relevant	guidance,	reporting	on	the	financial	viability	of	the	
 development of the whole (and relevant phases) of the Strategic Allocation Area and 
 justifying the form and content of the proposals set out in the Allocation-wide 
 Masterplan, Infrastructure Delivery Strategy and Phasing Strategy (including the 
 amount and type of affordable housing and, if applicable, land reserved for custom or 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     46 self-build homes) should be submitted to and approved by the local planning authority.
Phase-specific	further	requirement
To be acceptable, planning applications that cover a phase or part of the Strategic Allocation Area 
must be accompanied by: 
•	 An	application-specific	Masterplan	and	Delivery	Statement	for	approval	by	the	local	planning		
 authority that relates to the application site and sets out:
1.	 Site-specific	infrastructure	requirements	and	how	these	relate	and	adequately	contribute	to		
 the Allocation-wide Infrastructure Delivery Strategy;
2.	 Details	of	proposed	development	and	its	phasing,	proposed	triggers/	thresholds	for	the		 	
 delivery of associated infrastructure and how in each case these relate and adequately   
 contribute to the Allocation-wide Spatial Masterplan, Infrastructure Delivery Strategy and to  
 the Phasing Strategy and conform with the general principles in Policy DP7: General 
 Principles for Strategic Development at Burgess Hill; and
3. Details of how proposed publicly accessible space, routes and facilities would be managed  
 and maintained. 
An Allocation-wide Financial Appraisal in a format to be agreed in advance with the local planning 
authority	and	in	accordance	with	relevant	guidance,	reporting	on	financial	viability	issues	
associated with the development and its relationship and contribution to the Allocation-wide 
Financial Appraisal and justifying the form and content of the proposals applied for in respect of 
the relevant phase or part (including the amount and type of affordable housing and, if applicable, 
land reserved for custom or self-build homes) should be submitted to and approved by the local 
planning authority.
 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     47
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping. Mid Sussex District Council. 100021794. 2013.I
Key
Employment Land
Land for Formal Sport
Mixed Use
Built Up Area Boundary
Extension to Bedelands Nature ReserveStrategic allocation to the north and
north-west of Burgess Hill (DP9)
Figure 7: Strategic allocation to the north and north-west of Burgess Hill (Policy DP9) 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     48DP10: Strategic Allocation to the east of Pease Pottage
This greenfield site lies to the south of Crawley adjacent to the M23 
motorway and the Pease Pottage Service Station. The site is within 
the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB).
It has been established through the Crawley Borough Local Plan 
examination that the borough has a need to provide for about 
5,000 additional homes during the period until 2030 which are not 
capable of being built within the town. Crawley Borough Council is 
required to work closely with its neighbouring authorities, particularly 
those which form the Northern West Sussex Housing Market Area 
(Horsham and Mid Sussex), in exploring opportunities and resolving 
infrastructure and environmental constraints in order to meet this 
need in sustainable locations. This includes continued assessment of 
potential urban extensions to Crawley.
Whilst committing to assist with meeting neighbouring authorities the Council also needs to ensure that it 
can demonstrate a 5 year housing land supply. Pease Pottage can deliver homes within the first five years 
of the Plan and therefore will make an important contribution to the housing supply in the early part of the 
Plan.
Outline planning permission has been granted for the development of the site. This proposes 600 dwellings, 
a hospice with community café and a primary school. The development will require very sensitive design 
and considerable mitigation in order to reduce its effects on the landscape, and great care will be needed to 
ensure that the development respects and where possible enhances the natural beauty and characteristics 
of the High Weald AONB.
The site’s proximity and accessibility to Crawley (there are good bus links) provides a sustainable 
opportunity to meet some of the town’s unmet needs. Whilst the service station opposite the site caters 
primarily for the needs of motorists, it does offer limited local convenience shopping, and the education 
provision proposed on the site would also improve the sustainability of this location.
A scheme of works has been agreed  with West Sussex County Council and Highways England, and is 
secured in the approved planning permission to ensure that access can be satisfactorily gained to the site 
without exacerbating current traffic conditions at junction 11 of the M23; and will not adversely impact upon 
the local highway network.
DP10: Strategic allocation to the east of Pease Pottage
Strategic Objectives: All.
Evidence Base: High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014-2019; A 
Landscape Character Assessment for Mid Sussex; Mid Sussex Landscape Capacity Study, Sustainability 
Assessment of Cross-Boundary Options for the Mid Sussex District Plan; Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 
Mid Sussex Transport Study; Mid Sussex District Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Assessment
Strategic development, as shown on the inset map, is allocated to the east of Pease Pottage for:
• Approximately 600 new homes;
• Provision of permanent pitches for settled Gypsies and Travellers to contribute towards the  4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     49	 additional	total	identified	need	within	the	District	commensurable	with	the	overall	
 scale of residential development proposed by the strategic development; or the provision of  
	 an	equivalent	financial	contribution	towards	the	off-site	provision	of	pitches	towards	
	 the	additional	total	identified	need	within	the	District	(or	part	thereof	if	some	on-site	
 provision is made) commensurate with the overall scale of residential development 
 proposed by the strategic development, if it can be demonstrated that a suitable, available 
 and achievable site (or sites) can be provided and made operational within an 
	 appropriate	timescale;	unless	alternative	requirements	are	confirmed	within	any	Traveller	
 Sites Allocations Development Plan Document or such other evidence base as is available 
 at the time the Allocation-wide Spatial Masterplan is approved (as appropriate);
• A new primary school (including co-location of nursery provision and community use   
 facilities as appropriate); and
• A hospice including a community café.
In addition to conforming to other relevant policies in the District Plan, strategic mixed-use 
development in this location will:
• Provide a suitable access to the site and appropriate mitigation to support the development  
 with regards to the local and Strategic Road Networks, including junction 11 of the M23   
 motorway;
• Provide appropriate mitigation to reduce the impact of the development on the landscape  
 and to ensure, in particular, that development respects and where possible enhances the   
 natural beauty and characteristics of the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.   
 There should be a strong defensible boundary to Parish Lane, that clearly separates the site  
 from land on the southern side of Parish Lane;
• Identify and respond to environmental and ecological constraints and deliver opportunities  
 to enhance green infrastructure and local biodiversity, including the provision of  an 
 appropriate buffer to the Ancient Woodland to the east of the site;
• Identify and respond to issues relating to noise pollution and air quality in relation to the   
	 site’s	proximity	to	the	M23	motorway	to	ensure	that	proposed	land	uses	are	appropriately	
	 located	to	protect	health	and	amenities	and	to	maximise	the	efficient	use	of	the	site;
•	 Provide	improved	public	transport	and	safe	pedestrian/cycling	connectivity	with	surrounding		
 settlements, in particular Pease Pottage and Crawley. The development should include   
	 mitigation	measures	that	address	the	issue	of	pedestrian/cycling	connectivity	over	the	M23		
 motorway and onwards to Crawley;
• Provide new formal play facilities and informal open space on the site, alongside the   
 provision of new allotments to encourage healthy lifestyles;
• Provide a range of housing including affordable housing, in accordance with Policy DP31:  
	 Affordable	Housing	and	housing	for	older	people.	The	market	housing	mix	should	reflect	the		
 housing needs of Crawley as well as Mid Sussex;
•	 Wherever	possible,	incorporate	on-site	‘community	energy	systems’,	such	as	Combined			
 Heat and Power or other appropriate low carbon technologies, to meet energy needs and 
 create a sustainable development. The development shall also include appropriate carbon  
	 reduction,	energy	efficiency	and	water	consumption	reduction	measures	to	demonstrate	
 high levels of sustainability;4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     50•	 Provide	infrastructure,	as	set	out	in	the	Council’s	Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan	and	identified		
 in technical assessments, implemented before or alongside development to an agreed 
 programme of delivery. Given the proximity of site to Crawley consideration should be 
 given to where future occupiers are likely to access services. This is particularly important 
 when considering secondary education, library and health services, where the nearest 
 provision is within Crawley; and
• Provide surface water drainage, based on sustainable drainage principles in accordance with  
 DP41: Flood Risk and Drainage.
There are known sewage treatment capacity issues at Crawley Waste Water Treatment Works 
(CWWTW).	It	must	be	demonstrated	that	the	CWWTW	has	sufficient	capacity	to	deal	with	the	waste	
from the development taking into account the development that already has planning consent, 
as well as planned growth that will be served by CWWTW.  The development must not occupied 
until any necessary improvements at CWWTW and connecting pipework and pumping stations to 
increase the capacity and environmental quality are implemented.
 
 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     51
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping. Mid Sussex District Council. 100021794. 2018I
Land to the east of Pease Pottage (DP10)
District boundaryStrategic allocation to the east 
of Pease Pottage (DP10)
Figure 8: Strategic allocation to the east of Pease Pottage (Policy DP10)4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     52DP11: Strategic Allocation to the north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks
This greenfield site lies to the north of the existing development at 
Clayton Mills, Hassocks.  
The Sustainability Appraisal for the District Plan assesses this site 
alongside other proposed alternatives for strategic development in 
Mid Sussex. The appraisal notes that the site is sustainably located 
with respect to existing health, retail and community facilities within 
Hassocks village. There are known deficiencies in primary school 
education in Hassocks, with the existing primary school operating at 
capacity. The development of this site would make provision of land for 
a new primary school, which would alleviate existing deficiencies as well 
as providing extra capacity. 
Hassocks railway station (operating a regular service on the Brighton mainline) lies within walking distance 
to the south of the site. 
There is an Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) within Hassocks, at Stonepound Crossroads. The impact 
of the development has been tested through the Mid Sussex Transport Study, which shows that there 
are no significant impacts from the development on the AQMA, however, the planning application for the 
site must be accompanied by independent technical evidence which demonstrates that it will not cause 
unacceptable levels of air pollution. 
There are no significant environmental designations on-site or in proximity that would be negatively af fected 
by development. 
The eastern area of the site lies close to listed buildings - Ockley Manor (Grade II*), Ockley Manor Barn 
(Grade II) and Dovecote (Grade II). The development will need to respect their setting and incorporate a 
suitable buffer. 
Overall the Sustainability Appraisal concludes that this site is sustainable and suitable for strategic 
development.
The Council will work with the promoter/developer of the site, and the Parish Council, over the preparation 
of an allocation-wide masterplan to guide the future development of the site. 
Residents have expressed significant concerns over the safety of the unmanned pedestrian crossing over 
the London – Brighton railway line. As part of the preparation of the masterplan,  alternative options (for 
example improving or replacing this crossing; introducing safety measures at this crossing; closing this 
crossing; and/or improving nearby crossing facilities) will be explored with Network Rail and other statutory 
consultees. 
This site can deliver homes within the first five years of the Plan period and therefore will make an 
important contribution to the housing supply in the early part of the Plan period.
DP11: Strategic allocation to the north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks
Strategic Objectives: All.
Evidence Base: A Landscape Character Assessment for Mid Sussex; Mid Sussex Landscape Capacity 
Study, Sustainability Assessment of Cross-Boundary Options for the Mid Sussex District Plan; Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment, Mid Sussex Transport Study; Mid Sussex District Gypsy and Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     53Strategic development, as shown on the inset map, is allocated to the north of Clayton Mills, 
Hassocks for:
• Approximately 500 new homes;
• A new primary school; 
• Provision of permanent pitches for settled Gypsies and Travellers to contribute, towards   
	 the	additional	total	identified	need	within	the	District	commensurable	with	the	overall	
 scale of residential development proposed by the strategic development; or the provision of  
	 an	equivalent	financial	contribution	towards	the	off-site	provision	of	pitches	towards	
	 the	additional	total	identified	need	within	the	District	(or	part	thereof	if	some	on-site	
 provision is made) commensurate with the overall scale of residential development 
	 proposed	by	the	strategic	development.	The	financial	contribution	towards	off-site	
 provision will only be acceptable if it can be demonstrated that a suitable, available and 
 achievable site (or sites) can be provided and made operational within an appropriate 
	 timescale	unless	alternative	requirements	are	confirmed	within	any	Traveller	Sites	
 Allocations Development Plan Document or such other evidence base as is available at 
 the time;
In addition to conforming to other relevant policies in the District Plan, strategic mixed-use 
development in this location will:
• Provide a suitable and safe access to the site from Ockley Lane and appropriate mitigation to  
 support the development with regards to the Local and Strategic Road Network;
• Provide appropriate mitigation to reduce the visual impact of the development on the   
 landscape and to ensure, in particular, that development respects the South Downs 
 National Park and its setting;
• Incorporate a greenspace buffer on the northern boundary. This will form a strong defensible  
 boundary to prevent coalescence with Burgess Hill and retain the separate identity and 
	 amenity	of	the	two	settlements.	Land	within	this	buffer	will	be	transferred,	with	the	Parish’s		
 agreement, to the Parish Council;
• Incorporate a suitable buffer to protect the setting of Ockley Manor (Grade II*), Ockley Manor  
 Barn (Grade II) and Dovecote (Grade II), which lie to the east of the site;
• Incorporate a greenspace buffer on the southern boundary to protect the amenity of existing  
 residential properties on Mackie Avenue which back on to the site;
• Identify and respond to environmental and ecological constraints and deliver opportunities  
 to enhance green infrastructure and local biodiversity;
•	 Identify	and	respond	to	issues	relating	to	air	quality	in	relation	to	the	site’s	proximity	to	the		
 Stonepound Crossroads Air Quality Management Area (AQMA). The scheme must 
 demonstrate that it will not cause unacceptable levels of air pollution and is consistent  
 with the Stonepound Crossroads Air Quality Action Plan;
• Make provision for charging electric vehicles by installing a dedicated electrical socket   
 suitable for charging electric vehicles at each residential unit (either internally such as 
 within a garage, or externally at an allocated parking space) and making parking areas 
	 ‘charger	ready’ 	by	making	it	possible	to	install	a	dedicated	electric	vehicle	charging	device	
 (such as fast chargers) at a later date;4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     54•	 Make	a	financial	contribution	to	secure	improved	public	transport	provision	to	Hassocks	and		
 Burgess Hill;
•	 Provide	safe	pedestrian/cycling	routes	within	the	development	and	to	connect	with	existing		
 residential areas, the services within Hassocks village centre, Hassocks railway station, and  
 enhance the existing cycle route to Burgess Hill;
• Assess the implications of the development on pedestrian and cycle railway crossings and  
 ensure that there is an agreed approach towards ensuring the provision of safe crossings;
• Make provision for new formal play facilities and informal open space on the site; 
•	 Provide	financial	contributions	to	improve	the	existing	open	space,	including	improvements		
 to the footpath, to the south of the site;
• Provide a range of housing including affordable housing, in accordance with Policy DP31:  
 Affordable Housing and housing for older people;
•	 Wherever	viable,	incorporate	on-site	‘community	energy	systems’,	such	as	Combined	Heat		
 and Power, ground-source hear pumps or other appropriate low carbon technologies, to   
 meet energy needs and create a sustainable development. The development shall    
	 also	include	appropriate	carbon	reduction,	energy	efficiency	and	water	consumption		 	
 reduction measures to demonstrate high levels of sustainability;
•	 Provide	infrastructure,	as	set	out	in	the	Council’s	Infrastructure	Delivery	Plan	and	identified		
 in technical assessments, implemented before or alongside development to an agreed 
 programme of delivery; and
• Provide surface water drainage, based on sustainable drainage principles in accordance with  
 DP41: Flood Risk and Drainage.
 
 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     55
Reproduced from Ordnance Survey mapping. Mid Sussex District Council. 100021794. 2018I
Land north of Clayton Mills, HassocksStrategic Allocation to the north
of Clayton Mills, Hassocks (DP11)
Figure 9: Strategic allocation Land north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks (DP11)4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     56Development in the Countryside
DP12: Protection and Enhancement of Countryside
Mid Sussex is a rural District, and the countryside is an asset that is 
highly valued by the Council and local residents and is recognised as 
having social value in enhancing the health and wellbeing of residents 
and visitors. The countryside is a working environment that needs to 
be managed in a way that enhances the attractiveness of the rural 
environment whilst enabling traditional rural activities to continue. The 
rural economy will be supported by other policies within this Plan that 
permit small-scale development and changes of use that will further 
economic activities that are compatible with the District’s rural character. 
Its environmental worth will be protected and enhanced by the policies 
in this Plan, in particular the Natural Resources policies (DP37 – DP42).
The primary objective of the District Plan with respect to the countryside is to secure its protection by 
minimising the amount of land taken for development and preventing development that does not need to be 
there. At the same time, it seeks to enhance the countryside, support the rural economy by accommodating 
well-designed, appropriate new forms of development and changes in land use where a countryside 
location is required and where it does not adversely affect the rural environment. New development to meet 
local needs can be proposed through Neighbourhood Plans where this will support local services and is 
otherwise compatible with District Plan policies.
The Capacity of Mid Sussex District to Accommodate Development Study (June 2014, paragraph 2.138) 
describes high quality soil as an invaluable and non-renewable natural resource and identifies provisional 
Agricultural Land Classification Grades across the District which suggest only 455.7 hectares of Grade 2 
land (1.4% of the District) and no Grade 1 land within Mid Sussex. A large proportion of the District (63.8%) 
is Grade 3 land with the potential to be classified as Grade 3a (i.e. best and most versatile agricultural 
land). Not all land has been surveyed in detail and more detailed field surveys may be required to inform 
decisions about specific sites. Where identified, Grade 1, 2 and 3a agricultural land should be protected 
from development due to its economic importance and geological value. This is the land which is most 
flexible, productive and efficient and can best deliver future crops for food and non-food uses.
The Council has worked with West Sussex County Council to produce evidence, guidance and landscape 
strategy documents that will be referred to when implementing this policy. The Landscape Character 
Assessment for Mid Sussex (2005) provides a comprehensive account of the landscape character of 
Mid Sussex. The Assessment states that change needs to be managed so that important landscape 
characteristics are not lost and that opportunities to create new landscapes are maximised (paragraph 
2.81). Historic Landscape Character Information (data held by West Sussex County Council) has been 
prepared for the District, which identifies important historic landscape features such as farmsteads and 
ancient field patterns.
The Strategy for the West Sussex Landscape (2005, paragraph 2.5) identifies the settlement pattern 
of the County – a network of small to medium-sized towns, villages and hamlets – as a strong defining 
characteristic. Built-up area boundaries, which set the boundaries between the built-up areas and the wider 
countryside, have been established for many years within the District and continue to be defined on the 
Policies Map.
The Capacity of Mid Sussex District to Accommodate Development Study (June 2014) summarises the 
relevant findings of the Landscape Capacity Study undertaken for the District in 2007 and includes an 
assessment of areas that were not included in the previous study . In addition to the significant proportion 
of the District under a national landscape designation (60%), the Capacity Study (paragraph 3.22) found 
that “even outside of the AONB and National Park, there are no areas assessed as having high landscape 
capacity (i.e. likely to be able to accommodate significant allocations of housing development)”. It is 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     57therefore necessary that all development in the countryside, defined as the area outside of built up area 
boundaries, must seek to maintain or enhance the intrinsic beauty and tranquillity of the countryside.
Minerals are a finite resource and can only be worked where they are found. Therefore it is important to use 
them in the most efficient manner to secure their long term conservation. Where a development is sited in 
a West Sussex Minerals Consultation Area, further work will be required in conjunction with West Sussex 
County Council as the Minerals Planning Authority to identify whether minerals are accessible in sufficient 
amounts to be economically viable to extract.
In the interests of historic and nature conservation any development proposals in the countryside must be 
in accordance with policies DP29: Noise, Air and Light Pollution, DP34: Listed Buildings and Other Heritage 
Assets, DP35: Conservation Areas, DP36: Historic Parks and Gardens and DP38: Biodiversity.
DP12: Protection and Enhancement of Countryside
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 
11) To support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination; and 15) To create 
places that encourage a healthy and enjoyable lifestyle by the provision of first class cultural and sporting 
facilities, informal leisure space and the opportunity to walk, cycle or ride to common destinations.
Evidence Base: A Landscape Character Assessment for Mid Sussex, A Strategy for the West Sussex 
Landscape, Capacity of Mid Sussex District to Accommodate Development Study.
The countryside will be protected in recognition of its intrinsic character and beauty.  Development 
will	be	permitted	in	the	countryside,	defined	as	the	area	outside	of	built-up	area	boundaries	on	
the Policies Map, provided it maintains or where possible enhances the quality of the rural and 
landscape character of the District, and:
• it is necessary for the purposes of agriculture; or
•	 it	is	supported	by	a	specific	policy	reference	either	elsewhere	in	the	Plan,	a	Development			
 Plan Document or relevant Neighbourhood Plan.
Agricultural land of Grade 3a and above will be protected from non-agricultural development 
proposals.		Where	significant	development	of	agricultural	land	is	demonstrated	to	be	necessary,	
detailed	field	surveys	should	be	undertaken	and	proposals	should	seek	to	use	areas	of	poorer	
quality land in preference to that of higher quality.
The Mid Sussex Landscape Character Assessment, the West Sussex County Council Strategy for 
the West Sussex Landscape, the Capacity of Mid Sussex District to Accommodate Development 
Study and other available landscape evidence (including that gathered to support Neighbourhood 
Plans) will be used to assess the impact of development proposals on the quality of rural and 
landscape character.
Built-up area boundaries are subject to review by Neighbourhood Plans or through a Site 
Allocations Development Plan Document, produced by the District Council.
Economically viable mineral reserves within the district will be safeguarded.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     58DP13: Preventing Coalescence
The settlement pattern of Mid Sussex makes an important contribution 
to the distinctive character of Mid Sussex and therefore a strategic 
objective of the Plan is to promote well located and designed 
development that reflects the distinctive towns and villages, retains their 
separate identity and character and prevents coalescence.
Policy DP13: Preventing Coalescence provides the policy framework for 
achieving the objective based on the Mid Sussex Landscape Character 
Assessment (2005) which has been jointly produced with West 
Sussex County Council and provides a profile of each of the distinctive 
Landscape Character Areas within the District.  The Assessment 
provides further information on the development of settlements in the 
District, how the landscape has influenced the settlement pattern and 
the contribution that the settlement pattern makes to the overall character of the Mid Sussex Landscape 
(part three of the Assessment). Part four of the Assessment sets out land management guidelines for each 
of the character areas. This includes guidance on how new development could be managed within the 
landscape. 
Areas considered in the Landscape Capacity Study and updated in the Capacity of Mid Sussex District 
to Accommodate Development Study (2014), plus five additional areas included in the Capacity Study, 
have all been assessed according to landscape character and visual sensitivity criteria in terms of their 
contribution to the separation between existing settlements.
DP13: Preventing Coalescence
Strategic Objective: 2) To promote well located and designed development that reflects the District’s 
distinctive towns and villages, retains their separate identity and character and prevents coalescence.
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Landscape Character Assessment; Capacity of Mid Sussex District to 
Accommodate Development Study.
The individual towns and villages in the District each have their own unique characteristics. It is 
important that their separate identity is maintained. When travelling between settlements people 
should have a sense that they have left one before arriving at the next.  
Provided	it	is	not	in	conflict	with	Policy	DP12:	Protection	and	Enhancement	of	the	Countryside,	
development will be permitted if it does not result in the coalescence of settlements which harms 
the separate identity and amenity of settlements, and would not have an unacceptably urbanising 
effect on the area between settlements.
Local	Gaps	can	be	identified	in	Neighbourhood	Plans	or	a	Site	 Allocations	Development	Plan	
Document, produced by the District Council, where there is robust evidence that development 
within the Gap would individually or cumulatively result in coalescence and the loss of the separate 
identity and amenity of nearby settlements. Evidence must demonstrate that existing local and 
national policies cannot provide the necessary protection.
 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     59DP14: Sustainable Rural Development and the Rural Economy
Although Mid Sussex is a rural district, agriculture only accounts 
for 5% of all businesses in Mid Sussex (This is Mid Sussex 2012). 
The rural area supports a large number of diverse businesses that 
make an important contribution to the rural economy. Rural economic 
development should be encouraged where it provides good quality 
long-term employment, helps to improve local skills and services 
and contributes towards sustaining a high quality environment and 
well-being of the local community in accordance with policy DP12: 
Protection and Enhancement of Countryside.
The policy supports the Mid Sussex Economic Development Strategy 
(2013) objective to increase opportunities for further business growth 
in rural areas. 
  
This policy conforms to the National Planning Policy Framework, where it relates to the development of a 
sustainable rural economy (paragraph 28). Small scale enterprises needed for the processing, distribution 
and local retailing of local produce should be positively supported to allow the District’s rural economy to 
grow and improve the quality of life and environment for rural communities. 
This policy will not apply within the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, where a more 
restrictive policy approach, Policy DP16: High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, will be adopted 
(National Planning Policy Framework paragraph 14). 
DP14: Sustainable rural development and the rural economy
Strategic Objectives: 7) To promote a place which is attractive to a full range of businesses, and where 
local enterprise thrives; 8) To provide opportunities for people to live and work within their communities, 
reducing the need for commuting; 10) To support a strong and diverse rural economy in the villages and the 
countryside; and 11) To support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination.
Evidence Base: A Landscape Character Assessment for Mid Sussex; Town and Parish Council 
submissions.
Provided	it	is	not	in	conflict	with	Policy	DP12:	Protection	and	Enhancement	of	Countryside	and	
DP13: Preventing Coalescence:
• new small-scale economic development, including tourism-related development, within the  
	 countryside	(defined	as	the	area	outside	of	built	up	area	boundaries	as	per	the	Policies	Map)		
 will be permitted provided:
 • it supports sustainable growth and the vitality of the rural economy; and 
 • where possible, utilises previously developed sites.
•	 diversification	of	activities	on	existing	farm	units	will	be	permitted	provided:
 • they are of a scale which is consistent to the location of the farm holding; and
 • they would not prejudice the agricultural use of a unit.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     60• the re-use and adaptation of rural buildings for business or tourism use in the countryside  
 will be permitted provided:
 • the building is of permanent construction and capable of re-use without substantial  
  reconstruction or extensive alteration;
 • the appearance and setting is not materially altered; and
 • it is not a recently constructed agricultural building which has not been or has been  
  little used for its original purpose.
DP15: New Homes in the Countryside
This policy conforms to the National Planning Policy Framework, where 
it relates to the development of a sustainable rural economy (paragraph 
55). Past experience of dealing with proposals for agricultural dwellings 
has highlighted the need for clear guidance on how we will assess such 
proposals. This guidance is set out in the policy below. 
DP15: New Homes in the Countryside
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 
and 13) To provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of the community.
Evidence Base: A Landscape Character Assessment for Mid Sussex; Town and Parish Council 
submissions.
Provided	that	they	would	not	be	in	conflict	with	Policy	DP12:	Protection	and	Enhancement	of	the	
Countryside,	new	homes	in	the	countryside	will	be	permitted	where	special	justification	exists.	
Special	justification	is	defined	as:
• Where accommodation is essential to enable agricultural, forestry and certain other full time  
 rural workers to live at, or in the immediate vicinity of, their place of work; or
• In the case of new isolated homes in the countryside, where the design of the dwelling is of  
 exceptional quality and it enhances its immediate setting and is sensitive to the character of  
 the area; or
• Affordable housing in accordance with Policy DP32: Rural Exception Sites; or 
• The proposed development meets the requirements of Policy DP6: Settlement Hierarchy.
Permanent agricultural (includes forestry and certain other full time rural worker) dwellings   
will only be permitted to support existing agricultural activities on well-established  
agricultural units where:
•	 The	need	cannot	be	fulfilled	by	another	existing	dwelling	on	or	any	other	existing			 	
 accommodation near the agricultural unit; and4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     61• It can be proven that it is essential for the proper functioning of the enterprise for one or   
 more workers to be readily available at most times; and
• It can be proven that the farming enterprise is economically viable; and
• It can be proven that the size of the dwelling is commensurate with the established   
 functional requirement of the agricultural unit.
Temporary agricultural dwellings essential to support a new farming activity either on a newly 
created agricultural unit or on an established one will be subject to the criteria above and should 
normally be provided by temporary accommodation. 
Applications for the removal of agricultural occupancy conditions will only be permitted where it 
can be proven that there is no longer any need for the dwelling for someone solely, mainly or last 
working in agriculture or forestry or other rural based enterprise. This will be based on an up to 
date assessment of the demand for farm (or other occupational) dwellings in the area as a whole, 
and not just on a particular holding.
New	‘granny	annexes’ 	that	are	physically	separate	to	the	dwelling	are	defined	as	a	new	home	and	
are subject to the same requirements as above.
Re-use of rural buildings for residential use
The re-use and adaptation of rural buildings for residential use in the countryside will be permitted 
where it is not a recently constructed8  agricultural building which has not been or has been little 
used for its original purpose and:
• the re-use would secure the future of a heritage asset; or
• the re-use would lead to an enhancement of the immediate setting and the quality of the rural  
 and landscape character of the area is maintained.
Replacement dwellings in the countryside
Replacement dwellings in the countryside will be permitted where:
• The residential use has not been abandoned;
• Highway, access and parking requirements can be met; and
• The replacement dwelling maintains or where possible enhances the quality of the natural  
	 and/or	built	landscape	particularly	in	the	High	Weald	 Area	of	Outstanding	Natural	Beauty,		
	 especially	if	a	significant	change	in	scale	from	the	existing	dwelling	is	proposed.
8 The term ‘recently constructed’ will generally be held to apply to buildings constructed within about two/three years of a planning 
application for their re-use or adaptation.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     62DP16: High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural 
Beauty
The National Planning Policy Framework gives great weight to the 
need to conserve the landscape and scenic beauty of the Areas of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), which have the highest status of 
protection in relation to landscape and scenic beauty. The conservation 
of wildlife and cultural heritage are also identified as important 
considerations. National policy also states that planning permission 
should be refused for major developments in these areas except in 
exceptional circumstances and where it can be demonstrated that they 
are in the public interest.  
The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty covers most of the northern part of the District. The 
High Weald AONB Management Plan identifies the distinctive features of the landscape and how these 
can be conserved and enhanced. Significant consideration should be given to the conservation and 
enhancement of the locally distinctive features of the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, as 
defined by the High Weald AONB Management Plan. 
 
The setting of the High Weald AONB is also important as landscapes connect ecologically, economically 
and socially. In particular, the views into and out of the AONB may be affected by activities outside of the 
designated area. The National Planning Practice Guidance explains that the duty to conserve and enhance 
the natural beauty of AONBs is relevant when considering development proposals situated outside of an 
AONB, but which might have an impact on its setting.
DP16: High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 
and 11) To support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination.
Evidence Base: The High Weald AONB Management Plan.
Development within the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), as shown on the 
Policies Maps, will only be permitted where it conserves or enhances natural beauty and has regard 
to the High Weald AONB Management Plan, in particular;
•	 the	identified	landscape	features	or	components	of	natural	beauty	and	to	their	setting;
• the traditional interaction of people with nature, and appropriate land management;
• character and local distinctiveness, settlement pattern, sense of place and setting of the   
 AONB; and
• the conservation of wildlife and cultural heritage.
Small scale proposals which support the economy and social well-being of the AONB that are 
compatible with the conservation and enhancement of natural beauty will be supported.
Development on land that contributes to the setting of the AONB will only be permitted where 
it does not detract from the visual qualities and essential characteristics of the AONB, and in 
particular should not adversely affect the views into and out of the AONB by virtue of its location or 
design.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     63DP17: Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC)
Following consultation with Natural England, the District Council has 
undertaken a Habitats Regulations Assessment to test whether the 
District Plan, in combination with other plans and projects, is likely to 
have an adverse impact on the integrity of the Ashdown Forest Special 
Protection Area and Special Area of Conservation.
The main potential impacts arising from the District Plan that are 
likely to have a significant effect on Ashdown Forest are recreational 
disturbance to protected breeding birds from an increase in visitors 
to Ashdown Forest and atmospheric pollution affecting the heathland 
habitat from increased traffic and associated nitrogen deposition.
The Habitats Regulations Assessment for the District Plan identifies that proposed new housing in areas 
close to Ashdown Forest is likely to increase the number of visitors, with associated impacts on bird 
populations. This ‘zone of influence’ is within a 7km straight-line distance from the SPA boundary of the 
Ashdown Forest identified from the ‘Visitor Access Patterns on Ashdown Forest’ survey published in 
October 2009 and subsequent data analysis. For this reason it will be important to counter any adverse 
effects from new residential development in this zone, and to put in place appropriate measures which 
reduce visitor pressure. The proposed approach is to provide Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace 
(SANG) sites and Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM) measures on Ashdown Forest 
itself. In pursuance of this, the District Council has secured provision for a 33 Hectare strategic SANG at 
East Court & Ashplats Wood in East Grinstead. SANGs are sites that cater for the recreational needs of 
communities in order to avoid and reduce the likelihood of increasing visitor pressure and disturbance on 
important nature conservation areas such as Ashdown Forest. The provision of SANGs will be over and 
above that for public open space and should be of a suitable design and size to provide an alternative to 
visiting the Ashdown Forest. 
Policy DP17: Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) 
below sets out an avoidance and mitigation strategy to reduce the impact of recreational disturbance. 
Within the 7km zone of influence, all development will need to contribute to an appropriate level of 
mitigation detailed in the Habitats Regulations Assessment, in the form of providing a SANG, either on the 
development site itself or through a financial contribution to a strategic SANG elsewhere, and a separate 
financial contribution towards a SAMM Strategy. Further guidance on the type of development covered by 
this policy can be found in the SANG Strategy.
The Ashdown Forest SAMM Strategy will set out measures for the management of visitors to Ashdown 
Forest in such a way that reduces the impact on features of interest of the designated site together with a 
programme for monitoring birds and the impacts of visitors. This will be prepared in association with the 
Conservators of Ashdown Forest, Natural England, Wealden, Lewes, Tandridge and Sevenoaks District 
Councils, and Tunbridge Wells Borough Council. A strategy will be developed which will provide guidance 
on how developer contributions towards the implementation of the Ashdown Forest SAMM Strategy will be 
calculated and delivered. The District Council is currently implementing an interim SAMM Strategy which 
has been approved by Natural England.
In terms of atmospheric pollution, the Habitats Regulations Assessment concludes that adverse effects on 
the Ashdown Forest SAC are unlikely and no further measures are necessary at this stage. However, in 
order to promote good practice, the District Plan in Policy DP21: Transport contains measures to encourage 
sustainable transport. In addition, if appropriate, other measures to assess and manage atmospheric 
pollution impacts on Ashdown Forest will also be reviewed and implemented, particularly if new evidence 
becomes available. 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     64The District Council will monitor the effectiveness of this policy for the impacts on the Ashdown Forest SPA 
and SAC and review/amend the approach, including any mitigation requirements, set out in this policy as 
necessary.
DP17: Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area (SPA) and Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC)
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities.
Evidence Base: Ashdown Forest Visitor Survey Data Analysis, Habitats Regulations Assessment for the 
Mid Sussex District Plan, Visitor Access Patterns on Ashdown Forest.
In order to prevent adverse effects on the Ashdown Forest SPA and SAC, new development likely 
to	have	a	significant	effect,	either	alone	or	in	combination	with	other	development,	will	be	required	
to demonstrate that adequate measures are put in place to avoid or mitigate any potential adverse 
effects.
Within a 400 metres buffer zone around Ashdown Forest, mitigation measures are unlikely to be 
capable of protecting the integrity of the SPA and, therefore, residential development will not be 
permitted.
Within	a	7km	zone	of	influence	around	the	 Ashdown	Forest	SPA,	residential	development	leading	to	
a net increase in dwellings will be required to contribute to mitigation through:
1) The provision of Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG) to the minimum level of 
8Ha	per	1,000	net	increase	in	population;	or	a	financial	contribution	to	SANGs	elsewhere;	or	the	
provision of bespoke mitigation; and
2)	 A 	financial	contribution	to	the	 Ashdown	Forest	Strategic	 Access	Management	and	
Monitoring (SAMM) Strategy.
Large	schemes	proposed	adjacent	or	close	to	the	boundary	of	the	7km	zone	of	influence	may	
require mitigation for the SPA. Such proposals for development will be dealt with on a case-by-case 
basis.
Where bespoke mitigation is provided, these measures will need to be in place before occupation 
of development and must be managed and maintained in perpetuity. The effectiveness of such 
mitigation will need to be demonstrated prior to approval of the development. Bespoke mitigation 
will need to be discussed and agreed by the District Council as the competent authority following 
advice from Natural England.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     65DP18: Setting of the South Downs National Park
The areas of land surrounding the South Downs National Park make 
a contribution to the setting of the South Downs National Park. The 
South Downs Integrated Landscape Character Assessment (2011) 
provides information on the landscape character of the National Park. 
The Assessment examines the factors that may result in change to 
the National Park and the adjacent areas. The Assessment identified 
issues outside the National Park boundaries that can impact on the 
character of the National Park such as light pollution and increased 
development and the associated landscape change. Mid Sussex 
District Council works in partnership with the South Downs National 
Park Authority to protect and enhance the natural beauty of the 
National Park.
 
The South Downs National Park Authority has purposes as specified in the Environment Act 1995. In 
meeting these purposes there is also a duty to seek to foster the economic and social well-being of the 
communities within the National Park. The purposes of the National Park are:
 (i) To conserve and enhance the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the National Park area; and
 (ii) To promote opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of the Park’s special qualities by the 
public.
 
DP18: Setting of the South Downs National Park
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 
and 11) To support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination.
Evidence Base: The South Downs Partnership Management Plan, South Downs Integrated Landscape 
Character Assessment, Defra Duty of Regard.
Development within land that contributes to the setting of the South Downs National Park will 
only be permitted where it does not detract from, or cause detriment to, the visual and special 
qualities (including dark skies), tranquillity and essential characteristics of the National Park, and 
in particular should not adversely affect transitional open green spaces between the site and the 
boundary of the South Downs National Park, and the views, outlook and aspect, into and out of the 
National Park by virtue of its location, scale, form or design.  
Development	should	be	consistent	with	National	Park	purposes	and	must	not	significantly	harm	the	
National Park or its setting. Assessment of such development proposals will also have regard to 
the South Downs Partnership Management Plan and emerging National Park Local Plan  and other 
adopted planning documents and strategies.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     66DP19:	Sustainable	Tourism
Tourism makes an important contribution to the economy of 
Mid Sussex. Promoting the attractiveness of the District and its 
facilities is recognised in the Mid Sussex Economic Development 
Strategy (2013). This policy should be read alongside other 
policies in the Plan including DP12: Protection and Enhancement 
of Countryside and DP14: Sustainable Rural Development and 
the Rural Economy, and, where appropriate, DP16: High Weald 
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty or DP18: Setting of the 
South Downs National Park.
 
The Bluebell Railway, a privately-owned heritage railway, is an 
important visitor attraction to Mid Sussex. The Bluebell Railway has restored and operated scheduled 
steam train services on sections of the former Lewes to East Grinstead line since 1960. In view of the 
Bluebell Railway’s value to the local and regional tourist economy and as a public transport link, the Council 
has supported the completion of the line to East Grinstead. In the long-term, the Bluebell Railway plans to 
reinstate the disused branch line westwards from Horsted Keynes (via Ardingly) to a terminus at Haywards 
Heath. The completion of this section will connect the Bluebell Railway with main line rail services at both 
East Grinstead and Haywards Heath.
The proposed western extension of the Bluebell Railway from Horsted Keynes to Haywards Heath is 
considered to be a project of District-wide importance and is fully supported by the Council. This policy 
therefore safeguards the route of the proposed reinstated railway link between East Grinstead and 
Haywards Heath railway stations for the Bluebell Railway’s operating requirements and passenger facilities, 
as shown on the Policies Map.
DP19:	Sustainable	Tourism
Strategic Objectives: 7) To promote a place which is attractive to a full range of businesses, and where local 
enterprise thrives; 10) To support a strong and diverse rural economy in the villages and the countryside; 
and 11) To support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination.
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Economic Development Strategy.
Tourism	related	development	in	the	countryside	(defined	as	the	area	outside	of	the	built-up	area	
boundaries on the Policies Map), including extensions to existing facilities, visitor accommodation 
and the re-use of rural buildings will be permitted provided:
• it supports the sustainable growth of the rural economy; and
• maintains or where possible enhances the quality of the rural and landscape character of the  
 District, in accordance with Policy DP12: Protection and Enhancement of the Countryside.
The route of the proposed reinstated railway link between East Grinstead and Haywards Heath 
railway stations (as shown on the Policies Map) will be safeguarded for the Bluebell Railway from 
any development which could prevent its completion.
In particular, land will be safeguarded from development which will be required to deliver the 
proposed reinstated railway link and associated facilities for the Bluebell Railway along the route of 
the	railway	corridor	between	Horsted	Keynes	and	Haywards	Heath	railway	stations.
 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     67Delivery of Infrastructure
DP20: Securing Infrastructure
A strategic objective of the District Plan is to ensure that development 
is accompanied by the necessary infrastructure to ensure that it is 
adequately served without overstretching existing infrastructure and 
putting an unacceptable strain on the environment; and to create 
sustainable communities.
The Infrastructure Delivery Plan has been developed by working with a 
range of authorities and infrastructure providers to identify the level of 
infrastructure required to support development and the funding available 
to deliver this. It includes District-wide infrastructure requirements and a 
comprehensive section on Town and Parish requirements for transport, 
education, health, social infrastructure, green infrastructure, public and 
community services and utility services. 
In some cases more detailed work has been undertaken to identify the specific infrastructure improvements 
required to meet future needs across the District. The Mid Sussex Playing Pitch Strategy 2015 – 2031 
identified a need for new sports facilities to meet increased demand as a result of housing growth and 
increasing population. The priorities for additional provision are:
• Junior football – seven pitches
• Mini-soccer – four pitches
• Hockey – one Artificial Turf Pitch
• Cricket – two pitches
• Rugby – two pitches (in the south of the district)
Investment in existing facilities will also be necessary to ensure that these facilities can be used to full 
capacity. 
The Mid Sussex Community Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule is likely to prove a mechanism for 
delivering the necessary infrastructure to accompany new development. The draft Community Infrastructure 
Levy Charging Schedule sets out how new building projects pay for the necessary infrastructure to support 
development.
When the Community Infrastructure Levy is introduced, it will be supplemented with negotiated agreements 
to secure affordable housing and additional on-site infrastructure10 , and site-specific highway works11  
to make development acceptable in planning terms where appropriate. Planning permission for major 
developments will be granted on condition that a programme of infrastructure delivery is agreed before 
development begins (implemented by way of appropriate planning conditions/legal agreements). 
DP20: Securing Infrastructure
Strategic Objectives: 6) To ensure that development is accompanied by the necessary infrastructure in the 
right place at the right time that supports development and sustainable communities.  This includes the 
provision of efficient and sustainable transport networks.
10  Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 (as amended)
11  Section 278 of the Highways Act 19804
Policies              Adopted District Plan     68Evidence Base: Community Infrastructure Levy and Affordable Housing Viability Assessment; Mid Sussex 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan; Mid Sussex Playing Pitch Strategy; Town and Parish Council submissions and 
Neighbourhood Plans.
The Council will expect developers to provide for, or contribute towards, the infrastructure and 
mitigation measures made necessary by their development proposals through:
 
• appropriate on-site mitigation and infrastructure provision;
• the use of planning obligations (s106 legal agreements and unilateral undertakings);
• the Community Infrastructure Levy, when it is in place. 
A planning obligation can be used where it is necessary to make the development acceptable in 
planning terms, directly related to the development, and fairly and reasonably related in scale and 
kind to the development. The Council will assess each application on its merits to determine if a 
planning obligation is needed and the matters it should address. Planning obligations will only be 
entered into where planning conditions cannot be used to overcome problems associated with a 
development proposal.
Financial contributions will not be sought through planning obligations if 5 or more obligations 
for that project or type of infrastructure (other than for affordable housing) have already been 
entered into since 6 April 2010, or if it is a type of infrastructure that is funded by the Community 
Infrastructure Levy (this will be set out on a list of infrastructure that the Council proposes to fund 
from the Levy).
The Community Infrastructure Levy Charging Schedule will set out how development will fund the 
infrastructure needed to support it. The Levy will normally be spent on infrastructure needs in the 
locality of the scheme.
Proposals by service providers for the delivery of utility infrastructure required to meet the needs 
generated by new development in the District and by existing communities will be encouraged and 
permitted, subject to accordance with other policies within the Plan.
Affordable housing is dealt with separately, under Policy DP31: Affordable Housing.
DP21: Transport
A strategic objective of the District Plan is to ensure that development is 
accompanied by the necessary infrastructure to support development. 
The District Plan aims to create sustainable communities and this 
includes a sustainable local transport network and ease of access to 
local services and facilities.
The National Planning Policy Framework requires that development 
should not result in “severe residual cumulative (transport) impacts” 
after feasible mitigation has been effected. The Mid Sussex Transport 
Study has been prepared to inform whether the development proposed 
by the District Plan is practical to deliver in principle; and whether 
mitigation of any adverse effects on the transport network is feasible.  
Any transport mitigation that is required to support development, will be 
included within the Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
The West Sussex Transport Plan 2011-2026 sets out the strategy for guiding future investment in highways 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     69and transport infrastructure across West Sussex. It sets a framework for considering transport infrastructure 
requirements associated with future development across the county. This policy supports the objectives of 
the Transport Plan.
Depending on the size and likely transport impact of development, a Transport Statement or Transport 
Assessment will be submitted alongside planning applications. In such cases, and in accordance with the 
National Planning Policy Framework and the West Sussex County Council Development Travel Plans 
Policy, developers will be required to produce a Travel Plan Statement or full Travel Plan in order to reduce 
the level of vehicle trips associated with the site.
The District Council will continue to work with public transport providers to ensure that the level of service 
provided meets the needs of commuters and other travellers. This includes the frequency of services and 
quality of infrastructure such as stations and trains. The District Council will also work with West Sussex 
County Council to review residential and non-residential car parking standards to ensure that development 
provides an appropriate level of parking linked to the likely demand for the development and compliance 
with national planning policy.
DP21: Transport
Strategic Objectives: 6) To ensure that development is accompanied by the necessary infrastructure in the 
right place at the right time that supports development and sustainable communities.  This includes the 
provision of efficient and sustainable transport networks; and 15) To create places that encourage a healthy 
and enjoyable lifestyle by the provision of first class cultural and sporting facilities, informal leisure space 
and the opportunity to walk, cycle or ride to common destinations.
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Transport Study; West Sussex Transport Plan 2011-2026.
Development will be required to support the objectives of the West Sussex Transport Plan 2011-
2026, which are: 
• A high quality transport network that promotes a competitive and prosperous economy; 
• A resilient transport network that complements the built and natural environment whilst   
 reducing carbon emissions over time; 
• Access to services, employment and housing; and 
• A transport network that feels, and is, safer and healthier to use. 
To meet these objectives, decisions on development proposals will take account of whether:
• The scheme is sustainably located to minimise the need for travel noting there might be   
 circumstances where development needs to be located in the countryside, such as   
 rural economic uses (see policy DP14: Sustainable Rural Development and the Rural   
 Economy);
• Appropriate opportunities to facilitate and promote the increased use of alternative means of  
 transport to the private car, such as the provision of, and access to, safe and convenient   
 routes for walking, cycling and public transport, including suitable facilities for secure and  
 safe cycle parking, have been fully explored and taken up;
• The scheme is designed to adoptable standards, or other standards as agreed by the Local  
 Planning Authority, including road widths and size of garages;4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     70• The scheme provides adequate car parking for the proposed development taking into   
 account the accessibility of the development, the type, mix and use of the development and  
 the availability and opportunities for public transport; and with the relevant Neighbourhood  
 Plan where applicable; 
•	 Development 	which	generates	 significant 	amounts	 of	movement 	is	supported 	by	a	Transport 		
	 Assessment/	Statement	and	a	Travel	Plan	that	is	effective	and	demonstrably	deliverable		 	
 including setting out how schemes will be funded;
• The scheme provides appropriate mitigation to support new development on the local and  
 strategic road network, including the transport network outside of the district, secured where  
 necessary through appropriate legal agreements; 
•	 The	scheme	avoids	severe	additional	traffic	congestion,	individually	or	cumulatively,	taking		
 account of any proposed mitigation; 
• The scheme protects the safety of road users and pedestrians; and
• The scheme does not harm the special qualities of the South Downs National Park or the   
 High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty through its transport impacts.
Where practical and viable, developments should be located and designed to incorporate facilities 
for charging plug-in and other ultra-low emission vehicles.
Neighbourhood Plans can set local standards for car parking provision provided that it is based 
upon	evidence	that	provides	clear	and	compelling	justification	for	doing	so.
DP22: Rights of Way and other Recreational Routes
The District has a good, albeit fragmented network of footpaths, 
cycleways and recreational routes and these routes have the potential 
to provide good opportunities for sustainable transport and can facilitate 
healthy lifestyles. Public Rights of Way are identified as a primary 
environmental constraint to development in the Capacity of Mid Sussex 
District to Accommodate Development Study (2014, paragraph 6.9) 
due to both high environmental importance and the strong policy 
safeguards that apply to them. In accordance with the National Planning 
Policy Framework (paragraph 75), the District Plan will protect and 
enhance public rights of way, as well as Sustrans national cycle routes 
(identified as a secondary constraint in the Capacity of Mid Sussex 
District to Accommodate Development Study, paragraph 4.2) and other 
recreational routes.
The South Downs National Park Access Network and Accessible Natural Green Space Study assessed 
green infrastructure and access across the wider area including the entirety of West Sussex and the 
National Park. In Mid Sussex the study considers the potential for recreational pressure on the District’s 
Accessible Natural Green Spaces (ANGs) from nearby settlements of Brighton, Crawley and Shoreham 
(which lack desired ANG provision) to be the main cross-boundary influence (Supporting Information, page 
141). The protection and enhancement of Rights of Way and other recreational routes, including signage, 
is important therefore not only to maintain and improve access and provision for Mid Sussex residents but 
also for the benefit of the wider region.
Two Sustrans national cycle routes cross the District:4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     71• NCN21 (Worth Way and Forest Way) Crawley to East Sussex via East Grinstead
• NCN20 (along the A23) London to Brighton via Crawley.
DP22: Rights of Way and other Recreational Routes
Strategic Objectives: 5) To create and maintain easily accessible green infrastructure, green corridors and 
spaces around and within the towns and villages to act as wildlife corridors, sustainable transport links and 
leisure and recreational routes; and 15) To create places that encourage a healthy and enjoyable lifestyle 
by the provision of first class cultural and sporting facilities, informal leisure space and the opportunity to 
walk, cycle or ride to common destinations.
Evidence Base: Neighbourhood Plans; West Sussex Transport Plan 2011-2026; West Sussex Rights of 
Way Improvement Plan, South Downs National Park Access Network and Accessible Natural Green Space 
Study, Capacity of Mid Sussex District to Accommodate Development Study.  
Rights of way, Sustrans national cycle routes and recreational routes will be protected by ensuring 
development does not result in the loss of or does not adversely affect a right of way or other 
recreational routes unless a new route is provided which is of at least an equivalent value and 
which does not sever important routes.
Access to the countryside will be encouraged by:
• Ensuring that (where appropriate) development provides safe and convenient links to rights  
 of way and other recreational routes;
• Supporting the provision of additional routes within and between settlements that contribute  
 to providing a joined up network of routes where possible; 
• Where appropriate, encouraging making new or existing rights of way multi-functional to   
	 allow	for	benefits	for	a	range	of	users.	(Note:	‘multi-functional	will	generally	mean	able	to	be		
 used by walkers, cyclists and horse-riders).
DP23: Communication Infrastructure
The District Plan supports improved digital connectivity, including the provision of 
high-speed broadband and 4G across the District, due to the benefits that it will 
bring to both business and residents in the District. The District Council supports 
the West Sussex – Better Connected Initiative, which aims to make it possible 
for 90% of the County to connect to Next Generation Access broadband (at least 
24Mbps) and the remaining 10% hardest to reach areas with access to speed 
of at least 2Mbps. The adoption of a single County-wide approach to broadband 
delivery supports the objectives of the District Plan and the Gatwick Diamond 
Strategy’s ‘CONNECT’ objectives.
The Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan (March 2014) also seeks to 
improve digital connectivity across the District, including the delivery of ultrafast 
broadband for the proposed Science and Technology Park in Burgess Hill.
In accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework (paragraph 43), the District Plan supports 
the expansion of electronic communications networks and infrastructure, currently including high speed 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     72broadband and 4G. Landscape guidelines for telecommunications developments have been prepared 
on a county-wide basis in the Strategy for the West Sussex Landscape (2005, paragraph 4.7) and will be 
referred to when implementing this policy.
The initial stage of the Government’s Public Sector Telecommunications and Digital Infrastructure review 
has uncovered capacity in the existing publicly owned network across the country. In some cases it may not 
be necessary to build further infrastructure and it may be possible to use spare capacity to supplement and 
enhance existing provision and connectivity. Better use of existing infrastructure and avoiding unnecessary 
development is often the most sustainable solution.
DP23: Communication Infrastructure
Strategic Objectives: 6) To ensure that development is accompanied by the necessary infrastructure in the 
right place at the right time that supports development and sustainable communities.  This includes the 
provision of efficient and sustainable transport networks; 7) To promote a place which is attractive to a full 
range of businesses, and where local enterprise thrives; and 8) To provide opportunities for people to live 
and work within their communities, reducing the need for commuting.
Evidence Base: Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan, Greater Brighton City Deal, Gatwick Diamond 
Strategy; Mid Sussex Economic Development Strategy, A Strategy for the West Sussex Landscape.
The	Council	will	encourage	the	incorporation	of	digital	infrastructure	including	fibre	to	premises,	in	
major new housing, employment and retail development.12 
The expansion of the electronic communication network to the towns and rural areas of the District 
will be supported. 
When considering proposals for new telecommunication equipment the following criteria will be 
taken into account:
• The location and appearance of the proposed apparatus and associated structures should  
 seek to minimise impact on the visual amenity, character or appearance of the surrounding  
 area.  On buildings, apparatus and associated structures should be located and designed in  
 order to seek to minimise impact to the external appearance of the host building; 
• New telecommunication equipment should not have an unacceptable effect on sensitive   
 areas, including areas of ecological interest, areas of landscape importance, Areas   
 of Outstanding Natural Beauty, the South Downs National Park, archaeological sites,   
 conservation areas or buildings of architectural or historic interest and should be sensitively 
 designed and sited to avoid damage to the local landscape character;
• Preference will be for use to be made of existing sites rather than the provision of new sites. 
 
When considering applications for telecommunications development, regard will be given to   
the operational requirements of telecommunications networks and the technical limitations   
of the technology.
12 Guidance to developers on how this can be achieved and the grants available can be accessed at 
http://www.hampshiresuperfastbroadband.com/residents/new-sites/4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     73DP24: Leisure and Cultural Facilities and Activities
The National Planning Policy Framework (section 8), recognises the 
important role that the planning system has in promoting healthy 
communities. A strategic objective of the Plan is to create places that 
encourage healthy lifestyles by the provision of first class cultural and 
sporting facilities, informal leisure space and the opportunity to walk, 
cycle or ride to common destinations. The District Council has adopted 
a Leisure and Cultural Strategy to increase participation in arts and 
culture, sport and physical activity of those living and working in the 
District.
The Mid Sussex Playing Pitch Strategy (2015) identifies that it is 
essential for existing facilities to be retained and improved in order to 
meet increasing demand as a result of additional housing and population growth. 
This policy supports the provision of additional facilities as well as protecting existing facilities.
The activities and facilities referred to in this policy include:
• Allotments
• Artificial turf and grass playing pitches and ancillary facilities
• Cinemas, theatres and performance spaces
• Gyms, sports halls, swimming pools and fitness facilities
• Kickabout, skate parks, cycling and BMX tracks
• Leisure facilities such as bowling, ice rinks, outdoor activities
• Museums and galleries
• Open space, parks and nature conservation sites
• Play areas
• Public art
• Tennis, netball and multi-use courts
DP24: Leisure and Cultural Facilities and Activities
Strategic Objectives: 6) To ensure that development is accompanied by the necessary infrastructure in the 
right place at the right time that supports development and sustainable communities.  This includes the 
provision of efficient and sustainable transport networks; and 15) To create places that encourage a healthy 
and enjoyable lifestyle by the provision of first class cultural and sporting facilities, informal leisure space 
and the opportunity to walk, cycle or ride to common destinations. 
Evidence Base: Leisure and Cultural Strategy for Mid Sussex; Assessment of Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation; Mid Sussex Playing Pitch Strategy.
Development	that	provides	new	and/or	enhanced	leisure	and	cultural	activities	and	facilities,	
including allotments, in accordance with the strategic aims of the Leisure and Cultural Strategy for 
Mid Sussex will be supported. 
 
The on-site provision of new leisure and cultural facilities, including the provision of play areas 
and equipment will be required for all new residential developments, where appropriate in scale 
and	impact,	including	making	land	available	for	this	purpose.	Planning	conditions	and/or	planning	
obligations will be used to secure such facilities. Details about the provision, including standards, 
of new leisure and cultural facilities will be set out in a Supplementary Planning Document.   4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     74Sites	for	appropriate	leisure	and	cultural	facilities	to	meet	local	needs	will	be	identified	through	
Neighbourhood Plans or a Site Allocations Development Plan Document produced by the District 
Council.
Proposals that involve the loss of cultural facilities, open space, sports and recreational buildings 
and	land,	including	playing	fields,	will	not	be	supported	unless:
• an assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the cultural facility, open   
 space, sports land or recreational building to be surplus to requirements; or
• the loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or better  
 provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable location; or
• the development is for alternative sports and recreational provision, the needs for which   
 clearly outweigh the loss.
DP25: Community Facilities and Local Services
Community facilities and local services are important and should be 
retained where possible and provided alongside new development.
The Mid Sussex Infrastructure Delivery Plan sets out the community 
infrastructure required to support future growth in the district, and why 
this is needed. New community facilities and improvements to existing 
facilities form an important part of these requirements and Town and 
Parish Councils have provided this information, supplemented by 
infrastructure providers and other consultees. 
The community facilities and local services referred to in this policy 
include:
• Car parks
• Cemeteries and burial grounds
• Education facilities
• Emergency services
• Healthcare facilities
• Libraries
• Local shops including banks and post offices
• Places of worship
• Public conveniences
• Public houses
• Specialist accommodation and care homes
• Sports pavilions 
• Village halls and community centres
DP25: Community Facilities and Local Services
Strategic Objectives: 6) To ensure that development is accompanied by the necessary infrastructure in 
the right place at the right time that supports development and sustainable communities. This includes the 
provision of efficient and sustainable transport networks; and 12) To support sustainable communities which 
are safe, healthy and inclusive.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     75Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
The provision or improvement of community facilities and local services that contribute to creating 
sustainable communities will be supported.
Where proposals involve the loss of a community facility, (including those facilities where the loss 
would	reduce	the	community’s	ability	to	meet	its	day-to-day	needs	locally)	evidence	will	need	to	be	
provided that demonstrates:
• that the use is no longer viable; or
• that there is an existing duplicate facility in the locality which can accommodate the impact  
 of the loss of the facility; or
• that a replacement facility will be provided in the locality.
The on-site provision of new community facilities will be required on larger developments, where 
practicable	and	viable,	including	making	land	available	for	this	purpose.	Planning	conditions	and/
or planning obligations will be used to secure on-site facilities.  Further information about the 
provision, including standards, of community facilities will be set out in a Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
 
Community	facilities	and	local	services	to	meet	local	needs	will	be	identified	through	
Neighbourhood Plans or a Site Allocations Development Plan Document produced by the District 
Council.
 
Nature and Quality of Development – Design
 
DP26: Character and Design
Mid Sussex has a high quality built and natural environment and this 
requires the design of new development to respect the character of 
towns and villages as well as the character of the buildings. The policy 
requires high quality in design with new development that contributes 
positively to the private and public realm (including streets and 
open spaces), protects valued townscapes, and creates accessible 
environments. 
In relation to Gatwick Airport, any proposed development would need 
to comply with Aerodrome Safeguarding requirements to ensure that 
the operational integrity and safety of the airport are not compromised. 
For example there may be restrictions on height, on the detailed 
design of buildings or on development which might create an aircraft 
‘bird strike’ hazard. 
DP26: Character and Design
Strategic Objectives: 2) To promote well located and designed development that reflects the District’s 
distinctive towns and villages, retains their separate identity and character and prevents coalescence; 4) To 
protect valued characteristics of the built environment for their historical and visual qualities; 12) To support 
sustainable communities which are safe, healthy and inclusive; and 14) To create environments that are 
accessible to all members of the community. 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     76Evidence Base: CABE Good Practice Guidance.
All development and surrounding spaces, including alterations and extensions to existing buildings 
and	replacement	dwellings,	will	be	well	designed	and	reflect	the	distinctive	character	of	the	towns	
and villages while being sensitive to the countryside.  All applicants will be required to demonstrate 
that development:
• is of high quality design and layout and includes appropriate landscaping and greenspace;
•	 contributes	positively	to,	and	clearly	defines,	public	and	private	realms	and	should	normally		
 be designed with active building frontages facing streets and public open spaces to animate  
 and provide natural surveillance;
• creates a sense of place while addressing the character and scale of the surrounding   
 buildings and landscape;
• protects open spaces, trees and gardens that contribute to the character of the area;
• protects valued townscapes and the separate identity and character of towns and villages;
•	 does	not	cause	significant	harm	to	the	amenities	of	existing	nearby	residents	and	future			
 occupants of new dwellings, including taking account of the impact on privacy, outlook,   
	 daylight	and	sunlight,	and	noise,	air	and	light	pollution	(see	Policy	DP29);
• creates a pedestrian-friendly layout that is safe,  well connected, legible and accessible;
• incorporates well integrated parking that does not dominate the street environment,   
 particularly where high density housing is proposed;
• positively addresses sustainability considerations in the layout and the building design;
• take the opportunity to encourage community interaction by creating layouts with a   
	 strong	neighbourhood	focus/centre;	larger	(300+	unit)	schemes	will	also	normally	be		 	
 expected to incorporate a mixed use element;
• optimises the potential of the site to accommodate development.
DP27: Dwelling Space Standards  
The purpose of this policy is to set minimum space standards for all 
dwellings to ensure that the floor area of new homes and associated 
storage space is sufficient in size to secure a satisfactory standard of 
accommodation for their residents. In March 2015 the Government 
published new national technical standards for new dwellings which 
precluded local planning authorities from imposing technical standards 
beyond the nationally described space standard. This standard can 
only be applied where a local planning authority has a policy in place to 
trigger its application.
Dwelling space standards ensure that all residential development 
in Mid Sussex is of an acceptable size for the wellbeing of future 
occupants, that there is appropriate circulation space and that homes 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     77are highly functional in terms of typical day to day needs. The space standard helps to achieve sustainable 
development, encouraging  useable and flexible living environments in which residents can undertake a 
range of activities such as bringing up families, working from home and communal and social activities, as 
well as providing for residents’ changing needs by taking into account the spatial implications of providing 
improved accessibility and adaptability, particularly for older or less mobile people, including meeting the 
requirements of residential building accessibility standards in Building Regulations Approved Document M 
(Volume 1).
The District Council identified a need for such a standard and adopted a Supplementary Planning 
Document relating to Dwelling Space Standards in March 2009 and those standards have been used 
successfully since this time. The typical costs of building to these standards have been reflected in the Mid 
Sussex Whole Plan and CIL Viability Assessment (2016).
DP27: Dwelling Space Standards
Strategic Objectives: 12) To support sustainable communities which are safe, healthy and inclusive; 13) To 
provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of the community; and 14) To 
create environments that are accessible to all members of the community.
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Sustainable Communities Strategy 2008-2018, DCLG Technical housing 
standards – nationally described space standard, March 2015; Mid Sussex Whole Plan and CIL Viability 
Assessment (2016).
Minimum	nationally	described	space	standards	for	internal	floor	space	and	storage	space	will	be	
applied to all new residential development. These standards are applicable to:
• Open market dwellings and affordable housing;
• The full range of dwelling types; and
• Dwellings created through subdivision or conversion.
All dwellings will be required to meet these standards, other than in exceptional circumstances, 
where clear evidence will need to be provided to show that the internal form or special features 
prevent some of the requirements being met.
DP28: Accessibility
Accessibility is about the ease and convenience with which a place 
can be used by people. This policy applies to both homes and places, 
including areas of open space and transport infrastructure. 
  
The District has an ageing population and residents and employees 
who need safe and easy access to buildings and spaces. The District 
Council has worked with local voluntary organisations that seek 
to improve access for the whole community including those with 
disabilities or mobility problems, for example, wheelchair users and 
people with physical and/or sensory disabilities. During the preparation 
of the District Plan, the groups have engaged in the process and this 
has led to the inclusion of the policy in the Plan.
 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     78The policy below seeks to ensure that accessibility is considered holistically when designing places.
Revisions to Part M of the Building Regulations came into effect in October 2015. These introduced optional 
additional technical requirements for accessibility, exceeding the minimum standards required by Building 
Regulations where a local planning authority has a policy in place based on evidence that a higher level of 
accessibility and adaptability in new residential development is viable and necessary to meet current and 
future housing needs. 
The Council has considered housing needs through a number of studies that inform the assessment of 
housing and economic development needs. This has demonstrated that a high and rising proportion of 
residents are in need of the level of accessibility provided by Approved Document M - Category 2 dwellings, 
broadly equivalent to the former Lifetime Homes Standards. This requires new residential development to 
provide step-free access to and within the entrance storey of the dwelling.
The policy makes provision for 20% of all new developments of 5 or more dwellings to be built to optional 
additional standard M4(2). The housing requirements of groups with particular needs will be monitored and 
the Plan will be reviewed in this respect if evidence clearly supports a change to this level of provision.
The Mid Sussex Whole Plan and CIL Viability Assessment (2016) accounts for the cost of meeting 
Category 2 Accessible and Adaptable dwellings in the study construction costs. This demonstrates that 
the optional requirement is achievable although there is a risk that the need for lift provision may create a 
development viability issue for small flatted residential buildings. A threshold has been applied for this type 
of development below which the Category 1 (visitable dwellings) access standard will apply. The provision 
of a lift in a block of flats was not a Lifetime Homes requirement.
DP28: Accessibility  
Strategic Objectives: 12) To support sustainable communities which are safe, healthy and inclusive; 13) To 
provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of the community; and 14) To 
create environments that are accessible to all members of the community.   
Evidence Base: CABE Good Practice Guidance; Mid Sussex Whole Plan and CIL Viability Assessment 
(2016); DCLG Technical Housing Standards – nationally described space standard, March 2015; Housing 
and Economic Development Needs Assessment. 
All development will be required to meet and maintain high standards of accessibility so that all 
users can use them safely and easily.
This will apply to all development, including changes of use, refurbishments and extensions, open 
spaces, the public realm and transport infrastructure, and will be demonstrated by the applicant.
 
With regard to listed buildings, meeting standards of accessibility should ensure that the impact on 
the integrity of the building is minimised.
Accessible and Adaptable Dwellings
Developments of 5 or more dwellings will be expected to make provision for 20% of dwellings to 
meet Category 2 – accessible and adaptable dwellings under Building Regulations – Approved 
Document M Requirement M4(2), with the following exceptions:
1) Where new dwellings are created by a change of use;
2)	 Where	the	scheme	is	for	flatted	residential	buildings	of	fewer	than	10	dwellings;
3)	 Where	specific	factors	such	as	site	topography	make	such	standards	unachievable	by		 	
	 practicable	and/	or	viable	means;
4)	 Where	a	scheme	is	being	proposed	which	is	specifically	intended	for	the	needs	of	particular	4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     79individuals or groups, where a greater proportion may be appropriate.
Wheelchair-user dwellings
 
Category 3 – Wheelchair-user dwellings under Building Regulations – Approved Document M 
Requirement M4(3) will be required for a reasonable proportion of affordable homes, generally 4%, 
dependent on the suitability of the site and the need at the time.
The Requirement will also apply to private extra care, assisted living or other such schemes 
designed for frailer older people or others with disabilities and those in need of care or support 
services.
DP29:	Noise,	 Air	and	Light	Pollution
Mid Sussex has a high quality environment and its residents value 
tranquillity and freedom from unpleasant noises, smells or light glare. 
New development in the District needs to be managed so that the 
local economy can prosper within clear guidelines and businesses 
can operate efficiently alongside homes without adversely affecting 
the environment. Soil quality must be protected in accordance with 
Policy DP38: Biodiversity.
Where development is being proposed within 800m of a sewage 
treatment works, the developer should liaise with the statutory 
sewerage/water undertaker to consider whether an odour impact assessment is required as part of the 
promotion of the site and potential planning application submission. The odour impact assessment would 
determine whether the proposed development would result in adverse amenity impact for new occupiers, 
as those new occupiers would be located in closer proximity to a sewage treatment works.  Where any 
such assessment identifies that there is an odour impact for proposed development and no improvements 
are programmed by the water company, the developer should contact the water company to agree what 
improvements are required and how they will be funded prior to any occupation of the development.
Sussex local authorities have developed guidance on noise to provide advice for developers and their 
consultants when making a planning application. This guidance can be viewed at 
www.midsussex.gov.uk/planningpolicy	
Where development is being proposed within 15m of a pumping station, the developer should liaise with 
the statutory sewerage/water undertaker to consider whether an odour and/or noise and/or vibration 
impact assessment is required as part of the promotion of the site and potential planning application 
submission. Any impact assessment would determine whether the proposed development would result in 
adverse amenity impact for new occupiers, as those new occupiers would be located in closer proximity 
to a pumping station. Where any such assessment identifies that there is an odour impact for proposed 
development and no improvements are programmed by the water company, the developer should contact 
the water company to agree what improvements are required and how they will be funded prior to any 
occupation of the development.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan             80DP29:	Noise,	 Air	and	Light	Pollution
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 
and 12) To support sustainable communities which are safe, healthy and inclusive.
Evidence Base: Data held by Environmental Health, Air Quality Action Plan – Stonepound Crossroads, 
Hassocks.
The environment, including nationally designated environmental sites, nationally protected 
landscapes, areas of nature conservation or geological interest, wildlife habitats, and the quality 
of	people’s	life	will	be	protected	from	unacceptable	levels	of	noise,	light	and	air	pollution	by	only	
permitting development where:
Noise pollution:
• It  is designed, located and controlled to minimise the impact of noise on health and quality  
 of life, neighbouring properties and the surrounding area;
•	 If	it	is	likely	to	generate	significant	levels	of	noise	it	incorporates	appropriate	noise		 	
 attenuation measures;
Noise sensitive development, such as residential, will not be permitted in close proximity to 
existing or proposed development generating high levels of noise unless adequate sound 
insulation measures, as supported by a noise assessment are incorporated within the development.
In appropriate circumstances, the applicant will be required to provide:
• an assessment of the impact of noise generated by a proposed development; or
• an assessment of the effect of noise by an existing noise source upon a proposed   
 development;
Light pollution:
• The impact on local amenity, intrinsically dark landscapes and nature conservation areas of  
	 artificial	lighting	proposals	(including	floodlighting)	is	minimised,	in	terms	of	intensity	and		
	 number	of	fittings;
•	 The	applicant	can	demonstrate	good	design	including	fittings	to	restrict	emissions	from			
 proposed lighting schemes;
Air Pollution:
• It does not cause unacceptable levels of air pollution;
• Development on land adjacent to an existing use which generates air pollution or odour   
 would not cause any adverse effects on the proposed development or can be mitigated to  
 reduce exposure to poor air quality to recognised and acceptable levels;
• Development proposals (where appropriate) are consistent with Air Quality Management   
 Plans.
The degree of the impact of noise and light pollution from new development or change of use is 
likely to be greater in rural locations, especially where it is in or close to specially designated areas 
and sites.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     81Nature and Quality of Development – Housing  
DP30: Housing Mix
The 2009 Northern West Sussex SHMA and Update (2012) established 
that there is not a direct relationship between household size and 
housing size, particularly in the market sector. The Update concludes 
that broad requirements for different types and sizes of new market 
housing should be set whilst taking into account a number of factors 
including broader economic and demographic changes. 
The North West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment Update 
(2012) sets out that the majority of household growth is expected 
to result from increasing single person households within the area. 
Whilst a high proportion of these are existing older households who already have housing, there will be a 
significant need for smaller dwelling types over the plan period, with the majority of new households forming 
(70%) being one or two person households with a very high proportion of need arising for elderly persons 
(aged 75 years and over), with the majority of such households also being one or two persons. A significant 
proportion of future household growth will also be for family sized homes at around 30% of projected total 
growth, with 50% of this requiring smaller family sized homes of 2-3 bedrooms and 50% of this requiring 
larger family sized homes of 3+ bedrooms.
The Council supports the provision of flexible general market housing and specialist accommodation or 
care appropriate for older persons through both public and private sector provision. Providing suitable and 
alternative housing for older people can free up houses that are otherwise under occupied.
Whilst more attention may need to be paid towards matters of design, neighbouring land uses and 
security, schemes falling within Use Class C2 are considered to usually have a lesser impact on existing 
communities, for instance through lower vehicle usage levels and reduced parking requirements. For this 
reason, provided the scheme makes efficient use of land, any site considered appropriate for housing 
development would be positively considered for such older person accommodation through the decision 
making process.
Specialist accommodation and care homes falling within Use Class C2 form a very specific part of 
the housing needs market. Supported accommodation such as this falls within the definition of social 
infrastructure which also includes community facilities and local services including buildings13 . Policy 
DP25: Community Facilities and Local Services therefore applies to the protection of existing specialist 
accommodation and care home facilities falling within Use Class C2. Under this Policy, the loss of such 
facilities for the redevelopment to alternative uses would be prevented unless the scheme or a replacement 
scheme was proved to be no longer viable; or that there is an existing duplicate facility in the locality that 
can accommodate the impact of the loss of the facility; or that a replacement facility will be provided in 
the locality. It is granted that some existing older specialist accommodation and care homes facilities are 
relatively small in size, and if such schemes were closed on grounds of the suitability for their intended 
use, then there might be significant doubt on the viability of redevelopment of the site to another specialist 
scheme. In such cases, the Council will consider alternative provision such as accessible flats for older 
people.
The Council also makes policy provision through Policy DP28: Accessibility to ensure that new residential 
development provides accessible and adaptable dwellings and wheelchair-user dwelling to support the 
changes and needs of individuals and families at different stage of life.
 
The Mid Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs Assessment 
provides information on the number of pitches required to meet the need for permanent Gypsy and 
Traveller accommodation in the district. Sites to meet this identified need are being delivered through a 
Traveller Sites Allocations Document (see Policy DP33: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople).
13  See also Mid Sussex Infrastructure Delivery Plan4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     82Work on the Allocations Document has highlighted the difficulties in the delivery of permanent Gypsy and 
Traveller sites and underlined that there could be a shortage of suitable sites, should the identified need 
for such sites increase unexpectedly over the plan period; and underlines that the primary provision of 
permanent Gypsy and Traveller sites is best undertaken in way that can be master planned into future, 
currently unplanned strategic sites. Policy provision for such an approach is already supported in this 
District Plan through Policy DP9: Strategic allocation to the north and north-west of Burgess Hill; Policy 
DP10: Strategic Allocation to the east of Pease Pottage; Policy DP11: Strategic Allocation to the north of 
Clayton Mills, Hassocks; and within the emerging Traveller Sites Allocations Document. 
DP30: Housing Mix
Strategic Objectives: 13) To provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of 
the community.   
Evidence Base: Parish Housing Needs Assessments; Housing and Economic Development Needs 
Assessment; Mid Sussex District Council Common Housing Register; Mid Sussex Self Build Register; Mid 
Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs Assessment; Northern 
West Sussex Affordable Housing Needs Update Report (2014); Northern West Sussex – Mid Sussex: 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment Update Report (2012); Strategic Housing Market Assessment for 
Mid Sussex (2009).
To support sustainable communities, housing development will:
• provide a mix of dwelling types and sizes from new development (including affordable   
	 housing)	that	reflects	current	and	future	local	housing	needs;	
• meet the current and future needs of different groups in the community including older   
 people, vulnerable groups and those wishing to build their own homes. This could   
 include the provision of bungalows and other forms of suitable accommodation, and   
 the provision of serviced self-build plots; and
• on strategic sites, provide permanent pitches for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling   
 Showpeople, as evidenced by the Mid Sussex District Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling   
 Showpeople Accommodation Assessment or such other evidence as is available at the 
	 time;	or	the	provision	of	an	equivalent	financial	contribution	towards	off-site	provision	
 (or part thereof if some on-site provision is made) if it can be demonstrated that a suitable,  
 available and achievable site (or sites) can be provided and made operational 
 within an appropriate timescale, commensurable with the overall scale of residential 
 development proposed by the strategic development; and serviced plots for self-build 
	 homes	where	a	need	for	such	accommodation	is	identified.
•	 If	a	shortfall	is	identified	in	the	supply	of	specialist	accommodation	and	care	homes	falling		
 within Use Class C2 to meet demand in the District, the Council will consider allocating 
 sites for such use through a Site Allocations Document, produced by the District Council.
 
Evidence of housing need will be based on the best available evidence (including local evidence 
provided to support Neighbourhood Plans).4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     83DP31: Affordable Housing
The Mid Sussex Housing and Economic Development Needs 
Assessment (HEDNA), drawing upon the Northern West Sussex 
Affordable Housing Needs Update Report (2014), provides the 
underlying justification for requiring the provision of affordable housing 
on residential development through affordable housing policies. The 
Update Report indicates that 44.2% of newly forming households in Mid 
Sussex cannot afford to rent or buy on the open market.
In setting affordable housing policies, the evidence of affordable 
housing need must be combined with other information, including 
the viability and deliverability of housing development to set a level of affordable housing that is realistic 
and deliverable. The Mid Sussex Whole Plan and Community Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment 
(2016) applies the likely costs of new housing developments, including affordable housing and other policy 
requirements such as space standards, environmental policies and infrastructure contributions (Section 106 
and/or CIL). This provides conclusive evidence that the provision of 30% affordable housing is viable.
The requirement for the provision of affordable housing applies to all types of residential development 
falling within Use Class C3. This includes changes of use, mixed use sites that incorporate an element 
of residential development, sheltered and extra care housing schemes (falling within Use Class C3), 
conversions and any other developments where there is an increase in the number of residential units on 
the site.
Maintaining the number of affordable homes in the district is equally as important as delivering new 
affordable housing. Where existing affordable housing, or sites previously used for affordable housing 
are to be redeveloped, the Council will expect the same number of affordable units to be replaced on the 
site, with the scheme reflecting current mix and tenure requirements. The Council is aware that in some 
exceptional circumstances, such provision may not be feasible and variations in overall numbers, tenure, 
size or location, taking account of site specific circumstances, could be negotiated. Independent viability 
evidence may be required in such circumstances.
DP31: Affordable Housing
Strategic Objectives: 13) To provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of 
the community.   
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex District Council Common Housing Register; Parish Housing Needs 
Assessments; Northern West Sussex Affordable Housing Needs Update Report (2014); Mid Sussex 
Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment; Mid Sussex Whole Plan and Community 
Infrastructure Levy Viability Assessment (2016).
The Council will seek:
1. the provision of a minimum of 30% on-site affordable housing for all residential    
	 developments	providing	11	dwellings	or	more,	or	a	maximum	combined	gross	floorspace14   
 of more than 1,000m2; 
2. for residential developments in the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty providing  
 6 – 10 dwellings, a commuted payment towards off-site provision, equivalent to providing  
 30% on-site affordable housing;
3. on sites where the most recent use has been affordable housing, as a minimum, the same  
 number of affordable homes should be re-provided, in accordance with current mix and   
 tenure requirements;
14  Measured as gross internal floorspace4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     844. a mix of tenure of affordable housing, normally approximately 75% social or affordable   
 rented homes, with the remaining 25% for intermediate homes, unless the best available   
 evidence supports a different mix; and
5. free serviced land for the affordable housing.
All affordable housing should be integrated with market housing and meet national technical 
standards for housing including “optional requirements” set out in this District Plan (Policies 
DP27: Dwelling Space Standards; DP28: Accessibility and DP42: Water Infrastructure and the Water 
Environment); or any other such standard which supersedes these.
Proposals	that	do	not	meet	these	requirements	will	be	refused	unless	significant	clear	evidence	
demonstrates	to	the	Council’s	satisfaction	that	the	site	cannot	support	the	required	affordable	
housing from a viability and deliverability perspective. Viability should be set out in an independent 
viability assessment on terms agreed by the relevant parties, including the Council, and funded 
by	the	developer.	This	will	involve	an	open	book	approach.	The	Council’s	approach	to	financial	
viability, alongside details on tenure mix and the provision of affordable housing will be set out in a 
Supplementary Planning Document.
The	policy	will	be	monitored	and	kept	under	review	having	regard	to	the	Council’s	Housing	Strategy	
and any changes to evidence of housing needs.
DP32: Rural Exception Sites
Rural exception sites are sites used for affordable housing in perpetuity, 
usually on sites that would not normally be granted permission for 
housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the needs of the local 
community by accommodating households who are either current 
residents or have an existing family or employment connection.
The Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
Update (2012) assesses rural housing within the area. Paragraphs 5.11 
and 5.26 conclude that the Council should work with parishes to identify 
sites specifically for affordable housing that will meet local needs. It also 
identifies that the prices and mix of housing contribute to the identified 
need and affordability pressures in many rural areas.
DP32: Rural Exception Sites
Strategic Objectives: 13) To provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of 
the community.  
Evidence Base: Parish Housing Needs Assessments; Town and Parish Council submissions; Housing and 
Economic Development Needs Assessment; Mid Sussex District Council Housing Register.
The development of rural exception sites for affordable housing will be permitted provided:
I. the development comprises 100% affordable housing;
II.	 the	housing	is	to	meet	local	needs	justified	by	the	best	available	evidence;
III. the occupancy of the homes is restricted in perpetuity to those with a genuine local need for  
 affordable housing; 
IV. the scale of the development respects the setting, form and character of the settlement and  
 surrounding landscape; and
V. it is adjacent to, or in close proximity to a rural settlement containing local services.
 Where it can be clearly demonstrated through evidence that the site cannot support a   4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     85 scheme comprising 100% affordable housing from a viability perspective, the Council will  
 consider an element of open market housing, limited to that required to facilitate    
 scheme viability, to a maximum of 20% of the overall scheme, provided that:
• The requirements of ii), iv) and v) can be met for the overall scheme and for the affordable  
 housing element i) and iii); and
• The new development physically integrates the open market and affordable housing, which  
	 should	seek	to	be	‘tenure	blind’ 	and	makes	best	use	of	the	land.
Details of the evidence required to justify an element of open market housing will be set out in a 
Supplementary Planning Document. 
The delivery of rural exception sites will normally be led by Parish Councils, through planning 
applications, Community Right to Build schemes, Neighbourhood Development Orders or through 
Neighbourhood Plans.
DP33: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
The Government’s Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (2015), requires 
Local Planning Authorities to set pitch targets for Gypsies and Travellers 
and plot targets for Travelling Showpeople to address the identified 
accommodation needs of Travellers in their area.
The Mid Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople 
Accommodation Needs Assessment was first produced in 2013 and 
updated in 2014 and 2016. The Assessment provides information on 
the amount of permanent Gypsy and Traveller accommodation required 
in the district for the period to 2031.  The 2016 update takes account of 
the revised version of Planning Policy for Travellers Sites (PPTS) (2015) 
that includes a change to the definition of Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople for planning purposes15.
 
The Local Development Scheme sets out the timetable for the preparation of a Traveller Sites Allocations 
Document which will provide sufficient sites to satisfy local need for permanent Gypsy and Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople accommodation16.
DP33: Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
Strategic Objectives: 13) To provide the amount and type of housing that meets the needs of all sectors of 
the community. 
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs 
Assessment.
The Mid Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Assessment  does not identify any 
need for permanent pitches and plots for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople who 
still travel for the period up to 203117.
15  See Annex 1 – Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015)
16  For Gypsies and Travellers who meet and do not meet the definition of a Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showperson for 
planning purposes, provided in Annex 1- Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015) i.e. Gypsies and Travellers who still 
travel and settled Gypsies and Travellers who no longer travel
17 For Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople who meet the definition of a Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showperson 
for planning purposes, provided in Annex 1- Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015)4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     86The	Assessment	identifies	the	need	to	accommodate	23	households	for	settled	Gypsies	and	
Travellers for the period up to 2031 and does not identify any need to provide sites for Travelling 
Showpeople who no longer travel18.
To	ensure	that	a	sufficient	amount	of	permanent	culturally	suitable	housing	for	settled	Gypsies,	
Travellers	and	Travelling	Showpeople	is	delivered	to	meet	identified	needs	within	an	appropriate	
timescale, the Council makes provision for:
• the allocation of pitches within the strategic allocation to the north and north-west of   
	 Burgess	Hill	or	the	provision	of	an	equivalent	financial	contribution	towards	the	off-site	
 provision of pitches if it can be demonstrated that a suitable, available and achievable 
 site (or sites) can be provided and made operational within an appropriate timescale 
	 (Policy	DP9:	Strategic	 Allocation	to	the	north	and	north-west	of	Burgess	Hill	refers);
• the allocation of pitches within the strategic allocation to the east of Pease Pottage; or the  
	 provision	of	an	equivalent	financial	contribution	towards	the	off-site	provision	of	pitches	
 if it can be demonstrated that a suitable, available and achievable site (or sites) can be 
 provided and made operational within an appropriate timescale (Policy DP10: Strategic 
 Allocation to the east of Pease Pottage refers); 
• the allocation of pitches within the strategic allocation to the north of Clayton Mills,   
	 Hassocks;	or	the	provision	of	an	equivalent	financial	contribution	towards	the	off-site	
 provision of pitches if it can be demonstrated that a suitable, available and achievable site 
 (or sites) can be provided and made operational within an appropriate timescale (Policy 
 DP11: Strategic Allocation to the north of Clayton Mills, Hassocks refers); and
• the provision of such pitches on strategic sites (Policy DP30: Housing Mix refers)
 The Council is progressing a Traveller Sites Allocations Development Plan Document to 
 allocate further sites over the Plan period as required. 
The provision of permanent accommodation to meet the changing needs of current and future 
Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showperson households will be monitored to ensure a suitable 
supply of such sites is provided at the appropriate time.
The Mid Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Assessment does not indicate 
a need to consider transit provision at this time as there is an operational public transit site in 
Chichester. Levels of unauthorised encampments in Mid Sussex by Gypsies and Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople will be monitored over the plan period to identify any additional requirement 
for such provision.
Existing Traveller sites will be safeguarded for Gypsy and Traveller use  at: 
• Fairplace Hill Caravan Site, Burgess Hill 
• Bedelands Caravan Site, Burgess Hill 
•	 Horsgate	Caravan	Site,	Cuckfield	
•	 Walstead	Caravan	Site,	near	Lindfield	
•	 Highfields,	near	Warninglid	
• Pitts Head (Woodside Park), near Warninglid 
• Marigold Farm Caravan Site, near Ansty 
Planning permission will not be granted for an alternative use on a safeguarded site unless an 
alternative,	replacement	site	has	been	identified	and	developed	to	provide	facilities	of	an	equivalent	
or improved standard (including its location) whilst there remains a need for such sites as 
evidenced by the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment or the best available evidence.
18  For Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople who do not meet the definition of a Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling 
Showperson for planning purposes, provided in Annex 1- Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015)4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     87Any new or extensions to existing Gypsy and Traveller or Travelling Showpeople sites19  granted 
permanent planning permission shall also be safeguarded for such use.
New Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople sites20, and extensions to existing sites, including 
transit sites, will be permitted provided:
•	 The	site	or	extension	satisfies	a	clearly	defined	need,	as	evidenced	by	the	Mid	Sussex	Gypsy		
 and Traveller Accommodation Assessment or the best available evidence;
• The site is reasonably accessible to schools, shops, health and other local services and   
 community facilities;
•	 The	development	is	appropriately	located	and	designed	to/	or	capable	of	being	designed			
 to ensure good quality living accommodation for residents and that the local environment  
 (noise and air quality) of the site would not have a detrimental impact on the health and 
 well-being of the Travellers; 
• The sites are compatible with neighbouring land uses, and minimise impact on adjacent   
 uses and built form and landscape character;
• In rural and semi-rural areas sites should not dominate the nearest settled community; 
•	 Any	site	within	the	7km	zone	of	influence	around	 Ashdown	Forest	will	require	an	appropriate		
 assessment under the Habitats Regulations to be undertaken and appropriate mitigation   
 provided as required (Policy DP17: Ashdown Forest Special Protection Area (SPA)   
 and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) refers); and
• In the case of proposals within the High Weald AONB, Policy DP16: High Weald Area of   
 Outstanding Natural Beauty will apply.
The determination of planning applications for new sites or extensions to sites providing 
accommodation for settled Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople21  use will be considered 
under the relevant District Plan policies.
Nature and Quality of Development – Historic Environment
DP34: Listed Buildings and Other Heritage Assets
The heritage assets of the District include over 1,000 Listed Buildings, 
25 Scheduled Ancient Monuments which are identified on the policies 
map and over 500 sites of archaeological interest which appear on 
the West Sussex Historic Environment Record. The District also 
includes many other buildings which, whilst not statutorily listed are 
of architectural merit or of local historic interest, make a valuable 
contribution to the character of the area. 
19  For Gypsies and Travellers who meet and do not meet the definition of a Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showperson for 
planning purposes, provided in Annex 1- Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015) i.e. Gypsies and Travellers who still 
travel and settled Gypsies and Travellers who no longer travel
20  For Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople who meet the definition of a Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showperson 
for planning purposes, provided in Annex 1- Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015)
21  For Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople who do not meet the definition of a Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling 
Showperson for planning purposes, provided in Annex 1- Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (August 2015)4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     88In accordance with Section 66 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, the 
District Council will have regard to the desirability of preserving the listed building or its setting or any 
features of special architectural or historic interest which it possesses.
DP34: Listed Buildings and Other Heritage Assets
Strategic Objectives: 2) To promote well located and designed development that reflects the District’s 
distinctive towns and villages, retains their separate identity and character and prevents coalescence; 4) 
To protect valued characteristics of the built environment for their historical and visual qualities; and 11) To 
support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination.
Evidence Base: West Sussex Historic Environment Record; Register of Listed Buildings.
Listed Buildings
Development will be required to protect listed buildings and their settings. This will be achieved by 
ensuring that:
•	 A 	thorough	understanding	of	the	significance	of	the	listed	building	and	its	setting	has	been		
 demonstrated. This will be proportionate to the importance of the building and potential   
 impact of the proposal;
• Alterations or extensions to a listed building respect its historic form, scale, setting,   
	 significance	and	fabric.	Proposals	for	the	conversion	or	change	of	use	of	a	listed	building		
	 retain	its	significance	and	character	whilst	ensuring	that	the	building	remains	in	a	viable	use;
• Traditional building materials and construction techniques are normally used. The   
 installation of uPVC windows and doors will not be acceptable;
• Satellite antennae, solar panels or other renewable energy installations are not sited in a   
 prominent location, and where possible within the curtilage rather than on the building itself;
• Special regard is given to protecting the setting of a listed building;
• Where the historic fabric of a building may be affected by alterations or other proposals, the  
 applicant is expected to fund the recording or exploratory opening up of historic fabric.
Other Heritage Assets
Development that retains buildings which are not listed but are of architectural or historic merit, 
or	which	make	a	significant	and	positive	contribution	to	the	street	scene	will	be	permitted	in	
preference to their demolition and redevelopment.
The	Council	will	seek	to	conserve	heritage	assets	in	a	manner	appropriate	to	their	significance,	
so that they can be enjoyed for their contribution to the character and quality of life of the District. 
Significance	 can	be	defined	 as	the	special	interest	 of	a	heritage	 asset,	which	may	be	archaeological,	
architectural, artistic or historic. 
Proposals affecting such heritage assets will be considered in accordance with the policies in the 
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) and current Government guidance.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     89DP35: Conservation Areas
The Council’s 36 conservation areas are protected through 
national planning legislation but are designated locally. They 
range from the historic town centre of East Grinstead through 
to smaller villages and settlements. The key characteristics of 
each of the conservation areas are described in conservation 
area character summaries on the Council’s website. The 
Council has also produced more detailed conservation area 
appraisals and management plans for some conservation 
areas which assess local character and promote environmental 
enhancements. The conservation area character appraisals will 
be reviewed where necessary and the Council will support local 
groups such as local history societies to undertake this work.
DP35: Conservation Areas
Strategic Objectives: 2) To promote well located and designed development that reflects the District’s 
distinctive towns and villages, retains their separate identity and character and prevents coalescence; 4) 
To protect valued characteristics of the built environment for their historical and visual qualities; and 11) To 
support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination.
Evidence Base: Mid Sussex Conservation Area Appraisals; Sussex Extensive Urban Surveys; West Sussex 
Historic Environment Record.
Development in a conservation area will be required to conserve or enhance its special character, 
appearance and the range of activities which contribute to it. This will be achieved by ensuring that:
•	 New	buildings	and	extensions	are	sensitively	designed	to	reflect	the	special	characteristics		
 of the area in terms of their scale, density, design and through the use of complementary   
 materials; 
• Open spaces, gardens, landscaping and boundary features that contribute to the special   
 character of the area are protected. Any new landscaping or boundary features are designed  
	 to	reflect	that	character;
• Traditional shop fronts that are a key feature of the conservation area are protected. Any   
 alterations to shopfronts in a conservation area will only be permitted where they do not 
 result in the loss of a traditional shopfront and the new design is sympathetic to the 
 character of the existing building and street scene in which it is located;
• Existing buildings that contribute to the character of the conservation area are protected.  
 Where demolition is  permitted, the replacement buildings are of a design that    
	 reflects	the	special	characteristics	of	the	area;
• Activities such as markets, crafts or other activities which contribute to the special character  
 and appearance of the conservation area are supported;
•	 New	pavements,	roads	and	other	surfaces	reflect	the	materials	and	scale	of	the	
 existing streets and surfaces in the conservation area.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     90Development will also protect the setting of the conservation area and in particular views into and 
out of the area.
New buildings of outstanding or innovative design may be acceptable in conservation areas 
provided that their impact would not cause material harm to the area.
DP36: Historic Parks and Gardens
There are 9 Registered Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in 
Mid Sussex. In addition there are a large number of historic parkscapes 
which are unregistered but which appear on the West Sussex Historic 
Environment Record. The need to protect such landscapes is also 
recognised. 
DP36: Historic Parks and Gardens
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 
and 11) To support and enhance the attractiveness of Mid Sussex as a visitor destination.
Evidence Base: West Sussex Historic Environment Record.
The character, appearance and setting of a registered park, or park or garden of special local 
historic interest will be protected. This will be achieved by ensuring that any development within 
or adjacent to a registered park, or park or garden of local historic interest will only be permitted 
where it protects and enhances its special features, setting and views into and out of the park or 
garden.
Nature and Quality of Development – Natural Resources
DP37: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows
Trees, woodland and hedgerows make a valuable landscape, amenity 
and biodiversity contribution to the District, both in urban and rural 
areas. Mid Sussex is a heavily wooded district with two thirds of this 
being ancient woodland.
Trees, woodland and hedgerows form part of the District’s green 
infrastructure, and in particular, are important for health and well-being, 
biodiversity, and increasing resilience to the effects of climate change. 
Ancient woods are irreplaceable wildlife habitats with complex 
ecological conditions that have developed over centuries. They contain 
a wide range of wildlife including rare species, however, because the 
resource is limited and highly fragmented, ancient woodland and their associated wildlife are particularly 
vulnerable and must be protected from damaging effects of adjacent and nearby land uses that could 
threaten the integrity of the habitat and survival of its special characteristics.  4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     91The District Plan recognises this contribution and will support the protection of trees, woodland and 
hedgerows, as well as encouraging new planting. Development will be required to incorporate trees, 
woodland and hedgerows into the design and landscaping scheme.
All hedgerows on farmland and open land are protected and consent is required from the District Council 
to remove them. The Hedgerow Regulations 1997 also define ‘important’ hedgerows as being of particular 
archaeological, historical, wildlife or landscape value.
The District Council will make Tree Preservation Orders or attach planning conditions, in line with national 
guidance, to protect specific trees, a group of trees or woodlands in the interests of amenity or where 
they are threatened by development. The amenity value of trees will take into account visibility and 
characteristics relating to the individual, collective and wider impact including:
• Size and form; and
• Future potential as an amenity; and
• Rarity, cultural or historical value; and
• Contribution to, and relationship with, the landscape; and
• Contribution to the character and appearance of a conservation area.
DP37: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 4) 
To protect valued characteristics of the built environment for their historical and visual qualities; and 5) To 
create and maintain easily accessible green infrastructure, green corridors and spaces around and within 
the towns and villages to act as wildlife corridors, sustainable transport links and leisure and recreational 
routes.
Evidence Base: Green Infrastructure mapping; Mid Sussex Ancient Woodland Survey, Tree and Woodland 
Management Guidelines, Tree Preservation Order records.
The District Council will support the protection and enhancement of trees, woodland and 
hedgerows, and encourage new planting. In particular, ancient woodland and aged or veteran trees 
will be protected.
Development that will damage or lead to the loss of trees, woodland or hedgerows that contribute, 
either	individually	or	as	part	of	a	group,	to	the	visual	amenity	value	or	character	of	an	area,	and/	or	
that have landscape, historic or wildlife importance, will not normally be permitted.
Proposals for new trees, woodland and hedgerows should be of suitable species, usually native, 
and where required for visual, noise or light screening purposes, trees, woodland and hedgerows 
should be of a size and species that will achieve this purpose.
Trees, woodland and hedgerows will be protected and enhanced by ensuring development:
• incorporates existing important trees, woodland and hedgerows into the design of new   
 development and its landscape scheme; and
• prevents damage to root systems and takes account of expected future growth; and
• where possible, incorporates retained trees, woodland and hedgerows within public open  
 space rather than private space to safeguard their long-term management; and
• has appropriate protection measures throughout the development process; and
• takes opportunities to plant new trees, woodland and hedgerows within the new    
 development to enhance on-site green infrastructure and increase resilience to the effects of  
 climate change; and
• does not sever ecological corridors created by these assets.
 Proposals for works to trees will be considered taking into account:4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     92• the condition and health of the trees; and
• the contribution of the trees to the character and visual amenity of the local area; and
• the amenity and nature conservation value of the trees; and
• the extent and impact of the works; and
• any replanting proposals.
The felling of protected trees will only be permitted if there is no appropriate alternative. Where a 
protected tree or group of trees is felled, a replacement tree or group of trees, on a minimum of 
a 1:1 basis and of an appropriate size and type, will normally be required. The replanting should 
take place as close to the felled tree or trees as possible having regard to the proximity of adjacent 
properties.
Development should be positioned as far as possible from ancient woodland with a minimum buffer 
of 15 metres maintained between ancient woodland and the development boundary.
DP38: Biodiversity
Coupled with the pressure for new development is the importance of 
conserving and enhancing areas of importance for biodiversity and 
nature conservation. The District has a number of valued landscapes, 
habitats and species which need to be protected and enhanced. 
The District Plan recognises the importance of the protection and 
conservation of areas of importance for nature conservation and the 
valuable contribution made by these sites and features in conserving 
biodiversity and geodiversity of our natural heritage, together with 
opportunities for education and employment. The District Plan also 
recognises the importance of the protection and conservation of areas 
outside of designated areas where these are of nature conservation 
value or geological interest especially where they contribute to wider 
ecological networks.
Mid Sussex lies adjacent to the Ashdown Forest (within Wealden District), a European designated Special 
Protection Area and Special Area of Conservation. Policy DP17: Ashdown Forest Special Protection area 
(SPA) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC) looks at protecting this area. Mid Sussex also contains 
13 Sites of Special Scientific Interest, 50 Sites of Nature Conservation Importance and 6 Local Nature 
Reserves. Nearly 16% of the District is covered by Ancient Woodland. 
 
This policy reflects the requirements of the National Planning Policy Framework (section 1 1) where it 
relates to biodiversity and the natural environment. It takes into account the duty on the District Council 
to have regard to the purpose of conserving biodiversity. Development proposals should be informed by 
local ecological and geological evidence and national guidance. Local ecological evidence should include 
protected and notable species as well as considering the potential effects of the development on the 
habitats and species on the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 section 41 list.
DP38: Biodiversity
Strategic Objectives: 3) To protect valued landscapes for their visual, historical and biodiversity qualities; 
and 5) To create and maintain easily accessible green infrastructure, green corridors and spaces around 
and within the towns and villages to act as wildlife corridors, sustainable transport links and leisure and 
recreational routes.
Evidence Base: Biodiversity 2020; Biodiversity Action Plan; Biodiversity Opportunity Areas; Green 
Infrastructure mapping; Habitats and Species Records; Mid Sussex Ancient Woodland Survey; Mid 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     93Sussex Infrastructure Delivery Plan; The Natural Choice: Securing the Value of Nature; West Sussex SNCI 
Register.
Biodiversity will be protected and enhanced by ensuring development:
• Contributes and takes opportunities to improve, enhance, manage and restore biodiversity  
 and green infrastructure, so that there is a net gain in biodiversity, including through 
 creating new designated sites and locally relevant habitats, and incorporating biodiversity 
 features within developments; and
• Protects existing biodiversity, so that there is no net loss of biodiversity. Appropriate   
 measures should be taken to avoid and reduce disturbance to sensitive habitats and 
 species. Unavoidable damage to biodiversity must be offset through ecological 
 enhancements and mitigation measures (or compensation measures in exceptional 
 circumstances); and
• Minimises habitat and species fragmentation and maximises opportunities to enhance   
 and restore ecological corridors to connect natural habitats and increase coherence   
 and resilience; and
• Promotes the restoration, management and expansion of priority habitats in the District; and
• Avoids damage to, protects and enhances the special characteristics of internationally   
 designated Special Protection Areas, Special Areas of Conservation; nationally designated 
	 Sites	of	Special	Scientific	Interest,	 Areas	of	Outstanding	Natural	Beauty;	and	locally	
 designated Sites of Nature Conservation Importance, Local Nature Reserves and Ancient 
	 Woodland	or	to	other	areas	identified	as	being	of	nature	conservation	or	geological	
 interest, including wildlife corridors, aged or veteran trees, Biodiversity Opportunity Areas, 
 and Nature Improvement Areas. 
Designated sites will be given protection and appropriate weight according to their importance and 
the contribution they make to wider ecological networks. 
Valued soils will be protected and enhanced, including the best and most versatile agricultural land, 
and development should not contribute to unacceptable levels of soil pollution. 
Geodiversity will be protected by ensuring development prevents harm to geological conservation 
interests, and where possible, enhances such interests. Geological conservation interests include 
Regionally Important Geological and Geomorphological Sites.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     94Nature and Quality of Development – Sustainable Resources
DP39:	Sustainable	Design	and	Construction
The District Council, with four other West Sussex authorities, commissioned 
the ‘West Sussex Sustainable Energy Study’ to inform policies on carbon 
emission standards for new development. The Study was prepared to 
inform planning polices which positively encourage reduced energy 
consumption and carbon emissions from buildings and greater sustainable 
energy generation. The Study makes a number of recommendations 
(section 9 of the Study) for inclusion in future planning documents.  
The Mid Sussex Sustainable Energy Study (2014) updated this earlier 
work and assessed the local potential for renewable and low carbon 
energy development.  However, since the 2014 Study was published, 
the Government’s position on sustainable development has changed.  In 
July 2015, HM Treasury and the Department for Business, Innovation 
and Skills published ‘Fixing the Foundations: Creating a more prosperous 
nation’. This states, “The Government does not intend to proceed with the zero carbon Allowable Solutions 
carbon offsetting scheme, or the proposed 2016 increase in on-site energy efficiency standards, but will 
keep energy efficiency standards under review, recognising that existing measures to increase energy 
efficiency of new buildings should be allowed time to become established.” The policy reflects the current 
Government position on sustainable development. 
DP39:	Sustainable	Design	and	Construction
Strategic Objectives: 1) To promote development that makes the best use of resources and increases the 
sustainability of communities within Mid Sussex, and its ability to adapt to climate change.
Evidence Base: Gatwick Sub Region Water Cycle Study; West Sussex Sustainable Energy Study, Mid 
Sussex Sustainable Energy Study.
All development proposals must seek to improve the sustainability of development and should 
where appropriate and feasible according to the type and size of development and location, 
incorporate the following measures:  
• Minimise energy use through the design and layout of the scheme including through the use  
 of natural lighting and ventilation; 
•	 Explore	opportunities	for	efficient	energy	supply	through	the	use	of	communal	heating		 	
 networks where viable and feasible; 
• Use renewable sources of energy; 
•	 Maximise	efficient	use	of	resources,	including	minimising	waste	and	maximising	recycling/	
 re-use of materials through both construction and occupation; 
•	 Limit	water	use	to	110	litres/person/day	in	accordance	with	Policy	DP42:	Water	Infrastructure		
 and the Water Environment;
• Demonstrate how the risks associated with future climate change have been planned for   
 as part of the layout of the scheme and design of its buildings to ensure its longer   
 term resilience 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     95DP40: Renewable Energy Schemes
The Mid Sussex Sustainable Energy Study (2014) assessed the 
potential for renewable energy schemes in Mid Sussex and concluded 
that the level of technical and capacity constraints in the District were 
likely to prevent major new renewable energy schemes from coming 
forward over the Plan period. Renewable energy schemes were likely 
to be relatively small-scale and the local community could have a 
key role through Neighbourhood Plans or other local initiatives. Such 
projects could help support energy security, respond to fuel poverty, 
reduce carbon emissions and provide a longer term financial return for 
communities.
The National Planning Policy Framework (paragraph 17, NPPF) lists 
the use of renewable resources, including the development of renewable energy, as a core planning 
principle. Paragraph 97 of the NPPF requires local planning authorities to maximise renewable and low 
carbon energy development while ensuring that adverse impacts are addressed satisfactorily and support 
community-led initiatives for renewable and low carbon energy.
In relation to Gatwick Airport, any proposed development would need to comply with Aerodrome 
Safeguarding requirements to ensure that the operational integrity and safety of the airport are not 
compromised. Schemes such as large banks of solar panels will need to be assessed at an early stage as 
they have the potential to impact on navigational aids at the airport.
DP40: Renewable Energy Schemes
Strategic Objectives: 1) To promote development that makes the best use of resources and increases the 
sustainability of communities within Mid Sussex, and its ability to adapt to climate change.
Evidence Base: Gatwick Sub Region Water Cycle Study; Capacity of Mid Sussex District to Accommodate 
Development Study; Mid Sussex Landscape Capacity Study; Mid Sussex Sustainable Energy Study; West 
Sussex Sustainable Energy Study.
Proposals for new renewable and low carbon energy projects (other than wind energy development 
– see below), including community-led schemes, will be permitted provided that any adverse local 
impacts can be made acceptable, with particular regard to: 
• Landscape and visual impacts, including cumulative impacts, such as on the setting of   
 the South Downs National Park and High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and the  
 appearance of existing buildings; 
• Ecology and biodiversity, including protected species, and designated and non-designated  
 wildlife sites;   
•	 Residential	amenity	including	visual	intrusion,	air,	dust,	noise,	odour,	traffic	generation,		 	
 recreation and access.  
Assessment of impacts will need to be based on the best available evidence, including landscape 
capacity studies. 
Proposals for wind energy development involving one or more wind turbines will only be granted if:
•	 the	development	site	is	in	an	area	identified	as	suitable	for	wind	energy	development	in	a		
 Neighbourhood Plan; and4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     96•	 following	consultation,	it	can	be	demonstrated	that	the	planning	impacts	identified	by		 	
 affected local communities have been fully addressed and therefore the proposal has their  
 backing. 
DP41: Flood Risk and Drainage
In accordance with the National Planning Policy Framework, a Strategic 
Flood Risk Assessment has been prepared to identify areas that are at 
risk from flooding - this has informed the preparation of the District Plan. 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment mapping is kept up-to-date with new 
flood events and updated releases of information from the Environment 
Agency. 
The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment provides information on the use 
of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) to avoid increased flood risk 
or adverse impact on water quality. Well-designed SuDS rarely function 
with only a single purpose and should be considered early in the design 
process due to their relationship with other design considerations. Guidance on the potential benefits, 
suitability and feasibility for different SuDS types is available in the ‘Water. People. Places.’ document 
prepared for South East England authorities. This guidance should be used as part of the initial planning 
and design process for all types of residential, commercial and industrial development.
Development proposals in areas at risk of flooding will be considered in accordance with the National 
Planning Policy Framework (paragraph 103 and 104).  Development proposals in areas at risk of flooding 
should be supported by site-specific flood risk assessments in accordance with paragraphs 103 and 104 of 
the NPPF.
The Gatwick Sub Region Water Cycle Study provides an assessment of the capacity of current water 
infrastructure to accommodate growth without adversely affecting the environment. Section 8 of the Study 
sets out a number of recommendations that address capacity and quality issues identified in the Study . 
Section 8.2 makes recommendations for Sustainable Drainage Systems and these recommendations have 
been included in the policy. 
DP41: Flood Risk and Drainage
Strategic Objectives: 1) To promote development that makes the best use of resources and increases 
the sustainability of communities within Mid Sussex, and its ability to adapt to climate change; and 12) To 
support sustainable communities which are safe, healthy and inclusive.
Evidence Base: Gatwick Sub Region Water Cycle Study; Strategic Flood Risk Assessment; Water. People. 
Places SuDS guidance.
Proposals for development will need to follow a sequential risk-based approach, ensure 
development	is	safe	across	its	lifetime	and	not	increase	the	risk	of	flooding	elsewhere.	The	District	
Council’s	Strategic	Flood	Risk	 Assessment	(SFRA)	should	be	used	to	identify	areas	at	present	
and	future	flood	risk	from	a	range	of	sources	including	fluvial	(rivers	and	streams),	surface	water	
(pluvial), groundwater, infrastructure and reservoirs.
Particular	attention	will	be	paid	to	those	areas	of	the	District	that	have	experienced	flooding	in	
the	past	and	proposals	for	development	should	seek	to	reduce	the	risk	of	flooding	by	achieving	a	
reduction from existing run-off rates.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan     97Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) should be implemented in all new developments of 10 
dwellings or more, or equivalent non-residential or mixed development22  unless demonstrated to 
be	inappropriate,	to	avoid	any	increase	in	flood	risk	and	protect	surface	and	ground	water	quality.	
Arrangements	for	the	long	term	maintenance	and	management	of	SuDS	should	also	be	identified.
For	the	redevelopment	of	brownfield	sites,	any	surface	water	draining	to	the	foul	sewer	must	
be disconnected and managed through SuDS following the remediation of any previously 
contaminated land.
SuDS should be sensitively designed and located to promote improved biodiversity, an enhanced 
landscape and good quality spaces that improve public amenities in the area, where possible.
The preferred hierarchy of managing surface water drainage from any development is:
1.	 Infiltration	Measures
2. Attenuation and discharge to watercourses; and if these cannot be met,
3. Discharge to surface water only sewers.
Land	that	is	considered	to	be	required	for	current	and	future	flood	management	will	be	safeguarded	
from	development	and	proposals	will	have	regard	to	relevant	flood	risk	plans	and	strategies.
DP42: Water Infrastructure and the Water Environment
The European Water Framework Directive came into force in December 
2000 and became law in December 2003. The Water Framework 
Directive sets out a requirement to prevent deterioration of water quality 
and to achieve good ecological status in rivers, estuaries and coastal 
waters, together with good status of groundwater by at least 2027. The 
policy requires new development proposals to be in accordance with 
this Directive.
The Council has worked with Crawley Borough Council, Horsham 
District Council and Reigate and Banstead Borough Council to analyse 
the existing water environment, assess environmental capacity 
and establish the water infrastructure required to deliver growth, in 
accordance with paragraph 162 of the NPPF. The Gatwick Sub Region 
Water Cycle Study provides an assessment of the capacity of current water infrastructure to accommodate 
growth without adversely affecting the environment. Section 8 of the Study sets out a number of 
recommendations which would address capacity and quality issues identified in the Study . The policy 
requires new development proposals to accord with the findings of the Study .
Water scarcity is an increasing concern as the population of the district and demand increases as new 
homes are built. Climate change may further increase demand and put public water supply under greater 
pressure in the future. South East Water has produced its Water Resources Management Plan (2014) 
covering the period 2015 to 2040. The Plan states that “calculations show that with less water being 
available for use, combined with an increasing overall demand for water , we will have insufficient supplies 
to meet demand”. The Plan set out a water efficiency strategy that seeks to reduce water consumption for 
all households from 165 litres per person per day to 148.3 litres per person per day by 2040 and highlights 
the importance of partnership working with Local Authorities to incorporate water efficiency into all new 
buildings.
22  As set out in Article 2(1) of the Town and Country Planning (Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2010.4
Policies              Adopted District Plan             98Recommendation 1 of the Water Cycle Study proposes a standard above that required by Building 
Regulations. For new residential development, an internal/indoor water usage standard of 105 litres of 
water consumed per person per day (l/p/d) and for non-residential developments to meet a BREEAM 
‘Good’ standard for water consumption targets. 
Revisions to Part G of the Building Regulations came into effect in October 2015.  These introduced an 
optional requirement for water efficiency into the Building Regulations that would be triggered where a 
local planning authority has a policy in place based on clear and evidenced need. The policy therefore 
incorporates this optional requirement for all new dwellings to deliver estimated average water consumption 
of no more than 110 litres per person per day. The need for such a requirement in Mid Sussex is 
demonstrated in the Water Cycle Study which recommends a water consumption standard of 105 litres 
per person per day for internal/indoor water usage. In addition to this the optional requirement includes an 
allowance for external water use of 5 litres per person per day.
Recommendation 4 (page 105) of the Study has shaped the approach to foul and surface water provision 
and water supply in this policy. The recommendation suggests that developments for more than 10 
dwellings should submit a Water Sustainability and Drainage Assessment as part of their application 
to demonstrate that they have met the requirements of this policy. It is necessary for the District Plan 
to address the provision of water and sewerage infrastructure because it is not possible to identify all 
infrastructure required over the plan period as water companies only plan in five year periods through Asset 
Management Plans due to the way they are regulated.
Developers will be required to demonstrate that there is adequate capacity or additional infrastructure 
can be provided in time both on and off the site to serve the development and that it would not lead to 
problems for existing users. Developers will need to show that they have engaged with service providers at 
the earliest opportunity to establish the proposed development’s demand for water supply and wastewater 
infrastructure and how this can be met. In some circumstances this may make it necessary for developers 
to carry out appropriate studies to ascertain whether the proposed development will lead to overloading of 
existing water and wastewater infrastructure.
Statutory undertakers have only limited powers under the Water Industry Act 1991 to prevent connection 
ahead of required infrastructure upgrades and are reliant on robust policies to ensure improvements 
are provided prior to occupation and therefore can achieve sustainable development in accordance with 
National Planning Practice Guidance.  It is essential to ensure that infrastructure is in place to avoid 
unacceptable impacts on the environment such as sewage flooding of residential and commercial property , 
pollution of land and watercourses plus water shortages with associated low pressure water supply 
problems. Where there is a capacity constraint and no improvements are programmed by the statutory 
undertaker the developer will need to contact the statutory undertaker/s to agree the improvements 
required and how these will be funded prior to any occupation of the development.
DP42: Water Infrastructure and the Water Environment
Strategic Objectives: 1) To promote development that makes the best use of resources and increases 
the sustainability of communities within Mid Sussex, and its ability to adapt to climate change; 6) To 
ensure that development is accompanied by the necessary infrastructure in the right place at the right 
time that supports development and sustainable communities.  This includes the provision of efficient and 
sustainable transport networks.
Evidence Base: Building Regulations (Approved Document G); Gatwick Sub Region Water Cycle Study; 
DCLG Housing Standards Review: Technical Consultation, September 2014; South East Water - Water 
Resources Management Plan 2014, Strategic Flood Risk Assessment. 
New development proposals must be in accordance with the objectives of the Water Framework 
Directive,	and	accord	with	the	findings	of	the	Gatwick	Sub	Region	Water	Cycle	Study	with	respect	
to water quality, water supply and wastewater treatment and consequently the optional requirement 4
Policies              Adopted District Plan             99under Building Regulations – Part G applies to all new residential development in the district. 
Development must meet the following water consumption standards:
• Residential units should meet a water consumption standard of 110 litres per person per day  
 (including external water use); 
•	 Non-residential	buildings	should	meet	the	equivalent	of	a	‘Good’ 	standard,	as	a	minimum,		
 with regard to the BREEAM water consumption targets for the development type.
Development proposals which increase the demand for off-site service infrastructure will be 
permitted where the applicant can demonstrate;
•	 that	sufficient	capacity	already	exists	off-site	for	foul	and	surface	water	provision.	Where			
 capacity off-site is not available, plans must set out how appropriate infrastructure   
 improvements approved by the statutory undertaker will be completed ahead of the   
	 development’s	occupation;	and
• that there is adequate water supply to serve the development.
Planning conditions will be used to secure necessary infrastructure provision.
Development should connect to a public sewage treatment works. If this is not feasible, proposals 
should	be	supported	by	sufficient	information	to	understand	the	potential	implications	for	the	water	
environment.
The	development	or	expansion	of	water	supply	or	sewerage/sewage	treatment	facilities	will	
normally be permitted, either where needed to serve existing or proposed new development, or in 
the interests of long term water supply and waste water management, provided that the need for 
such facilities outweighs any adverse land use or environmental impacts and that any such adverse 
impact is minimised.
 Chapter 5  
Implementation and Monitoring 
of the District Plan5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     101Chapter 5:  Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan
Implementation of the District Plan
5.1. One of the key tests of an effective development plan is that it is deliverable. The Council has a   
 range of mechanisms which it can use to ensure the District Plan’s strategic objectives and policies  
 are met including partnership working with landowners, developers and strategic stakeholders; use  
 of its own powers; and use of its own land and assets. 
5.2. In line with the NPPF and in order to foster sustainable development the Council has a positive   
 approach to decision taking over planning applications which accord with the development plan. 
 However, it recognises that there are many factors that can influence the timely development of 
 sites including land assembly, changes in ownership, changes in the economy and speed of 
 delivery of required infrastructure. In order to address these risks and maintain a rolling 5 year 
 housing land supply the Council will: 
• secure an ongoing pipeline of sites through the preparation of a Site Allocations DPD;
• continue to work closely with developers, landowners and promoters of strategic sites to ensure   
 delivery within agreed timescales;
• work with Town and Parish Councils to bring forward Neighbourhood Plan allocations in line with  
 policies DP4: Housing and DP6: Settlement Hierarchy and support further Neighbourhood Plan   
 preparation;
• establish a Developers’ Group in order to understand issues regarding site supply and development  
 constraints; and
• prepare, maintain and publish and update regularly a Brownfield Sites Register;
5.3. The Council has entered into partnership working relationships with a range of strategic    
 organisations (including the Coast to Capital LEP; the Gatwick Diamond Initiative; and the   
 West Sussex and Greater Brighton Strategic Planning Board) to make sure that sub-regional issues  
 are addressed. 
Monitoring of the District Plan 
5.4. Monitoring is an essential process to ensure the District Plan is meeting its strategic objectives, that  
 the planned housing, employment growth and infrastructure are being delivered and to ensure the 
 effective and timely delivery of development and infrastructure. It is important that there are 
 mechanisms in place for the Council to identify changing circumstances and take appropriate action  
 if required.
5.5. The monitoring schedule sets out a range of indicators including output indicators that assess the  
 impact of individual policies and contextual indicators that facilitate understanding of the wider 
 context that may be influencing output indicators or identify where future intervention may be 
 necessary. These are based on those used for the Sustainability Appraisal to maintain close links 
 between the two documents. It is important that indicators chosen can be monitored in a robust 
 and consistent way throughout the Plan period. The indicators are reported through the Council’s  
 monitoring information and will be made available as soon as possible.
5.6. The Council’s monitoring will also include keeping an up to date evidence base as well as ongoing  
 co-operation with neighbouring authorities on agreed strategic priorities.
5.7. If it appears that policies are not being effective, or are no longer appropriate in the light of more  
 recent national policies or local circumstances, then action will be taken to review the policy or 
 policies concerned.  5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     102Monitoring Schedule  
Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP1:  
Economic 
Development7,8 Net increase 
/ decrease in 
commercial 
(Use Classes 
B1 (b, c), B2, 
B8) and office 
(B1 (a) and A2) 
floorspaceNet increase 
per annumDevelopers, 
Local AuthorityWest Sussex 
County 
Council 
Commercial, 
Industrial and 
Leisure Land 
Availability 
Survey
Employment 
land available – 
by type (net)Monitor Developers, 
Local AuthorityWest Sussex 
County 
Council 
Commercial, 
Industrial and 
Leisure Land 
Availability 
Survey
Provision of 
new 
employment 
floorspace in 
neighbouring 
authoritiesMonitoring of 
cross-
boundary 
implicationsLocal 
authoritiesLocal 
authorities
Number of new 
businesses 
setting up in the 
DistrictMaximise Office for 
National 
Statistics
Unemployment Minimise Office for 
National 
Statistics
DP2: Town 
Centre 
Development9 Total amount of 
floorspace for 
‘town 
centre uses’Maximise in 
accordance 
with DP2: 
Town Centre 
DevelopmentDevelopers, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP3: Village 
Centre and 
Neighbourhood 
Centre 
Development9 Net increase 
/ decrease in 
commercial 
(Use Classes 
B1 (b, c), B2, 
B8) and office 
(B1 (a) and A2) 
floorspaceNet increase 
per annumDevelopers, 
Local AuthorityWest Sussex 
County 
Council 
Commercial, 
Industrial and 
Leisure Land 
Availability
Survey5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     103Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP4: Housing All Housing 
Completions 
in Mid Sussex 
(net)To meet 
identified 
needsDevelopers, 
Local Authority, 
Highway 
authority, public 
agencies, utility 
companies and 
service 
providersMid Sussex 
District 
Council/West 
Sussex 
County 
Council annual 
monitoring
Housing 
completions in 
neighbouring 
authorities (net)Monitoring of 
cross-
boundary 
implicationsLocal authorities Local 
authorities
DP5:  Planning 
to Meet Future 
Housing NeedAll Housing 
Completions 
in Mid Sussex 
(net)To meet 
identified 
needsDevelopers, 
Local Authority, 
Highway 
authority, public 
agencies, utility 
companies and 
service 
providersMid Sussex 
District 
Council/West 
Sussex 
County 
Council annual 
monitoring
Housing 
completions in 
neighbouring 
authorities (net)Monitoring of 
cross-
boundary 
implicationsLocal authorities Local 
authorities
DP6:  
Settlement 
Hierarchy2, 6 Housing 
commitments by 
parish
Neighbourhood 
plan monitoringNo 
development 
to be 
permitted 
outside 
built-up area 
boundaries 
unless the site 
is allocated 
in the District 
Plan, a 
Neighbour -
hood Plan or a 
Development 
Plan 
DocumentMid Sussex 
District Council, 
Town and 
Parish CouncilsMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP7:  General 
Principles for 
Strategic 
Development 
at Burgess HillAll The objectives 
listed under DP7 
are monitored 
under their 
separate policy 
areas- - -5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     104Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP8:  
Strategic 
Allocation to 
the east of 
Burgess Hill at 
Kings WayAll Housing 
completions on 
allocated site 
DP8In accordance 
with DP8Developers Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP9:  
Strategic 
Allocation to 
the north and 
north west of 
Burgess HillAll Housing 
completions on 
allocated site 
DP9In accordance 
with DP9Developers Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP10:  
Strategic 
allocation to 
the east of 
Pease PottageAll Housing 
completions on 
allocated site 
DP10In accordance 
with DP10Developers Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP11:  
Strategic 
allocation to 
the north of 
Clayton Mills, 
HassocksAll Housing 
completions on 
allocated site 
DP11In accordance 
with DP11Developers Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP12:  
Protection and 
Enhancement 
of Countryside3 Percentage 
of new and 
converted 
dwellings on 
previously 
developed 
(brownfield) 
landMaximise Developers, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP13:  
Preventing 
Coalescence2 Number of 
planning 
permission 
granted in 
Local Gaps, 
where these 
have been 
defined in 
Neighbourhood 
PlansMinimise Local Authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council / 
Neighbourhood 
Plan monitoring
DP14:  
Sustainable 
Rural 
Development 
and the Rural 
Economy10, 11 Number of new 
commercial 
developments 
approved 
within the 
countrysideIncrease Developers, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     105Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP15:  New 
Homes in the 
Countryside3 Number of 
applications for 
new 
dwellings in the 
countryside 
overturned on 
appealZero Local authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP16:  High 
Weald Area of 
Outstanding 
Natural Beauty3 Number of 
applications 
approved 
contrary to 
advice from 
the High Weald 
AONB UnitZero Local authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP17: 
Ashdown 
Forest Special 
Area of 
Conservation 
and Special 
Protection 
Area3 SANG 
capacitySufficient for 
anticipated 
developmentLocal authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
Implementation 
of SAMMMonitoring of 
projects 
within 
StrategyConservators of 
Ashdown 
Forest, Mid 
Sussex District 
Council, 
Wealden DCMid Sussex 
District 
Council/ other
DP18:  Setting 
of the South 
Downs 
National Park3 Number of 
applications 
refused as 
contrary to this 
policy but 
overturned on 
appealZero Public 
agencies, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council/SDNP 
Authority
DP19:  
Sustainable 
Tourism.9, 10 Number of jobs 
in the tourism 
sectorMaximise Tourism South 
East
Number of 
visitors staying 
overnightIncrease Local authority Tourism South 
East
DP20: 
Securing 
Infrastructure6 Monitor 
infrastructure 
funds received, 
by Parish and in 
accordance with 
Monitoring 
requirements set
out in the CIL 
Regulations and 
Guidance.Amount of 
CIL funds 
received by 
year.Local authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     106Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP21: 
Transport6 Number of 
sustainable 
transport 
schemes 
implementedAnnual 
numberLocal authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP22:  
Rights of Way5, 14 Number of 
applications 
resulting a net 
increase in 
Rights of WayNet 
increase per 
annumLocal authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council/ 
West 
Sussex 
County 
Council 
monitoring
DP23:  
Communication 
Infrastructure7, 8 Number of 
applications 
refused as 
contrary to 
this policy but 
overturned on 
appealZero Local authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP24:  
Leisure and 
Cultural Facilities 
and Activities14 Number of 
applications 
resulting in the 
loss of a 
community 
service (shop, 
public house, 
place of 
worship, etc.)Minimise Local authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP25:  
Community 
facilities and 
local Services6, 12, 13 Amount of 
additional 
community 
facilities 
delivered
Net loss of 
specialist 
accommodation 
and care 
falling within 
Use Class C2Maximise Local Authority, 
Public agencies, 
DevelopersMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP26:  
Character and 
Design2 Number of 
applications 
refused as 
contrary to 
this policy but 
overturned on 
appealZero Public agencies, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     107Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP27:  
Space 
Standards13, 14 Number of 
applications 
refused as 
contrary to 
this policy but 
overturned on 
appealZero Developers, Local 
AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council
monitoring
DP28:  
Accessibility13 Number of 
applications 
refused as 
contrary to 
this policy but 
overturned on 
appealZero Developers, Local 
AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council
monitoring
DP29:	
Noise, Air 
and Light 
Pollution2, 3 Number of 
Air Quality 
Managements 
Areas 
(AQMAs) 
within the 
DistrictMinimise Highway/ Local 
AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council  
(Environmental 
Health) 
monitoring
DP30:  
Housing Mix12, 13 Total mix of all 
housing 
permitted 
annually 
reflects local 
housing needsTo reflect 
housing needDevelopers, Local 
AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council  
(Environmental 
Health) 
monitoring
DP31: 
Affordable 
Housing12, 13 Number of 
affordable 
homes 
completed 
annually 
(gross)
Financial 
contributions 
towards 
affordable 
housing 
provisionMaximise in 
compliance 
with DP31: 
Affordable 
HousingDevelopers, Local 
Authority, Highway 
authority, public 
agencies, utility 
companies and 
service providersMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
DP32: 
Rural 
Exception 
Sites10, 12, 13 Number of 
affordable 
housing 
dwellings 
completed on 
rural exception 
sitesMaximise in 
compliance 
with DP32: 
Rural 
Exception 
SitesDevelopers, 
Registered 
Providers, Local 
AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     108Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP33: 
Gypsy and 
Travellers12, 13 Number of 
new additional 
pitches 
granted 
permanent 
planning 
permission 
Number of 
unauthorised 
encampments 
in Mid SussexMaximise
MinimiseLocal Authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
Monitoring
DP34: 
Listed 
Buildings and 
Other Heritage 
Assets2, 3, 4 Number of 
listed 
buildings 
within the 
DistrictNo 
deteriorationLocal Authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
Monitoring
DP35: 
Conservation 
Areas2, 3, 4 Number of 
Conservation 
Areas with 
appraisals and 
management 
proposalsIncrease Parish Councils
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
Monitoring
DP36: 
Historic Parks 
and Gardens3 Number of 
applications 
permitted 
contrary to 
advice 
received by 
the Mid 
Sussex 
District 
Council 
archaeological 
adviserZero Local Authority Mid Sussex 
District 
Council 
Monitoring
DP37 : 
Trees, 
Woodland and 
Hedgerows3, 4, 5 Number of 
applications 
refused as 
contrary to 
this policy but 
overturned on 
appeal.
Area of 
Ancient 
Woodland lost 
to 
developmentZero
ZeroDevelopers, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
monitoring
Information 
from Sussex 
Wildlife Trust5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     109Policy Strategic 
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation Source
DP38: 
Biodiversity3, 4 Number of 
planning 
applications 
contrary to advice 
given by Natural 
England on 
biodiversity issues
Number of priority 
habitats lost to 
development
Condition of 
SSSIsZero
Zero
ImprovePublic agencies, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
Monitoring
Information 
from Sussex 
Wildlife Trust
DP39:	
Sustainable 
Design and 
Construction1 Installed capacity 
of renewable 
energy 
installations within 
Mid SussexIncrease Developers, 
Utility providers, 
Local AuthorityDepartment 
for Energy 
& Climate 
Change
DP40: 
Renewable 
Energy 
Schemes1 Development of 
Allowable 
SolutionsPhysical 
or financial 
contributions 
to Allowable 
SolutionsDevelopers, 
Private sector 
providers, Local 
AuthorityDepartment 
for Energy 
& Climate 
Change
DP41: 
Flood Risk 
and Drainage1 Number of 
planning 
applications 
approved contrary 
to advice given by 
the Environment 
Agency on flood 
risk/ flood defence 
groundsZero Public agencies, 
Local AuthorityEnvironment 
Agency5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     110DP42: 
Water 
Infrastructure 
and the Water 
Environment1 Number of 
planning 
applications 
approved contrary 
to advice given by 
the Environment 
Agency on water 
quality issuesZero Public agencies, 
Local AuthorityEnvironment 
Agency/ Mid 
Sussex District 
Council 
Monitoring
Number of 
planning 
applications 
approved contrary 
to advice from the 
statutory 
sewerage/water 
undertakerZero Statutory 
sewerage/water 
undertakers, 
Local AuthorityMid Sussex 
District 
Council 
Monitoring
Incidents of major 
and significant 
water pollution 
within the DistrictZero Developers, 
Statutory 
sewerage/ water 
undertakers, 
Local Authority, 
Public agenciesEnvironment 
Agency
Stretches of 
watercourse that 
are, as a 
minimum, Water 
Framework 
Directive status 
“Moderate”Maximise Local authority, 
public agenciesEnvironment 
Agency5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     111
Appendix A:  Housing Trajectory
  5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     112Appendix B:  List of evidence base documents
 The evidence base for the District Plan includes the following documents:
• A Landscape Character Assessment for Mid Sussex (November 2005)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/leisure-recreation-tourism-events/nature-conservation/landscape-and- 
 biodiversity/ 
• A Strategy for the West Sussex Landscape (October 2005)
 www.westsussex.gov.uk/living/environment_and_planning/landscape_and_environment/landscape_ 
 character_assessment
• Air Quality Action Plan – Stonepound Crossroads, Hassocks (September 2013)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/environment-health/pollution/air-quality/stonepound-crossroads-air- 
 quality-management-area-hassocks/   
• Ashdown Forest Visitor Survey Data Analysis (September 2010)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/district-plan/habitats-regulations-assessment/  
• Assessment of Open Space, Sport and Recreation (September 2006)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/assessment-of-open-space-sport-and-recreation/   
• At Crawley Study (October 2009) 
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/ 
• Biodiversity 2020: A Strategy for England’s Wildlife and Ecosystems Services (2011)
 www.gov.uk/government/publications/biodiversity-2020-a-strategy-for-england-s-wildlife-and-  
 ecosystem-services  
• Biodiversity Action Plan
 www.biodiversitysussex.org  
• Biodiversity Opportunity Areas
 www.biodiversitysussex.org  
• Burgess Hill: A Town Wide Strategy for the Next 20 Years (August 2011)
 www.burgesshill.gov.uk  
• Burgess Hill Employment Sites Study (March 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/burgess-hill-employment-sites-study/  
• Burgess Hill Town Centre Masterplan (November 2006)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/   
• Burgess Hill: Visioning the Future (July 2007)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/burgess-hill-visioning-the-future/  
• CABE Good Practice Guidance
 www.designcouncil.org.uk/CABE  5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     113• Capacity of Mid Sussex District to Accommodate Development (June 2014)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/capacity-study/  
• Coast to Capital Strategic Economic Plan (March 2014)
 www.coast2capital.org.uk/strategic-objectives/strategic-economic-plan  
• Community Infrastructure Levy and Viability Assessment (2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/community-  
 infrastructure-levy-cil/  
• Department for Communities and Local Government – Technical Housing Standards – nationally  
 described space standard (March 2015)
 www.gov.uk/government/publications/technical-housing-standards-nationally-described-space-  
 standard
• East Grinstead Town Centre Masterplan (July 2006)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/   
• Feasibility Study for Development Options at Burgess Hill (September 2005 plus Addendum –   
 December 2005)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/feasibility-studies-for-development-options-at-burgess-hill-and-haywards- 
 heath/    
• Feasibility Study for Development Options at Haywards Heath (December 2005 plus Part 2 – May  
 2006)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/feasibility-studies-for-development-options-at-burgess-hill-and-haywards- 
 heath/  
• Gatwick Diamond Futures Plan (October 2008)
 www.gatwickdiamond.co.uk  
• Gatwick Diamond Strategy
 www.gatwickdiamond.co.uk  
• Gatwick Sub Region Water Cycle Study (January 2011)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/gatwick-sub-region-water-cycle-study/   
• Greater Brighton City Deal (March 2014)
 www.gov.uk/government/publications/city-deal-greater-brighton  
• Habitats and Species Records
 www.sxbrc.org.uk  
• Habitats Regulations Assessment for the Mid Sussex District Plan (September 2017)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/district-plan/habitats-regulations-assessment/  
• Haywards Heath Town Centre Masterplan (June 2007)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/  5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     114• Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (February 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/  
• Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment Update (November 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/  
• Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment Addendum (June 2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/  
• Leisure & Cultural Strategy for Mid Sussex 2009-2020 (October 2009)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/leisure-recreation-tourism-events/leisure-and-culture-   
 strategy-2009-2020/   
• Mid Sussex Ancient Woodland Survey (February 2007) 
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/a-revision-of-the-ancient-woodland-inventory-for-mid-sussex-district-  
 council/  
• Mid Sussex Conservation Area Appraisals
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/conservation-areas/  
• Mid Sussex District Plan Sustainability Appraisal (March 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/district-plan/  
• Mid Sussex Economic Development Strategy (2010 – Refreshed 2013)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/business/economic-development-strategy/  
• Mid Sussex Gypsy and Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Needs Assessment  
 (2014 and 2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/traveller-sites-allocations-document/  
• Mid Sussex Housing Strategy 2012-14
 www.midsussex.gov.uk/7671.htm   
• Mid Sussex Infrastructure Delivery Plan (August 2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/infrastructure-delivery-plan/   
• Mid Sussex Landscape Capacity Study (July 2007)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/mid-sussex-landscape-capacity-study/  
• Mid Sussex Playing Pitch Strategy (January 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/leisure-recreation-tourism-events/community-arts-sports-and-leisure/ 
 sports-development-and-physical-activity/  
• Mid Sussex Retail Study Update (May 2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/mid-sussex-retail-study/  5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     115• Mid Sussex Sustainable Communities Strategy 2008-2018
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/my-street-my-community/mid-sussex-partnership/sustainable-  
 communities-strategy-2008-2018/  
• Mid Sussex Sustainable Energy Study (October 2014)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/sustainable-energy/  
• Mid Sussex Transport Study (2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/mid-sussex-transport-study/   
• Neighbourhood Plans
 www.midsussex.gov.uk/neighbourhoodplans  
• New Market Town Study (August 2010)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/new-market-town-study/  
• Northern West Sussex Economic Growth Assessment (April 2014)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/northern-west-sussex-economic-growth-assessment/  
• Northern West Sussex Housing Market Area – Affordable Housing Needs Update (2014)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/strategic-housing-market-assessment/
• Northern West Sussex – Mid Sussex: Strategic Housing Market Assessment Update (October 2012)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/strategic-housing-market-assessment/  
 
• Northern West Sussex Strategic Housing Market Assessment (May 2009)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/strategic-housing-market-assessment/
• Register of Listed Buildings 
 https://www.historicengland.org.uk/listing/the-list/  
• Settlement Sustainability Review (May 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/  
• South Downs Integrated Landscape Character Assessment (December 2005 – Updated 2011)
 www.southdowns.gov.uk/planning/integrated-landscape-character-assessment
• South Downs Access Network and Accessible Natural Green Space Study (July 2014)
 www.southdowns.gov.uk/planning/planning-policy/local-plan/evidence-and-supporting-documents/ 
 Access-Network-and-Accessible-Natural-Green-Space-Study
• South Downs Partnership Management Plan: Shaping the future of your South Downs National   
 Park 2014-2019
 www.southdowns.gov.uk  
• South East Water - Water Resources Management Plan (June 2014)
 www.southeastwater.co.uk/about-us/our-plans/water-resources-management-plan5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     116• Strategic Economic Land Availability Assessment (May 2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/strategic-economic-land-availability-assessment/  
• Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (May 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/sequential-flood-risk-test/  
• Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (April 2016)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/strategic-housing-land-availability-assessment/  
• Sustainability Assessment of Cross-boundary Options (February 2015)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/  
• The High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Management Plan 2014-2019 (3rd Edition,  
 adopted March 2014)
 www.highweald.org  
• The Natural Choice: Securing the Value of Nature (June 2011)
 www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-natural-choice-securing-the-value-of-nature  
• The Sussex Extensive Urban Survey (2005 and 2006)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/the-sussex-extensive-urban-survey/  
• Tree and Woodland Management Guidelines (October 2012)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/leisure-recreation-tourism-events/parks-places-of-interest-and-things- 
 to-do/trees-and-woodlands/  
• Visitor Access Patterns on Ashdown Forest (September 2009)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/district-plan/habitats-regulations-assessment/  
• Water. People. Places. (September 2013)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/historical-flooding- 
 and-flood-risk/  
• West Sussex Historic Environment Record
 www.westsussex.gov.uk/leisure/explore_west_sussex/history_of_west_sussex/historic_   
 environment_record.aspx
• West Sussex Rights of Way Improvement Plan: A Strategic Framework 2007-2017
 www.westsussex.gov.uk/leisure/public_paths_and_the_countrysi/rights_of_way_improvement_plan. 
 aspx
• West Sussex Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI) Register
 www.westsussex.gov.uk/leisure/enjoy_west_sussex/countryside_and_wildlife/conservation_  
 biodiversity_and/sites_of_nature_conservation_i.aspx  
• West Sussex Sustainable Energy Study (October 2009)
 http://www.midsussex.gov.uk/planning-licensing-building-control/planning-policy/local-development- 
 framework/evidence-base/sustainable-energy/   
• West Sussex Transport Plan 2011-2026 (February 2011)
 www.westsussex.gov.uk   5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     117Appendix C:  Saved Local Plan Policies
Local Plan policies that will continue to be saved on adoption of the District Plan
The table below sets out which policies in the Mid Sussex Local Plan 2004 will continue to be saved after 
the District Plan is adopted. These policies are shown on the Policies Map. Those Local Plan policies 
that are saved will remain in place until they are implemented or until superseded by a subsequent 
neighbourhood plan or an appropriate planning document.  The expectation is that the District Plan will set 
out the strategic priorities for the area and that neighbourhood plans will provide the detailed site-specific 
coverage.
Notwithstanding the schedule below, until such time as the South Downs Local Plan is adopted (currently 
estimated for September 2018), any relevant general or site specific policy in the Mid Sussex Local Plan 
will continue to apply to development proposals in that part of the district within the South Downs National 
Park.
Saved Local Plan Policy Policy type
Burgess Hill
BH1  Open Air Market, Cyprus Road Housing
BH2 The Oaks Centre, Junction Road Housing
BH3 Station Yard and Car Park Burgess Hill Mixed Housing
East Grinstead
EG2 The Portlands Conservation
EG5 East Grinstead Lawn Tennis Club Housing
EG8 Stonequarry Woods Housing
Haywards Heath
HH11 Land north of Rookery Farm Housing
Pease Pottage
PP1 Hemsley nursery – residential (implemented) and public open 
space (not implemented)Housing/ leisure
Turners Hill
TH1 Land at Clock Field Housing
Rural Areas
RA2 Rowfant Business Centre Site specific policy
Appendix D:  Glossary
Abbreviations
AONB  Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
BOA  Biodiversity Opportunity Area
BREEAM  Building Research Establishment Environment Assessment Method
CIL Community Infrastructure Levy
DPD  Development Plan Document
HRA  Habitats Regulations Assessment
IDP Infrastructure Delivery Plan
LDD Local Development Document
LDF Local Development Framework
LDS Local Development Scheme
LEP Local Economic Partnership
LNR Local Nature Reserve
LPA Local Planning Authority5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     118LSP Local Strategic Partnership
MR Monitoring Report
NPPF  National Planning Policy Framework
NPPG  National Planning Practice Guidance
OAN  Objectively Assessed Need
RIGS  Regionally Important Geological and Geomorphological Sites
SA Sustainability Appraisal
SAC  Special Area of Conservation
SANG  Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace
SAMM  Strategic Access Management and Monitoring
SCI Statement of Community Involvement
SEA Strategic Environmental Assessment
SFRA  Strategic Flood Risk Assessment
SNCI  Site of Nature Conservation Importance
SPA Special Protection Area
SPD Supplementary Planning Document
SSSI  Sites of Special Scientific Interest
SuDS  Sustainable Drainage Systems
Ancient Woodland  – Areas that have had continuous woodland cover since 1600, non-statutory 
designations.
Aged or veteran tree  – A tree which, because of its great age, size or condition is of exceptional value for 
wildlife, in the landscape or culturally.
Appropriate planning document  – This could be a Development Plan Document, a Supplementary 
Planning Document, or technical note depending upon the role and objective of the document.
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (High Weald AONB)  – Areas designated to conserve and enhance 
natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage; and to meet the need for quiet enjoyment of the countryside 
and have regard for the interests of those who live and work within them. 
Biodiversity Opportunity Area  – Areas that identify where the greatest opportunities for habitat creation 
and restoration lie at a landscape scale; they enable the efficient focusing of resources to where they will 
have the greatest positive conservation impact, representing a more efficient way of delivering action on the 
ground.
Burgess Hill Town-Wide Strategy  – This strategy, prepared by Burgess Hill Town Council, sets out the 
general principles, visions and objectives for Burgess Hill over the plan period and provides a foundation on 
which policies addressing strategic development at Burgess Hill are based.
Commitments  – Sites already in the planning process which have planning permission for residential 
development or are allocated in a Development Plan Document.
Community Facilities and Local Services  – Public locations that meet a range of community needs 
such as providing support services, public information, and space for group activities. Includes local 
shops, places of worship, public houses, education facilities, heath and care facilities, libraries, emergency 
services, and community centres.
Community Infrastructure Levy  – A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners or 
developers of land undertaking new building projects in their area.
Comparison shopping  – The provision of items not obtained on a frequent basis. These include clothing, 
footwear, household and recreational goods.
Contiguous  – sharing a common border, touching5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     119Convenience shopping  – The provision of everyday essential items including food, drinks, newspapers/
magazines and confectionery.
Development Plan  – As set out in section 38(6) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act, an area’s 
development plan consists of the Development Plan Documents contained within the Local Development 
Framework.
Development Plan Documents (DPDs) – These documents include the District Plan and the Small Scale 
Housing Allocation Development Plan Document.  
District Plan  – This document is the principal Development Plan Document, setting out the long-term 
strategic vision for the District, as well as objectives for the area and strategic policies.
Economic Viability  – The financial feasibility of development.
Evidence base  – The evidence that any development plan document, in particular the District Plan, is 
based on. It is made up of the views of stakeholders and background facts about the area.
Geodiversity  – The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms.
Green infrastructure  – Green infrastructure is a connected network of multi-functional greenspace, both 
urban and rural, that delivers a wide range of environmental, social and economic benefits, including 
promoting ecosystem services and improving quality of life.
Gypsies and Travellers  – Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such 
persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs 
or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such.
Habitats Regulations Assessment – An assessment of the potential effects of planning policies on 
European nature conservation sites.
High Quality Business Park  - a location which provides an appropriate mix of high quality well designed 
B1(b), B1(c), B2 and B8 premises set within a high quality public realm. The premises should offer a range 
and appropriate mix of sizes in order to accommodate different business requirements and to meet local 
employment needs.
Infrastructure  – Includes roads and other transport facilities; flood defences; schools and other educational 
facilities; medical facilities; sporting and recreational facilities; and open spaces.  Examples of key 
infrastructure categories, and the elements within each group are provided as follows.5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     120Infrastructure Category Elements Relevant to Mid Sussex
Transport • Road networks
• Rail networks
• Bus services
• Cycling, walking and equestrian routes
• Other public rights of way (PROW)
• Parking facilities
Education • Pre-school and nursery schools
• Primary and secondary education
• Further and higher education
• Special educational needs
• Adult education
Health • GPs, health centres and other community care facilities such as 
            day-care centre
• Clinical Commissioning Groups
• Mental health hospitals and other support 
• Acute and general hospitals 
• Dental practices
• Social care
Social Infrastructure • Specialist accommodation and care falling within Use Class C2
• Social and community facilities, including buildings
• Cultural facilities such as arts centres and museums
• Sports centres and other recreation facilities
• Sports pitches
• Play space
Green Infrastructure • Flood defences and flood management schemes
• Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)
• Open spaces and parks
• Allotments 
• Biodiversity and nature conservation
Green Infrastructure
- Habitats Regulations 
mitigation• Interventions necessary to mitigate the effects of development on 
            nature conservation sites
• Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG)
• Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM) 
Public and Community 
Services• Emergency services (ambulance, fire and rescue, police)
• Community safety schemes
• Libraries
• Places of worship
• Cemeteries
• Waste management and disposal, including recycling facilities
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  – Identifies infrastructure needed to support new homes and businesses over 
the Plan period.
Leisure and Cultural Facilities  – This term refers to a broad range of facilities that are available to and 
enjoyed by the general public for arts, culture, sport and physical activity services including play spaces, 
open space, sports facilities, cinemas, museums, galleries, heritage and performance spaces.
Local Community  – A generic term, which includes all individuals (including the general public) and 
organisations external to the District Council. It includes the statutory and other consultees.
Local Development Document  – The collective term for documents that form part of the Local 
Development Framework. These documents can either be a Development Plan Document, a 
Supplementary Planning Document or the Statement of Community Involvement.5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     121Local Development Framework  – Introduced by the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 as 
the replacement for Local Plans. It is the term used to describe the whole portfolio of planning policy 
documents (Local Development Documents) setting out the planning strategy and policies for the area. 
It consists of Development Plan Documents, Supplementary Planning Documents, a Statement of 
Community Involvement, the Local Development Scheme and the Annual Monitoring Report.
Local Development Scheme  – This document sets out the timetable for the preparation of the Local 
Development Documents. It identifies which Development Plan Documents and Supplementary Planning 
Documents are to be produced and when.
Local Nature Reserve (LNR) – Designated by the local authority and managed for either nature 
conservation or to provide recreational opportunities to communities.
Local Distinctiveness  – Local distinctiveness is the physical, environmental, economic or social factors 
that characterise an area (and most likely a combination of all four), as well as how an area interacts with 
others.
Localism Act 2011  – The Localism Act contains a new power of competence for local government, 
new Neighbourhood Plans and development orders, and a new duty to co-operate to replace Regional 
Strategies. It was given Royal Assent of 15th November 2011.
Monitoring Report  – Part of the local development framework, the annual monitoring report assesses the 
implementation of the local development scheme and the extent to which policies in local development 
documents are being successfully implemented.
National Park (South Downs National Park)  – Areas designated to conserve and enhance the natural 
beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage; and to promote opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment if 
the special qualities of the park.
Multi-functional – Where greenspace or rooms are able to perform a range of functions, affording greater 
social, environmental and economic benefits.
National Planning Policy Framework 2012 (NPPF)  – Sets out the Government’s planning policies for 
England, and provides a framework within which local people and their accountable councils can produce 
their own distinctive local and Neighbourhood Plans, which reflects the needs and priorities of their 
communities.
National Planning Practice Guidance 2014 (NPPG)  – A web-based resource containing categorised 
planning guidance to accompany national planning policy.
Nature Improvement Areas  – Inter-connected networks of wildlife habitats intended to re-establish thriving 
wildlife populations and help species respond to the challenges of climate change.
Neighbourhood	Centre/Local	Centre  - provided alongside housing development to meet the day to day 
needs of the local community.  Uses include retail, education, health, employment, leisure, recreation and 
community uses sufficient to meet the day to day needs of the local community .  The retail provision should 
be no more than 2,500m2 within a single unit subject to it being demonstrated that there would not be a 
significant adverse impact on Burgess Hill or Haywards Heath Town Centres.
Neighbourhood Plans  – Neighbourhood plans are a new way for communities to decide the future of the 
places where they live and work. The Government introduced the right to prepare Neighbourhood Plans 
through the Localism Act.
Objectively Assessed Need  – The total amount of housing that would be needed to meet, as a minimum, 
expected levels of growth in population over the plan period. This level of growth expected should take into 
account demographics (i.e. birth/death rates and migration) and other signals that could influence future 
trends in demographics.5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     122Policies Map  – The adopted Policies Map illustrates all of the policies and proposals in the Development 
Plan Document and any saved policies that are included in the Local Development Framework.
Priority habitats and species  – Species and Habitats of Principal Importance included in the England 
Biodiversity List published by the Secretary of State under section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities Act 2006.
Recreational Routes  – These are routes usually created by local authorities, government agencies 
or volunteer organisations. The routes are usually waymarked and mainly follow existing rights of way. 
Recreational routes are an important leisure resource alongside the network of existing public rights of way.
Regionally Important Geological and Geomorphological Sites (RIGS)  – Also referred to as Local 
Geological Sites, these are locally designated sites important for geology and geomorphology (i.e. the 
Earth’s landforms and the processes which shape them). Although not having formal statutory protection, 
RIGS are often also designated as SSSIs.
Rural exception sites  – Small sites used for affordable housing in perpetuity where sites would not 
normally be used for housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the needs of the local community by 
accommodating households who are either current residents or have an existing family or employment 
connection.
Science Park  – A business support environment that encourages and supports the start-up, incubation 
and development of innovation-led, high-growth, knowledge-based businesses.  Initiatives called by other 
names such as Research Park, Innovation Centre, Technology Park, Technopole or technology-based 
Incubator – where they aspire to meet the essential criteria set out above - are also included within the 
definition.
Section 106 Agreement – A binding agreement between the Council and a developer on the occasion of 
granting a planning permission, regarding matters linked to the proposed development. Used to secure 
matters necessary to render planning applications acceptable by offsetting the costs of the external effects 
of development e.g. on local schools, which could not be secured through the imposition of planning 
conditions.
Section 278 Agreement  – A binding agreement between the County Council and a developer used to 
secure necessary highway improvements to make development acceptable in planning terms.
Sites of Nature Conservation Importance (SNCI)  – Locally important sites of nature conservation 
adopted by local authorities for planning purposes and identified in the local development plan.
Sites	of	Special	Scientific	Interest	(SSSI)	 – Areas identified by Natural England as being of special 
interest for their flora, fauna, or geological or physiographical features.
Strategic	 Allocations	and/or	Strategic	Development  – These are allocations for specific or mixed uses 
of development contained in Development Plan Documents. The policies in the document will identify any 
specific requirements for individual allocations.
Strategic Site  – A site that delivers 500 dwellings or more that is likely to contribute to a wider than local 
need and trigger the need for additional services.  A strategic site would often provide on-site infrastructure 
such as a school, community facility, shop or employment land.
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  – Areas given special protection under the European Union’s 
Habitats Directive, which is transposed into UK law by the Habitats and Conservation of Species 
Regulations 2010.
Special Protection Area (SPA)  – Areas which have been identified as being of international importance 
for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration of rare and vulnerable species of birds found within 
European Union countries. They are European designated sites, classified under the Birds Directive.5
Implementation and Monitoring of the District Plan     123Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANG)  – Green space that is of a quality and type suitable to 
be used as mitigation for the potential impact of development near the Ashdown Forest Special Protection 
Area.
Sustainable Community Strategy  – Community strategies promote the economic, social and 
environmental well-being of their areas and contribute to the achievement of sustainable development. A 
copy of the Mid Sussex Sustainable Community Strategy can be viewed on the Mid Sussex District Council 
website at: www.midsussex.gov.uk , from the Community Service link.
Stakeholders  – Stakeholders include any person or organisation, local or national, who have a legitimate 
interest in what happens in our area.
Strategic Access Management and Monitoring (SAMM)  – A strategy setting out the measures that 
provide part of the mitigation for new residential development within 7km of the Ashdown Forest SPA. 
These measures focus on protecting the SPA from new recreational pressures through managing access 
(visitor) behaviour and monitoring both birds and visitors.
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)  – An assessment by the District Council to inform the Local 
Development Framework of fluvial, surface water, groundwater, infrastructure and reservoir flood risks.
Supplementary Planning Documents – These documents provide supplementary information to the policies 
in the Development Plan Documents. They do not form part of the Development Plan and are not subject to 
independent examination.
Sustainability  – The creation or maintenance of conditions that fulfil current and future economic, 
environmental and social requirements.
Sustainability Appraisal  – Sustainability Appraisal is a tool for appraising policies to ensure that they 
reflect sustainable development objectives (i.e. social, economic and environmental factors). It is required 
under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act to be carried out on all Development Plan Documents 
and Supplementary Planning Documents.
Sustainable Development  – Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the 
ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The National Planning Policy Framework places a 
requirement on local planning authorities to positively seek opportunities to meet the development needs of 
their area and guide development to sustainable solutions.
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  – These are drainage systems designed to manage surface water 
and groundwater to sustainably reduce the potential impact of new and existing developments.
Travelling Showpeople  – Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses or 
shows (whether or not travelling together as such). This includes such persons who on the grounds of 
their own or their family’s or dependants’ more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or 
old age have ceased to travel temporarily or permanently, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined 
above.Web:  www.midsussex.gov.uk
Email:  planningpolicy@midsussex.gov.uk
Tel: 01444 458166