  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Forest Natio nal Park Local Plan 
2016 - 2036  
Regulation 19 Submission Draft   
January 2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
 New Forest National Park Local Plan 2016 – 2036 : Submission Draft  
 
 
 
Contents   
 
 
      Page No. 
  
Chap ter 1 Introduction  5 
Chap ter 2 Profile of the New Forest National Park  10 
Chap ter 3 Vision and Objectives 15 
 Chap ter 4 Strate gic Policies and Development Principles  20 
Chap ter 5 Protecting  and Enhancing the Na tural En vironment      28 
Chap ter 6 Protecting  and Enhancing the Histor ic & Built Environment 47 
Chap ter 7 Vibra nt Communities  53 
Chap ter 8 A Sus tainable Local Economy 87 
Chap ter 9 Transport and Access     101 
Chap ter 10 Monitor ing and Implementation    106 
Annex 1  New Forest National  Park S pecial Qualities    111 
Annex 2 Car Park ing and Cycle Standards  
 
 
    114 
Annex 3  Local Connections Criteria    
 
houGlossary     115 
 
  Glossary                                                                                                                  116 
  
  3 
 New Forest National Park Submission draft Local Plan 2016 – 2036: Policies  
CHAPTER  POLICY  POLICY TITLE  
 
Chapter 4  SP1 Supporting Sustainable D evelopment  
DP2 General Development Principles  
SP3 Major Development in the National Park  
SP4 Spatial Strategy  
 
Chapter 5  SP5 Nature Conservation Sites of International Importance  
SP6 The Natural Environment  
SP7 Landscape Character  
DP8 Safeguarding and Improving Water Resources  
SP9 Green Infrastructure  
DP10  Open Space  
SP11  Climate Change  
DP12  Flood Risk  
DP13  Coastal Development  
SP14  Renewable E nergy  
SP15  Tranquillity  
 
Chapter 6  SP16  The Historic and Built Environment  
SP17  Local Distinctiveness  
DP18  Design Principles  
 
Chapter 7  SP19  New Residential Development in the National Park  
SP20  Specialist Housing for Older People (Use Class C2)    
SP21  The Size of New Dwellings  
SP22  Land at Whartons Lane, Ashurst  
SP23  Land at the Lyndhurst Park Hotel, Lyndhurst  
SP24  Land south of Church Lane, Sway  
SP25  Land adjacent to the former Fawley Power Station  
SP26  Land at Calshot Village  
SP27  Affordable Housing provision within the Defined Villages and 
on Allocated Sites 
SP28  Rural Exceptions Sites  
SP29  New Forest Commoners Dwellings  
SP30  New Forest Estate Workers Dwellings  
DP31  Agricultural and Forestry Workers Dwellings  
DP32  Removal of Agricultural Occupancy Conditions  
SP33  Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
DP34  Residential Character of the Defined Villages  
DP35  Replacement Dwellings  4 
  
  
  
  
 
 DP36  Extensions to Dwellings  
DP37  Outbuildings  
SP38  Infrastructure Provision and Developer Contributions   
SP39  Local Community Facilities  
DP40  Change of Use from Retail in the Defined Villages    
DP41  Retail Development outside the Defined Villages  
 
Chapter 8  SP42  Business and Employment Development  
SP43  Existing Employment Sites  
DP44  Redevelopment of Existing Employment Sites  
DP45  Extensions to Non -Residential Buildings and Uses  
SP46  Sustainable Tourism Development  
DP47  Extensions to Holiday Parks and Camp Sites  
SP48  The Land -based Economy  
DP49  Re-use of Buildings outside the Defined Villages  
DP50  Agricultural and Forestry Buildings  
DP51  Recreational Horse Keeping  
DP52  Field Shelters and Stables  
DP53  Maneges  
Chapter 9  SP54  Transport Infrastructure  
SP55  Access  
  Annex 1 – New Forest National Park Special Qualities  
  Annex 2 –  Car Park ing and Cycle Standards  
  Annex  3 – Local Connections Criteria  5 
 1. Introduction 
 
1.1 The planning  system plays a key role in keeping  our National Parks special and  
ensuring they remain living, working landsca pes. It is for this reason that the 
Government has made National  Park authorities the sole planning aut horities 
for their respecti ve areas. As part of its statutory planning role, the New  Forest  
Natio nal Park Authority is required to prepare,  monitor and review a Local Plan  for 
the N ational P ark. On ce adopted, the Local Plan forms part of the statutory 
‘development plan’ (alongside any Neighbour hood Plans and the separate 
Minerals and Waste Local Plan) for the New Forest  and is the principal guide for 
planning decis ions within the National Park. The Local Plan  focuses on the area 
within the Natio nal Park boundary and it is the responsibil ities of New Forest  
District Council, Wiltshire Council and Test Val ley Borou gh Council to prepare 
the development plans for their respecti ve areas outside the National Park. 
 
Links to other plans and strategies  
 
1.2 The Local Plan aims to deliver the long -term planning vision for the New Forest 
National Park and forms a key part of the statutory ‘development plan’ for the area. 
National policy contained within the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
and National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) also form material 
considerations when preparing the Local Plan.   
 
1.3 The Environment Act 1995 also requires each National Park Authority to prepare 
a National Park Management Plan. The Management Plan is the overarching 
strategic document for the National Park and is intended to guide the work of all 
organisations within the National Park (not just the Authority). Although 
Management Plans do not form part of the statutory development plan, they should 
be taken into account in preparing Local Plans and may also be material 
considerations in assessing planning applications. In 2015 the New Forest National  
Park Management Plan was updated by the Partnership Plan which set s out a 
series of actions to be taken forward over the following five years.   
 
1.4 In addition to these statutory documents, the Authority can prepare Supplementary 
Planning Documents whic h provide more detail on planning policies, as well as 
specific strategies to guide the delivery of the two statutory National Park purposes, 
including the Recreation Management Strategy and Landscape Action Plan. These 
latter document s are not formal plan ning documents but provide detailed guidance 
on important issues within the National Park.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supplementary Planning Documents  
 Strategies and Plans, including the Recreation 
Management Strategy and Landscape Action Plan  
New Forest National Park Man agement / 
Partnership Plan  
National Planning Policy Framework / Planning 
Practice Guidance  
New Forest National Park Local Plan 2016 - 2036  6 
 1.5 Since the adoption of the first set of consistent National Park-wide planning policies 
in 2010 there have been significant changes in national planning policy – most 
notably the publication of the NPPF in 2012. National planning policy confirms that 
National Parks continue to have the highest level of protection i n relation to 
landscape and scenic beauty. In addition, the statutory National Park purposes 
originally established through the National Parks & Access to the Countryside Act 
1949 remain and are supplemented by the Environment Act 1995 .  
 
1.6 This Local Plan h as been prepared following extensive public consultation and 
evidence gathering that started in 2015. The Local Plan has been informed by a 
wide range of evidence base studies, including a Strategic Flood Risk Assessment; 
Whole -Plan Viability Assessment; B usiness Needs Survey; and an objective 
assessment of housing needs arising within the National Park. The policies set out 
in the Local Plan have been tested against a number of environmental, economic 
and social indicators as part of a Sustainability Appra isal (SA) / Strategic 
Environmental Assessment (SEA) and Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA).   
 
The New Forest National Park  
 
1.7 The New Forest National Park was designated in 2005 and covers an area of 220 
square miles within the counties of Hampshire and Wiltshire. The National Park 
operates within a detailed planning policy and legislative framework which is set 
out below. Nation al Park s have two statutory purposes  that set out the main 
reasons for their designation and describe the overall focus for their management. 
The two National Park purposes as set out primary legislation are: 
 
 To conserve and enhance the natural b eauty, wildlife and cultural her itage of 
the New  Forest; a nd 
 To promote opportunities for the understa nding and enjoyment of the special 
qualities of the New Forest by the public. 
 
1.8 National Park authorities also have a duty under  Section 62(1) of the En vironment 
Act 1995 in taking forward the two National Park purposes  to seek  to foster 
the economic and social well-being  of local communities  within the Natio nal 
Park. The New Forest  is a living working area,  home to 2,500 local businesses 
and 35,000 residents.  More detail is set out in Ch apter 2 – the profile of the New 
Forest National Park.  All relevant authorities are required to take the two purposes 
into account in a ny work that may affect the area and make every effort to reconcile 
any conflict  between the two. If such effor ts fail, then only as a measure of last 
resort should the first purpose take precedence.  
 
1.9 These statutory purposes and related duty form the golden thread s running 
through this Local  Plan.  The vision for the National  Park and strategic objectives 
(Chapter 3) are drawn from these purposes  and duty. 
 
  7 
 Cross  Boundary Planning I ssues 
 
1.10 The Local ism Act 2011 introduced  a legal requirement for planning aut horities – 
includ ing National  Park authorities - to cooperate  on strategic cross boundary  
planning matters.  The ‘duty to cooperate’ aims  to ensure  that neighbour ing 
authorities continue to engage with each other constructi vely. 
 
1.11 The New Forest National Park Authority is well placed to fulfil its duty  to cooperate 
duties due to:  
 
 Its co -ordinating role in the preparation and adoption of the National Park 
Management Plan. The updated version of this Plan, the Partnership Plan 
(2015 -2020 ), was overseen by a group of statutory bodies working alongside 
the National Park Authority and t his has helped establish good working 
arrangements between the respective authorities.  
 
 The National Park Authority is the statutory planning authority for the National 
Park, but the constituent authorities have retained their responsibilities for 
housing, economic development, environmental health, highways and 
education in the New Forest. The National Park Authority has therefore always 
worked closely with its constituent authorities on these matters.  
 
 The membership of the National Park Authority  is drawn from constituent local 
authorities and town and parish councils across the National Park, thereby 
ensuring good links across the tiers of local Government.  
 
1.12 Follo wing meetin gs with surrounding local authorities, it has  been agreed that the 
main areas  of strategic cross-boundary planning interest  are: 
 
 Habitat protection – over half of the New Forest National Park is designated 
as being of international importance for nature conservation. Consequently 
there is a shared need to ensure that the planned level of development within 
the National Park and surrounding areas does no t adversely impact on the 
integrity of the New Forest’s protected habitats.  
 
 Housing provision – there is a significant housing need within the New 
Forest  and surrounding areas.  The Government recognises  that Natio nal 
Parks  are not appropr iate locati ons for major development and unrestr icted 
housing and is clear that unmet needs should be cons idered under the  ‘duty  
to cooperate’. 
 
1.13 The Authority has worked  closely with its neighbour ing planning authorities 
during the production of this Local Plan, including on the joint commissioning of 
evidence base studies. More detail can be found in the accompanying ‘Dut y to 
Cooperate Statement’.  
 
 
 8 
 National Policy and Guidance  
 
1.14 The NPPF  (2012) and Planning Practice Guidance ( NPPG, first issued in 2014) 
set out the Government’s planning policies relevant to the wo rk of all planning 
authorities. They constitute guidance for planning a uthorities and decision -takers 
in drawing up plans a nd are  a material consideration in determinin g applications. 
The development plan remains the startin g point for determining  applications and 
planning law requires that applications for planning permission must be determined 
in accordance with the development plan unless material considerations indic ate 
otherwise.  
 
1.15 The NPPF states that Local Plans should set out the strategic priorities for the area . 
This should include policies to deliver the homes and jobs needed in the area and 
conservation and enhancement of the environment, including landscape. National 
Parks are identified as areas where development should be restricted and the 
NPPF confirms that National Parks have  the highest status of protection in relation 
to landscape and scenic beauty.  
 
1.16 The UK Government National Parks Vision and Circular (2010) provides policy 
guidance specifically for the English National Parks and for all those whose 
decisions or actions mi ght affect them. The Circular calls for a renewed focus on 
achieving the two National Park purposes and for the fostering of vibrant, healthy 
and productive living and working communities.  
 
1.17 In March 2016 the Government published a policy paper ‘National Pa rks: 8 -point 
plan for England (2016 to 2020) ’ which sets out how the Government intends to 
protect, promote and enhance the National Parks in England from now until 2020. 
The paper reaffirms the Government ’s commitment to the English National Parks, 
recogn ising them as “…national treasures at the heart of our national identity .” 
 
1.18 The NPPF, National Parks Circular, NPPG and the 8 -point plan have been taken 
into account in the preparation of this Local Plan.  
 
Minerals  and Waste Planning Fra mework 
 
1.19 The New Forest  National  Park Authority is the minerals and waste planning 
authority for the whole of the National Park. This statutory role includes the 
prepar ation and adoption of the planning  policy framework for minerals  and 
waste development within the Natio nal Park.  The Authority works in partn ership 
with the other minerals and waste planning authorities in Ha mpshire and has 
adopted the following planning policy documents: 
 
 Hampshire Minerals & Waste Plan (adopted 2013) – forms part of the 
statutory development plan for the Nati onal Park; 
 Oil & Gas De velopment in H ampshire SPD ( adopted 2016); and 
 Minerals &  Waste Safeguarding  in Ha mpshire (adopted 2016) 
 
1.20 With this up to date policy framework in place  for minerals  and waste de velopment 
in the National Park,  this Local  Plan does not include  any co verage of minerals 
and waste planning  matters. 9 
 Planning En forcement 
 
1.21 To support the protection  afforded to the New Forest  as a nationally desi gnated 
landsca pe, the Authority has a dedic ated Planning Enforcement Team to ensure  
unauthorised development is not harmful to the National Park,  its special 
qualities and  to protect the amenities of resident s. In accordance with the NPPF  
the Authority has adopted a Local  Enforceme nt Plan (adopted 2013 ) that sets out 
the policy and  procedures for enforcing planning  control in the National Park.   
 
  10 
 2. Profile of the New Forest National Park  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.1 The New Forest  is a place of outstanding  natural beauty. First created around 
1079 as a royal hunti ng Forest, it has survived for  over 900 years to become a 
highly valued part of the national heritage. It is a unique mixture of ancient 
woodla nd, heather covered heath, wide lawns, boggy mires, rivers and stre ams, 
pictures que villages and unspoilt coastlin e. The National Park e xtends from the 
wooded  slopes of Wiltshire in the north across the central New  Forest  plateau  
to the open coastline  of the Solent in the south. It has be en formed through 
the close relationsh ip between the land and its people o ver many thousands of 
years.  A wealth  of archa eological and histor ic features have been preser ved 
and much of the area is still managed by tra ditional agriculture and a system 
of commoning. 
 
2.2 The local communities  within the Natio nal Park are continually chan ging and 
adapting  to modern  life, but remarkably the Forest  has largely escaped the 
effects brought about elsewhere by large scale  development and intensive 
agriculture.  The villages retain their local character  and distincti veness  and t he 
medieval landscape of the Nova Foresta  – William the Conqueror’s royal hunting 
forest  – is still clearly apparent.  Today the National Park attracts  large numbers of 
visitors each year, who come to enjoy  the peace  and quiet, natural be auty and 
wildlife of one of the last ancient, unspoilt and open landsca pes in En gland. 
11 
 Area and Population  
 
2.3 The National  Park covers 567 square kilometres (220 square miles). In 2015 the 
Natio nal Park had a population of 35,260 people1 and with around 62 people per  
square kilometre it is the second most densely popul ated National Park after the 
South Do wns. The hous ing stock within the Natio nal Park amounts to 15,582 
dwellings (based  on 2011 Census data), of which an estimat ed 6% are seco nd 
homes or holiday lets. The main settlements of Ashurst,  Brockenhurst, Burley, 
Cadnam, Landford, Lyndhurst and Sway have bet ween 1,000 and 3,500 resi dents.  
Average house prices in the New Forest National Park are significantly higher than 
surrounding areas, with an average property price around 15 times higher than 
average annual earnings. This means the New Forest has the highest average 
house price of any of the UK’s National Parks.   
 
Landscape Character  
 
2.4 The New Forest  Landsca pe Character Assessment (2015) describes 19 character  
areas  in the National Park.  A Landsc ape Action  Plan for the National Park 
extends the landsc ape asses sment work and pro vides guidance for individuals 
and organisations  wanting  to help enhance and  conserve the special landsca pe 
chara cter of the New Forest.  At the heart of the New Forest  is an extensive area 
of unenclos ed woodla nd, grassla nd and  heath which is of international nature 
conser vation  importance and is maintained largely by the grazing of commoners’  
stock. Recent figures show that 12,044 animals are depastured on the Open 
Forest by 771 practis ing co mmoners2. This historic form of land management 
faces t hreats  from the high land and property costs. 
 
Nature Conservation  
 
2.5 In total 56% of the New Forest National P ark is designated of international value 
for nature conser vation  – the highest proportion  of land in any planning authority 
area in the country. The New Forest  Special Area of Conservation  (SAC), 
Spec ial Prot ection Area (SPA) and Ramsar sites cover more than 300 square 
kilometres  in the core of the New Forest, including the most e xtensive area  of 
heathland and valley mire in lowland Euro pe. Much of the coastline  is similarly 
designated, principally for the populations of wintering wildfowl and waders  and 
a framework is in place along the Solent (including the Natio nal Park) to ensure 
the impacts of new residential  development on the coast  are mitigated. 
 
Cultural Heritage  
 
2.6 The National Park contains a wealth of designated and non -designated heritage 
assets. There are  more than 340 Bronze Age barrows, a number of fine Iron Age 
hill forts, and numerous  remnants of medieval and later buildings, enclo sures 
and other earth works associa ted with the royal forest. The main rivers supported  
a boat and shipbuilding industry  and the coastal salt workings were among the 
                                            
1 New Forest  National Park mid-2015 Population Estimates (ONS) 
2 Verderers of the New Forest data 2016  12 
 most important in the country during the 18th century. The  National Park h as 214 
Scheduled Anc ient Monuments, 624 list ed bui ldings and 17 designated 
Conser vation  Areas,  plus three which straddle the National Park boundary with 
New Forest Dist rict. In addition to the nationally listed buildings, there are a 
significant number of non -designated heritage assets. There are also seven 
Registered Historic Parks and Gardens, four of which are grade II*.  
 
Access and Recreation  
 
2.7 The New Forest  has 42 kilometres of coastline, 325 kilometres  of Public Rights of 
Way (PROW), and over 30,000 hectares of accessible la nd (more than 50% of 
the area of the National Park). The major attracti ons, including  Buckler ’s Hard, 
Lepe Country Park,  Calshot  Activities Centre,  the Natio nal Motor Museum in 
Beaulieu, Paulton’s Park, and the villages of Lyndhurst,  Brocke nhurst, Beaulieu 
and Burley, attract  people throughout the year. 
 
2.8 Research by Tourism South East (2005) indicated that there were 13.5 million 
visitor days spent  per annum in the Natio nal Park.  15 million people live within a  
90-minute drive of the Natio nal Park. Research commissioned by the Aut hority, 
New Forest District Council, Natural England and the Forestry Com mission3 
estimated that housing  development in the period 2006-2026 within 50 
kilometres  of the New Forest  will result  in an additional 1.05 million visits per 
annum by 2026 – an increase  of 8% o ver the period. 
 
Communities and Settlement Pattern  
 
2.9 There are 37 parish and town counci ls wholly or partly within the Natio nal 
Park.  The Local Plan retains the current settlement hierarchy  within the National 
Park with Ashurst,  Brocke nhurst, Lyndhurst and  Sway identified as ‘Defined 
Villages’ due to their character,  population  and the range of facilities and services 
they provide. 
 
2.10 Other  smaller settlements with a basic  range of local services within the National 
Park include  Burley, Cadna m, East Boldr e, Landford, Netley  Marsh and 
Woodgreen. The surrounding  urban areas  of Southampton, Bournemouth and 
Salisbury  are easily reached  by rail  or road from the National Park  and pro vide a 
wide range of housin g, shops, leisure  facilities and employment op portunities. 
The towns of Lymington, New Milton, Ringwood, Totton and the Waterside are 
important local employment centres  and provide services to meet most of the 
needs of National Park residents. 
 
Economy  
 
2.11 While the National  Park is predominantly  rural in nature, the economy is 
diverse and is highly integrated with its surrounding  areas.  In 2015 there were 
2,540 businesses in the National Park,  reflecting  a very broad  range and 
types of  businesses, with the largest sector, in terms of the numbers of individual 
businesses,  being  professional, scientific and technical services. Residents  of 
                                            
3 Changing patterns of visitor numbers within the New Forest National Park, with particular reference to the 
New Forest SPA , Footprint Ecology, 2008  13 
 the National Park are employed in a wide range of busin esses and  services, with 
the health  sector; tourism; wholes ale and retail; professional and technical 
services; and education  all being  particularly impor tant employers. Only a small  
proportion of employment is now found in tra ditional rural land-based  activities 
such  as farming, forestry  and commoning, but these activities remain vital in 
maintaining the land use management practices  that help conserve the 
landsc ape charac ter of the National Park. Un employment within the National 
Park has remained at lower levels than in the south east and the UK  as a whole 
over the last decade and currently stands at 0.5% . Looki ng forward, a decline in 
the working age population is f orecast.  
 
2.12 In delivering the two statutory National Park purposes, the Authority has an 
important duty to foster the socio -economic well -being of the communities within 
the National Park. The English Natio nal Parks and the Broads UK Government 
Vision and Circular  (2010)  confirms that National  Park authorities should continue 
to focus their expendi ture on the delivery of their st atutory purposes,  while  
seeking  to maximise the socio-economic benefits available from such activity. 
Experience  to date has shown that by harnessing t he economy to environmental 
ends, tangible economic benefits can be del ivered through the statutory purposes  
whilst at the same time achie ving those purposes4. 
 
Transport  
 
2.13 The Natio nal Park is crossed  by several major routes which carry  high volumes 
of traffic. The A31, linking  South West England with Southampton and  the wider 
South East, is the most heavily used  road in the National Park, carrying up to 
77,000 vehicles daily and effectively cuts the area in two. The Natio nal Park is 
well-served for long-distan ce rail travel, with connections  at Ashurst,  Beaulieu 
Road, Brock enhurst  and Sway. Lymington – located just outsi de the National 
Park - also has two train stations  which link with the Isle of Wight ferry. There are 
a number of regular schedul ed public bus services through the National Park,  
including a regular service between Southampton and Lymington, via Lyndhurst 
and Brockenhurst. However many of the rural settl ements are less well-served 
and here public transport is not a practical option for the majority of resid ents. 
 
2.14 During the summer months the New Forest Tour bus operates three interlinked 
routes across the National Park and is aimed at both visitors and residents. 
Additionally the Beach Bus service, also operating during the summer, links the 
settlements of Hythe, L epe, Beaulieu and Lymington.  
 
2.15 Southampton and Bournemouth Airports  are located within close  proximity to the 
National Park. Plans for the expansi on of both airports  are set out in the 
respecti ve Airport Masterplans, with combined annual ai rcraft movements 
predict ed to increa se from circa 80,000 in 2016 to 146,000 in 2030. The scale  
of the impact  of this increa se of passenger aircraft flights will depend on future 
flight paths and the extent of improvements in  aircraft engine technology. 
 
 
                                            
4 Paragraph 66, English National Parks and the Broads UK Government Vision and Circular, 2010  14 
 2.16 Southampton is a major international gateway port with significant global and 
economic importance. Land at Dibden Bay, adjoining the National Park, has been 
identified as the only area of land physically capable of accommodating significant 
expansion of th e port in the draft Port of Southampton Masterplan 2016 - 2035. 
Any future development proposals for Dibden Bay must have regard to the 
Government’s National Policy Statement on Ports; potential impacts  on the 
adjacent  New Forest  National Park (as required by Section 62(2) of the 
Environment Act 19 95); national planning policy on major development in National 
Parks ; and  the legal requirements of the Habi tats Re gulations. 
 
  15 
 3. Vision and Objectives 
 
3.1 The Local Plan aims  to deliver sustainable development within the context of a 
nationally protected lands cape, in conformity with the statutory Park purposes; the 
objectives of national planning policy; and the ambitions in the New Forest National 
Park Partnership Plan 2015 - 2020.  The Vision and Objecti ves for the Local Plan 
set out how the New  Forest will look at the end of the Plan -period in 2036. 
 
3.2 The Vision has been informed by the ‘Special  Qualities’ of the National Park.  The 
special  qualities of the New Forest  are those qualities that define it, make it unique 
and immediately recognisable and, when taken  together, distin guish it from all 
other parts  of the countr y. These qualities are fundamental to the two purposes  
of the National Park and are the underlying reason  for its designation. The special  
qualities of the New Forest  were id entified through public consul tation  and are set 
out in Annex  1 of this Local P lan. 
 16 
 Vision for t he New Forest National  Park for 20 36 
 
In 2036 the New Forest’s outstanding natural beaut y has been safeguarded and 
enhanced. Sites of international, national and local importance for nature 
conservation and the National Park as a whole continue to host a variety of 
wildlife and habitats. The New Forest remains an area with a unique and 
immediately recognisable sense of place, with a mosa ic of distinctive landscapes 
and habitats including lowland heath, mire, ancient woodland, the Solent 
coastline and farmed landscapes. Tranquillity and a feeling of naturalness 
pervade large parts of the National Park.  
 
At the same time it is a place where  people can enjoy the wonderful opportunities 
for quiet recreation, learning and discovery. Recreation and visitor pressures 
have been successfully managed through a shared understanding of the issues. 
Traditional land management practices, particularly co mmoning, are supported 
and continue to thrive and shape the Forest’s landscape and cultural identity. 
The impacts of climate change are better understood and are being actively 
addressed through adaptation and change but without compromising the special 
qualities of the New Forest. People live and work sustainably and everyone 
contributes in appropriate ways to keeping the New Forest a special place for 
present and future generations.  
 
The limited development that has taken place within the National Park ha s been 
focused on catering for the socio -economic needs of local people rather than 
meeting external demand. Small scale housing development on allocated sites 
and within the defined villages of Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst and Sway 
has provided a mix of appropriate new housing to meet local needs arising within 
the National Park. Rural exception schemes and new dwellings focused on the 
needs of New Forest Commoners and Estate workers have helped deliver 
appropriate housing in the rest of the National Park.  
 
The cultural heritage and historic environment is better understood and 
appreciated through its continued protection and enhancement. The inherent 
characteristics and local distinctiveness of the individual villages ha ve been 
retained and enhanced t hrough the highest standards of design that respect the 
natural and built heritage of the Park. The rural economy has been supported by 
small scale employment development that does not conflict with the special 
qualities of the National Park.  
 
The co mmunit ies within the National Park continue to look to adjoining areas, 
including the urban areas in South Hampshire, South East Dorset and South 
Wiltshire for a range of services. The relationship with adjoining areas has been 
managed to the mutual benefit of a ll areas, including a shared approach to 
mitigating the impacts of new development on the National Par k. 
 
 
  17 
 Key Challenges  for the Loc al Plan 
 
3.3 The Local Plan has a key role in addressing the planning challenges likely to affect 
the New Forest National Park over the next 20 years , including:  
 
 Conserving and enhancing the nationally protected landscape of the New 
Forest – the outstanding natural be auty of the New Forest’s landscape is the 
primary reason for its designation as a National Park and has the highest status 
of protection in the NPPF.  
 
 Ensuring the impacts of new development on the national ly and internationally 
protected habitats of the New Forest are avoided or fully mitigated – over half 
of the National Park is designated as being of international importance for 
nature conservation and new development must not impact on the integrity of 
the New Forest and its coastal habitats.  
 
 Developing a positive strategy for the conservation and enhancement of local 
distinctiveness and heritage assets within the New Forest’s built environment 
– the New Forest has a rich built and cultural heritage and its conservation is 
key to the delivery of the first statutory  National Park purpose.  
 
 Delivering new housing to help address local needs while at the same time 
ensuring development does not compromise the delivery of the two statutory 
National Park purpos es – national planning policy recognises that National 
Park authorities have an important role to play in delivering housing for local 
people within the context of a nationally protected landscape.  
 
 Sustaining a diverse local economy – in delivering the tw o statutory National 
Park purposes, the Authority has an important duty to foster the socio -
economic wellbeing of the 35,000 people living within the National Park.  
 
 Supporting sustainable tourism and recreation within the National Park – the 
New Forest at tracts millions of visitors each year and the Authority has a 
statutory purpose to promote the understanding and enjoyment of the National 
Park’s special qualities.  
 
Strategic Ob jectives 
 
3.4 The Vision and the key challenges facing the New Forest over the next twenty 
years have been translated into nine strategic objectives, which are consistent with 
those in the New Forest National Park Partnership Plan 2015 – 2020 and reflect 
the Authority’s  overarching remit in delivering th e two statutory purposes and the 
related socio -economic duty, namely:  
 
1. To conserve and enhance the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of 
the New Forest; and  
2. To promote opportunities for the understanding and e njoyment of the special 
qualities of the New Forest by the public . 
 18 
 The Authority also has a duty under  Section 62(1) of the En vironment Act 1995 
in taking forward the two Park purposes  to seek  to foster the economic and 
social well-being  of local communities  within the Natio nal Park. 
 
3.5 The policies within the Local  Plan will contribute  towards meeting the Vision and 
Strate gic Objectives and will also help deliver a range of priority actions identified 
in the New Forest National Park Partnership Plan.  
 
Strate gic Objective Link to National 
Park purposes 
and duty  
(see above)  Relevant 
Policies 
1. Protect and enhance the natural 
environment of the National Park, 
including the natural beauty of the 
landscape a nd the range of 
habitats and species. First purpose 
 
 SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, 
DP8, SP9, , DP13, SP15  
2. Conserve and enh ance the 
cultural h eritage and  historic 
environment of the National Park, 
especially the wealth of individual 
characteristics that contribute to 
its local distinctiveness. First purpose 
 
 DP2, SP16,  SP17, 
DP18  
3. Plan for the likely impacts of 
climate  change on the special 
qualities of the New Forest. First purpose 
 
 SP11, DP12, DP13, 
SP14  
4. Strengthen the well-being, identity 
and sus tainability of rural 
communities and  the pride of local 
people in th eir area. Socio-economic 
duty 
 
 DP10, DP34, DP35, 
DP36, DP37, SP38, 
SP39, DP40, DP41  
5. Promote appro priate h ousing to 
meet local needs and mainta in the 
vibrant  commu nities of the 
National Park. Socio-economic 
duty 
 
 SP19, SP20, 
SP21,SP22, SP23, 
SP24, SP25, SP26, 
SP27, SP28, SP29, 
SP30, DP31, DP32, 
SP33    
6. Develop a d iverse a nd susta inable 
economy that co ntributes to the 
well-being of loc al commu nities 
throug hout the National Park. Socio-economic 
duty 
 
 SP42, SP43, SP44, 
DP45  
7. Encourage land management that 
susta ins the s pecial qualities of the 
National Park. First and second 
purposes and 
socio -economic 
duty SP48, DP49, DP50, 
DP51, DP52, DP53  19 
  
8. Support development which 
encourages susta inable tourism 
and recreation, and provides 
opportunities for enjoying the 
National Park’s special qualities. Second purpose  
 
 SP46, DP47  
9. Reduce the  impacts of traffic on 
the sp ecial qualities of the 
National Park and support a 
range of sustainable transport 
alternat ives within the Park. 
 Second purpose and 
socio -economic duty SP54, SP55  
 
 Local Plan Policies  
 
3.6 Section 38(6) of the Planning  & Compulsory Purchase  Act 2004 sets out the role 
of the ‘development plan’ in the planning system. This Local Plan forms a key part 
of the statutory development plan for the New Forest National Park. The policies 
in the Local Plan include both strategic p olicies (prefixed with ‘SP’) and more 
detailed development management policies (prefixed with ‘DP’). This Local Plan 
policy numbering enables loca l communities to understand which  are the strategic 
planning policies that they should be in general conformit y with in preparing 
Neighbourhood Development Plans. It should also be  emphasised  that all of the 
policies contained within the Local Plan have equal ‘development plan’ status 
within the British Plan -led planning system.   
 
  20 
 4. Strate gic Policies and Develop ment Principles  
 
Supp orting sust ainable development  
 
4.1 The NPPF states that Local Plans should contribute to the achievement of 
sustainable development . It sets out a presumption in favour of sustainable 
development, which should run through both plan mak ing and decision taking. In 
addition, the National Parks Circular (2010) states that the National Park 
authorities’ primary responsibility is to deliver their statutory purposes and in doing 
so, they should ensure they are exemplars in achieving sustainabl e development.  
 
4.2 There are three dimensions to sustainability: 
 A social  role – supporting  strong, vibrant  and healthy  communities, through 
the supply  of housin g, access ible local services and by creating a high quality 
built and natural environment; 
 An environmental role – protection and enhancement of the natural, built and  
histor ic environment and adapting  to climate change; and 
 An economic role – contributing  to a strong, responsi ve and competitive 
economy, by supporting local businesses and land managers. 
 
4.3 The N ational Park’s statutory purposes, together with the duty, broadly reflect the 
three dimensions of sustainable development in the NPPF. Policy SP1 takes a 
positive approach to sustainable development in accordance with the NPPF, 
recognising the protection afforded to National Parks in national planning policy 
and having full regard to the statutory National Park purposes and related duty.  
 
4.4 There is also increasing recognition of the wider sustainability benefits that 
National Parks offer to socie ty. These benefits are commonly referred to as 
‘ecosystem services’ and cover the services provided by the landscape and 
habitats of National Parks. These include improving air and water quality; 
controlling water flow downstream; regulating pollution; and  the benefits of 
National Parks to the public’s well -being through their enjoyment of the special 
qualities. The sustainable development policy reflects the contribution these 
ecosystem services make to society.     
 21 
 Policy SP1: Supporting sustainable development   
 
The National Park Authority will support sustainable development proposals 
that will conserve and enhance the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural 
heritage of the National Park and its special qualities; promote opportunities 
for their under standing and enjoyment by the public, and when doing so, will 
foster the social and economic well -being of local communities. Where there 
is an irreconcilable conflict between the statutory purposes, greater weight will 
be attached to the conservation and enhancement of the National Park ( in line  
with Section 62(2) of the Environment Act 19955). 
Sustainable development in the National Park is considered to be that which:  
 
a) Makes the National Park a high quality place to live, work and visit – 
including appropriate new housing to address local needs; accessibility to 
local employment opportunities; improved public transport links; local 
infrastructure provision ; and  enhanced commun ity and recreational 
facilities;  
 
b) Has a positive impact on the ability of the natural environment to positively 
contribute to society through the provision of food and water, regulation of 
floods, soil erosion and disease outbreaks, and non -material benefits such 
as recreation ;  
 
c) Enhances the la ndscape of the New Forest through high quality design and 
responding to the lo cal distinctiveness of the area;  
 
d) Contributes positively to the built and histori c environment of the New 
Forest;  
 
e) Does not impact on the integrity of the protected habitats of t he New F orest, 
including its coastline;   
 
f) Is resilient and responsive to the impacts of climate change through 
improved energy efficiency and making appropriate use of small scale 
renewable energy ; and  
 
g) Makes use of sustainable building tech niques, local m aterials and 
minimises  energy  use and waste.  
 
 
4.5 This approach is consistent with the NPPF which sets out a presumption in favour 
of sustainable development and indicates where development should b e 
restricted. National policy is clear that objectively assessed needs should be met 
unless any adverse impacts of doing so would significantly and demonstrably 
outweigh the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the Framework taken 
as a whole. Specific policies indicating where development should be r estricted 
include those relating to sites protected under the Habitats Directive, Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI); and land within a National Park.  
 
                                            
5 The relationship between the two Park purposes is commonly referred to as the Sandford Principle. 
Every effort should be ma de to reconcile any conflict between the two purposes, but if such efforts fail, the 
first purpose takes precedence.  22 
 4.6 The Authority will encourage and support the use of natural sustainable materials 
in the design  of new development. To support the delivery of sustainable 
development in the New Forest, local sources of such materials should be sought 
wherever possible. The use of locally sourced materials also benefits the local 
economy and supports land managers i n the National Park.  
 
4.7 In line with the requirement s of national policy, policy SP1 sets out the Authority’s 
overarching policy approach to the delivery of sustainable development within the 
context of a nationally protected landscape. This strategic policy  is supported by 
a more detailed policy on general development principles that the Authority 
expects all development within the National Park to be considered against.  
 
Policy DP2 – General Development Principles  
 
All new development and uses of land within the New Forest National Park 
must uphol d and promote the principles of sustainable development. New 
development proposals must demonstrate high quality design and 
construction which enhances local character and distinctiveness. This 
includes, but is not restrict ed to, ensuring: 
 
a) development is appropriate and sympathetic in terms of scale, 
appea rance, form, siting and layout; 
b) development respects the natural, built and historic  environment, 
landscape character and biodiversity; 
c) development takes oppo rtunities to protect and enhan ce the setting of 
groups and individual trees, and to include new planting of native trees 
and hedges  where appropriate ; 
d) materials are appropriate to the site and its setting; 
e) amenity is not adversely affected in terms of additional impacts, visual 
intrusion, overlooking or shading ; and 
f) no adverse impacts associated with traffic or pollution (including air, soil, 
water, n oise and light pollution) 
 
New development must also comply with required standa rds for: 
g) car parking (see Annex 2); 
h) open space (as set out in Policy DP10 ) 
 
Major development  in the N ew Forest Nat ional Pa rk 
 
4.8 National planning policy dating back many decades has  contained a clear 
presumption against major new development in National Parks because of the 
harm it would cause to the long -term national interest in conserving these 
landscapes. Major development is therefore only permitted within protected 
landscapes in exceptional circumstances, as outlined in the NPPF. In short, 
proposals have to demonstrate that the y are absolutely necessary; in the public 
interest; and that there is no practical alternative before they can be supported . 
 
4.9 The NPPG  states that it will be a matter for the relevant decis ion taker as to 
whether a proposed  development within the Natio nal Park should  be treated as 
major development, taking into acco unt the proposal  in question  and the local 23 
 context. For the purposes  of the policy, the phrase  ‘major  development’ will not 
be restricted to the definition of major development in the Town & Country 
Planning ( Development Management Procedure)  (England) Order 2015 or to 
propo sals that rai se issues  of national si gnificance. 
 
4.10 Major development is development of more than local significance (i.e. it would 
exceed the local -scale development needed to address the socio - economic 
needs of the New Forest’s 35,000 residents) which would have a long term impact 
on the landscape, wildlife or cultural heritage of the National Park because of its 
scale and form. This can include major residential and commercial development, 
significant infrastructure projects and power generation. Major development can 
have a significant impact on the special qualities of the New Forest and the 
reasons why the National Park was designated – relating to its outstanding natural 
beauty; the variety of landscapes and habitats; and the opportunities provided for 
the publi c to enjoy the Forest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dibden B ay 
 
4.11 Land at Dibden Bay, adjoining  the National Park,  is identified in the draft Port 
of Southampton Masterplan  2016 - 2035 as the only area of land physically 
capable  of acco mmodating significant expans ion of the port. The site  is a 
designated SSSI and the foreshore is desi gnated as a Special Prot ection Area 
(SPA) a nd Ramsar s ite. 
 
 Policy SP3: Major De velopment  in the National  Park 
 
In the context of the New Forest  Natio nal Park,  major development is defined 
as development which has the potential  to have a significant impact on 
the Natio nal Park and its special qualities due to its scale, charac ter and nature. 
 
Planning permission will only be granted for major development within the 
New Forest  Natio nal Park in exceptional  circumstances  and where it can be 
demonstrated to be in the public interest.  Consid eration of such applications 
should  include an assessment of: 
 
a) the  need  for  the  development,  including  in  terms  of  any  national 
considerations;  
b) the impact on the local economy of permitting or refusing it;  
c) the scope for developing outside the New Forest National Park, or 
meeting the need for it in some other way;  
d) any detrimental effect on the environment, the landscape and 
recreational opportunities and the extent to which that could be 
moderated;  
e) any  detrimental  impact  on  the  special  qualit ies  of  the  New  Forest 
National Park and whether they can be mitigated; and  
f) the  cumulative  impact  of  the  development  when  viewed  with  other 
proposals.  24 
 4.12 Prior to the designation of the New Forest  National Park in 2005, the Sec retary 
of State refused a previous proposal for major port development at Dibden  Bay, 
primarily on the basis that the environmental harm outweighed the predict ed 
economic benefits. 
 
4.13 Any future application for port use at Dibden Bay would likely be of a scale that 
would qualify as a Nationally Significant Infrastructure Project (NSIP) under the 
2008 Planning Act. Consequently the Authority would be invited to submit a Loca l 
Impact Report setting out the potential impacts of the development on the adjacent 
National Park, but would be a consultee rather than a decision maker. It would be 
the Planning Inspectorate who would consider and make a recommendation to 
the Secretary o f State on whether a Development Consent Order should be 
issued. The Secretary of State would make the final decision . 
 
4.14 As a strate gic site located immediately adjac ent to the National Park,  it is 
appropriate for the Authority’s Local  Plan to set out the range of factors to be 
consid ered should the site c ome forward for development. These include:  
 
 Any future proposals for Dibden  Bay that include major development within 
the New Forest National Park would need to satisfy the national planning 
policy tests for major development in the National Park set out in the NPPF 
and the tests in Policy SP3 on major development.  
 
 Section 62(2) of the Environment Act 1995 confirms that development 
proposals that could affect the New Forest National Park, including those 
located outside the Park that could impact on it, must have regard to the two 
statutory National Park purposes - namely the conservation and enhancement 
of the Forest’s landscape, wildlife and scenic beauty; and the understanding 
and enjoyment of the National Park’s special qualities.  
 
 Meeting the legal requirements of the Conservation of Habitats and Species 
Regulat ions 2010 in terms of the likely effects on the internationally 
designated Natura 2000 sites in the area, including the Solent and 
Southampton Water Ramsar Site and SPA; the Solent Maritime SAC; and the 
New Forest SPA and SAC.  
 
Spati al Strate gy 
 
4.15 Planning in the New Forest National Park is underpinned by the delivery of the 
two statutory Park purposes and the related socio -economic duty. These 
purposes and duty apply across the whole of the designated National Park. The 
emphasis of new development will be on small -scale proposals that reflect the 
area’s character and address the needs of local communities in the National Park, 
rather than catering for external demand.  
 
4.16 The New Forest is a rural area with small, dispersed settlements that generally 
have a limited range of facilities. None of the villages within the National Park have 
populations greater than 3,500 people and higher order services are normally 
provided in the larger towns and urban areas that fringe the National Park. The 
Local Plan s ets out where new development will take place in line with the 
principles of sustainable development and the statutory framework of the National 25 
 Park purposes. National planning policy confirms that planning should actively 
manage patterns of growth to mak e the fullest possible use of public transport, 
walking and cycling and focus significant development in locations which are or 
can be made sustainable. The New Forest National Park Partnership Plan 2015 
– 2020  includes a priority action to improve the con nectivity of routes between 
settlements in the New Forest. Sustainable development in rural areas should be 
promoted by focusing development where it will enhance or maintain the vitality 
of rural communities and sustain the settlements over the long term . 
 
4.17 The Spatial Strategy sets out the basic settlement hierarchy, with the villages of 
Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst and Sway identified as ‘Defined Villages’. 
Together these villages provide homes for around one third of all National Park 
residents and a ppropriate employment and housing development will be 
supported within the Defined Villages. In line with national policy, future 
development in the National Park is likely to be modest, but it will be important to 
ensure that the main villages continue to  prosper. These Defined Villages are 
considered to be the most sustainable settlements in the National Park as they 
have the broadest range of community facilities, local employment opportunities, 
transport links and a good range of other services for residents and visitors. The 
strategic approach for the Defined Villages seeks to:  
 
 Sustain and enhance the local services in the villages;  
 Support the important role of the villages in the local tourism economy;  
 Support the provision of appropriate housing, employment, retail and 
community facilities; and  
 Conserve the distinctive character and heritage of the villages.  
 
4.18 The remaining settlements in the National Park are smaller and have a more 
limited range of services, facilities and transport accessibility. The relatively small 
and scattered nature of these rural settlements means that the level of 
development will be more limited , but it is important that local communities across 
the National Park continue to thrive.  The Spatial Strategy therefore supports the 
provision of affordable housing for local people in and adjoining  these smaller 
settlements through the rural e xception  policy to help to address local housing 
needs. It also enables  the delivery of housing  spec ifically f or New Forest  
commoners,  Estate workers  and dwellings tied to the rural eco nomy, for 
example agricultural and  forestry workers’ h ousing. In addition, the Local Plan 
supports the provision of employment opportunities and essential local community 
facilities to support the sustainability of local communities.  
 
4.19 Provision is also made in the Local Plan for development in the National Park to 
support the redevelopment of the brownfield former Fawley Power Station site 
and to support the socio -economic well -being of the community at Calshot. These 
allocations have b een informed by consideration of the Government’s major 
development test and the Authority’s duty to foster the socio -economic well -being 
of local communities in the National Park.  
 
4.20 The Spatial Strategy also reflects the proximity of the National Park to 
surrounding  urban areas which provide a range of services. These areas  are 
more appropr iate locat ions for development. 26 
 New Forest National Park Spatial Strategy  
 
Larger towns and 
settlements outside  
the National Park  Downton   
Fordingbridge  
Ringwood  
New Milton  
Lymington  
Hythe & Dibden  
Totton & Eling  
Romsey  
 Provide a wide range of 
services, facilities and 
employment opportunities 
for National Park residents  
Defined Villages in 
the National Park  Ashurst  
Brockenhurst  
Lyndhurst  
Sway  
 The focus for  appropriate 
new community facilities, 
employment, retail and 
housing development to 
meet local needs  
 
Rural settlements in 
the National Park  Numerous smaller, 
dispersed settlements 
throughout the 
National Park  Affordable housing delivered 
through rural exception 
sites, retention of 
employment sites and 
provision of essential 
community facilities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy SP4: Spatial Strategy  
 
The  following  villages  within  the  New  Forest  National  Park  have  defined  
settlement boundaries:  
 Ashurst  
 Brockenhurst  
 Lyndhurst  
 Sway  
 
The principle of development within the ‘Defined Villages’ settlement 
boundaries as defined on the Policies Map will be supported, provided that it 
complies with the other relevant policies and is of a scale and nature 
appropriate to the character and function of the settlement.  
 
In addition to these Defined Villages, land use allocations are also made in 
other parts of the National Park to contribute towards meeting local community 
needs across the New Forest.  
 
Development proposals will only be permitted outside the Defined Village 
boundaries and allocated development sites where:  
 
a. It is in accordance with Polic y SP28  on Rural Exception Sites; or  
b. It is in accordance with Policy DP44 on employmen t sites;  or 
c. There is an essential need for a countryside location, or  
d. It meets the specific locational needs for commoners, Estate Workers or 
agricultural dwellings;  or 
e. It is an appropriate reuse or redevelopment of an existing building (s) in 
accordance wi th Policy DP49.  
 27 
 4.21 The Policies Map shows the boundaries of the Defined Villages which  have 
been reviewed as part of the Local  Plan process.  It is essential that any new 
development within the Defined Villages safeguards their character.  Any 
propo sals for development within the Defined Villages will be consid ered against  
all of the planning  policies in this Plan, including those relating  to lo cal 
distinc tiveness and design quality. 
 
  28 
 5. Protecting and Enhancing the Natural Environment 
 
5.1 This chapter sets out the strategic objectives for protecting and enhancing the 
natural environment of the National Park.  The natural environment of the New 
Forest supports a variety of habitats and wildlife and also provides multiple  
economic and so cial benefits. Protection of the natural environment c an help  
tackle a wide range of challenges, including supporting biodiversity, improving 
public health, creating sustainable business, making better use of renewable 
resources and addressing climate chan ge.   
 
5.2 The New Forest is one of the last remaining extensive areas of unspoilt natural 
beauty with rare habitats and wildlife in lowland Britain. The heart of the Forest, 
with its mosaic of ancient pasture woodland, lowland heath, lawns and wetlands 
and river systems, are intimately connected to the small -holdings and farms of the 
surrounding countryside. The National Park extends from the wooded slopes of 
Wiltshire in the north across the central New Forest plateau to the open coastline 
of the Solent in the south. It has been formed through the close relationship 
between th e land and its people over hundreds of years and much of the area is 
still managed by traditional agriculture and the historic system of commoning.  
 
5.3 The New Forest National Park is a na tionally protected landscape, which has the 
highest statu s of planning protection in the  NPPF in relation to landscape and 
scenic beauty. National planning policy also confirms that great weight in 
decisions must be given to the conservation of wildlife an d cultural heritage.  
 
5.4 In addition, over half of the National Park is further protected by international 
nature conservation designations. The New Forest is home to a wide variety of 
important and often rare wildlife, habitats and species. The importance of  these 
mean that large areas of land in the National Park and its coastline have been 
designated as Special Areas of Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Areas 
(SPA), and Ramsar sites  and they benefit from a high level of protection under 
international n ature conservation Directives. The NPPF also confirms that the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development does not apply where 
development could affect the integrity of these areas.  
 
5.5 The New Forest National Park has a higher proportion of its land co vered by 
international nature conservation designations than any other planning area in 
England, including all other English National Parks. The National Park and  also is 
under intense pressure from development .  
 
5.6 The New Forest’s natural environment is further protected by extensive areas 
designated as Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), reflecting their national 
nature conservation importance. National policies establish duties to both 
conserve and enhanc e these sites and avoid development having an adverse 
effect on them. These sites are complemented and supported by a landscape rich 
in regionally important habitats and species of principle importance for 
biodiversity, exemplified by the designation of around 400 local wildlife sites.  
  
5.7 The sense of naturalness, peace and quiet and feeling of remo teness  and 
tranquillity found within the National Park contrasts  dramatical ly with the 
intensi vely developed reside ntial and industrial environments close to its 29 
 boundaries. Indeed, the Parliamentary Ord er6 which established the New Forest  
as a Natio nal Park recognised  that over the years the Forest has  come under 
increasing  development pressure  from surrounding  urban areas  and t hat there 
has also been pressure from heavy and growing recre ational  use. It highlighted 
that these  national, regional and local pressures are threat ening its  future and 
the very qualities that make it specia l7. In the face of these pressures it is 
essenti al that the reasons for the designation of the New Forest as  a nationally 
important landscape are retained and enhanced, whilst at the same time 
facilitating  the enjoyment of the Park’s special qualities. 
 
5.8 Currently 53 % of the National Park’s SSSI area is in favourable condition8 and 
only 22% of monitored watercourses are achieving good ecological status9. 
Trends in a variety of key species, such as the curlew, appear to show declines 
which reflect a variety of pressures. The Government White Paper , The Natural 
Choice: Securing the Val ue of Nature (2011) recognise s the need for decisions to 
reverse such declines and to undertake action to deliver ecological networks t hat 
are coherent and resilient.  This requires activity to retain existing components of 
the ecological network, improve t heir quality and scale, provide buffers in the 
surrounding landscape, and stepping stones and corrid ors to ensure habitats are 
joined up. In doing so the ecosystem services that the natural environment 
provides will be enhanced and there will be concurrent  benefits for society.  
 
5.9 Measures to help the area adapt to and mitigate the impacts of climate change 
are also set out below, and include supporting small scale renewable energy 
generation, consideration of flood risks, and the provision of open space.  
 
Strategic Ob jective for Protecting the Fo rest’s Natur al Environm ent 
 
Protect , maintain  and enhan ce the natural  environm ent of the National 
Park, including  the natur al beauty of the landscape and the range  of 
habitats and spe cies. 
 
Protection of internati onally importa nt nature conser vation si tes 
 
5.10 Internationally designated nature conservation  sites in the National Park are 
Special  Protection  Areas (SPA), Special Areas of Conservation  (SAC)  and 
Ramsar Sites (Wetlands of International Importance) and are shown on the 
Policies Map. These designated areas are large, and incorporate more than 
30,000 hectares . These cover much of the core of the Forest and the c oastal 
areas, a nd in most areas  are also prot ected by the nati onal designation as Sites  
of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI).  In accord ance with the Conservation  of 
Habitats and Spec ies Regulations 2017 (as amended) , these internat ionally 
designated sites enjoy  the highest level of statutory and government pol icy 
protection.  Specific and stringent tests within the Habitats Regulatio ns are set 
to ensure that no development will harm the integrity of these areas, other than in 
exceptional circumstances.  
                                            
6 Explanatory Memorand um to the New Forest National Park Authority (establishment) Order 2005 
7 The special qualities of the National Park are highlighted in the New Forest National Park Manag ement 
Plan and are set out in Annex 1 to the Local Plan  
8 Hampshire Biodiversity Information Centre Annual Monitoring Report 2017  
9 Protected Landscapes Monitoring Framework 2017, Environment Agency  30 
 5.11 A Habitats Regulations Assessment  (HRA)  has been completed to test whet her 
developments in this  Local Plan would affect the integrity of the National Park’s 
internationally designated sites. It assessed a range of potential impacts on the 
designated sites including the recreational impacts from new households and 
visitor accommodation, and ‘urban ed ge’ impacts such as cat predation and the 
effects on habitats adjacent to developments. Policy SP5 reflects the conclusions 
of this HRA, and ensures that development complies with the Habitats 
Regulations. The main conclusions  and resulting requirements of  the HRA  are: 
 
     Prior to mitigation, the HRA cannot rule out the recreational impacts of a ny 
new residential and visitor accommodation throughout the National Park 
having a likely significant in combination effect on the New Forest SPA and  
SAC sites . The HRA also supports the evidence from the Solent Recreation 
Mitigation Partnership (SRMP) that recreational impacts cannot be ruled out 
for any residential dev elopment within 5.6 kilometres  of the  Solent SPA, SAC 
and Ramsar sites that cover the coast. Cons equently , mitigation is required 
for all proposals of these types of development  for the recreational  impacts on 
both the New Forest and the Solent coastal  designated sites.  
 
     Due to the expected small scale and wide distribution of individual windfall 
developments it  is judged that these are not likely to give rise to significant 
urban edge effects on the New Forest SAC or SPA.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy SP5: Nature Co nservation Sites of Intern ational  Impor tance 
 
 
All development must comply with the Conservation of Habitats and Species 
Regulations 2017 (as amended). Development which may affect the integrity of 
an internationally important site for nature conservation will not be permitted 
unless there are imperati ve reasons of overriding public interest for the 
development, and there are no alternatives. If this is the case, the Authority will 
require compensatory measures to ensure the overall coherence of the 
designated site.  
 
 
However, development may satisfy th e Conservation of Habitats and Species 
Regulations if sufficient and effective measures are put in place to avoid or fully 
mitigate any likely significant adverse effects of the proposal (either individually 
or in combination with other plans and projects)  through its lifetime on the 
designated sites. A contribution to the Authority’s Habitat Mitigation Scheme 
and/or the Solent Recreation Mitigation Partnership’s Scheme will enable 
developers to ensure that mitigation measures are secured.  The type of 
deve lopment and situations where impacts can be mitigated are described in 
the Authority’s Habitat Mitigation Scheme Guidance Note and the Solent 
Recreation Mitigation Strategy Explanatory Note.   
 
 
Avoidance or mitigation may not be possible in some cases due  to the scale, 
type, or proximity of the proposed development in relation to the designated 
site, and so the Authority will assess each case on its merits.  
 
  31 
 5.12 For development to comply with the Habitats Regulations, the Authority  will need 
to be certain that there will be no adverse impacts on the integrity of any of the 
designated sites. To achieve this, the Authority will need to be satisfied that 
sufficient and effective measures to avoid or fully mitigate any likely significan t 
adverse effects from a proposed development (either individually or in 
combination with other plans and projects) will be put in place .  
 
5.13 The Authority has devised a Mitigation Scheme which will fully mitigate the 
lifetime recreational impacts of certain  development on the New Forest 
designated sites. Therefore, to ensure their proposals comply with the Habitats 
Regulations, developers can make a financial contributi on to the Authority’s 
Habitat Mitigation  Scheme in relation  to the land based  designated sites, and 
to the Solent Recre ation Mitigation  Partnership’s  (SRMP) Scheme for 
development within 5.6 kilometres  of the Solent based coastal  designated 
sites. These contribut ions from developments will be used by the Authority and 
the SRMP (also known as Bird Aware, Solent) to  implement a range of measures 
that will mitigate the recreational impacts of new de velopment on the designated 
sites, and help protect and maintain these sites. The HRA of the Local Plan 
concludes that the National Park Authority’s Habitat Mitigation Scheme and the 
SRMP’s Scheme will adequately mitigate potential recreation pressures from 
development within the New Forest National Park.    
 
5.14 However, due to the scale, type, or proximity of the proposed development in 
relation to the de signated site, avoidance or mitigation and the use of financial 
contributions may not be possible in all cases. For example, if a larger number of 
windfall dwellings were to come forward on a single site, or a closely related 
cluster of sites , within 400 m etres  of the New Forest SAC and SPA, then the 
Authority will require the applicant to supply sufficient evidence for an appropriate 
assessment10 of the urban edge effects, as outlined in the HRA of the Local Plan.  
 
5.15 Details of the Authority’s Habitat Mitigat ion Scheme and that of the Solent 
Recreation Mitigation Partnership can be found in  the Authority’s Habitat 
Mitigation  Scheme  Guidance Note11 and the Solent Recreation Mitigation Strategy  
Explanatory Note12.  The Authority’s Scheme is based on the evidence i n the HRA 
that all residential and visitor accommodation throughout the National Park is 
likely to impact on the integrity of the designated sites if appropriate mitigation is 
not provided. The SRMP’s Strategy  is based on evidence that resi dential 
developm ent within 5.6 kilometres  of the coast will require mitigation.  
 
5.16 Applicants are not precluded from assessing  the potential impact of their 
proposal s on the desi gnated sites and devising their own  appropr iate mitigation  
measures. When considering these measures, the evidence presented will need 
to allow the Authority to be certain  that there will be no likely significant adverse 
                                            
10 The applicant will need to provide sufficient evidence for an appropriate assessment (that is informed 
by the HRA of the Local Plan) that will allow the Authority to be certain that there will be no likely significant 
adverse urban edge effects from the p roposed development throughout its lifetime on the integrity of the 
designated sites, and, therefore, will comply with the Habitats Regulations. Please contact the Authority 
to discuss the requirements.  
11  See the Authority’s website under Planning Policy  
12 See the Authority’s website under Planning Policy  32 
 effects from the proposed development throughout its lifetime on the designated 
sites. Applicants will need to provide sufficiently detailed information about the 
potential impacts of their proposed development on the designated features, 
species and habit ats of all the internationally protected sites and affect their 
proposed mitigation measures to demonstrate conclusively to the Authority that it 
will comply with the Habitat Regulations and there will be no likely significant 
adverse effects on the design ated sites. This will need to take into consideration 
the conclusions of the Habitats Regulations Assessment for the Local Plan and 
the proposal’s potential impacts in combination with all other planned 
development in the National Park and its surrounding areas. Under a 
precautionary principle, if the applicant does not demonstrate with certainty that 
the development, including any proposed mitigation, will not impact the integrity 
of the site, permission will be refused.   
 
5.17 Developments covered by prior approval and permitted development , contained 
in the Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) 
Orde r, are granted permission by central government a nd therefo re a planning 
application is not required. These developments, however, must still comply with 
the Habitats Regulations an d theref ore must adhere to the principles set out in 
Policy SP5. Where mitigation and/or avoidance measures are required, these can 
either be provided by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Authority, or where 
appropriate, a financial contribution can be made to the schemes set out above.  
 
Protecting, maintaining and enhancing nationally and locally important 
sites and features of the natural environment  
 
5.18 There are many nationally, regionally and locall y important sites and features that 
characterise the New Forest and these should be protected, conserved and 
enhanced, together with the coherence of its ecological network. This includes 
development proposals that would affect Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI), Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINCs) in Hampshire, 
County Wildlife Sites in Wiltshire, Local Nature Reserves (LNRs), irreplaceable 
habitats such as ancient woodlands, species and habitats of princip al importance 
and trees an d hedgerows.  
 
Policy SP6: The Natural  Environme nt 
 
Propo sals should protect, maintain and enhance nationally, regionally and 
locally importa nt sites and features of the natural environment, including 
habitats and spec ies of biodiversity importa nce, geological features and the 
water environment. 
 
Development which is likely to have an adverse effect on a Site of Special 
Scientific Interest (either individually or in combination with other developments) 
will not be permitted. Only where the benefits of the development clearly 
outweigh both the impacts on the special interest features of the SSSI and on 
the broader national network of SSSIs will an exception be considered.  
 
Development proposals which ad versely  affect loc ally designated sites, priority 
habitats and species populations,  protected species  or those id entified of 33 
 importance by national or local b iodiversity plans will be refused unless the 
Authority is satisfied that: 
 
a) It has been demonstrated that suitable measures for mitigating or 
compensating adverse effects will be provided and maintained in order to 
achieve a net gain in biodiversity value where possible, and no net loss; and  
b) There are no alternative solutions; and  
c) There are overriding reasons which outweigh the harm.  
 
In additio n, opportunities to enhance ecological or geological assets should be 
maximised, particularly in line with local Biodiversity Action Plan priorities. 
Applicants will be required to demonstrate the impacts of their proposal on 
biodiversity , and for  certain types of development13 by submission of a 
preliminary Ecological Appraisal (and any subsequent survey work it 
recommends) . 
 
 
5.19 National planning policies also support the protection and enhancement of 
geological conservation and recognise the wider benefits of ecosystem services. 
They require that impacts on biodiversity should be minimised, net gains in 
biodiversity provided where possible, and coherent ecological networks should be 
established that are more resilient to current and future pressures. Develop ment 
applications need to be accompanied by an  appropriate level of biodiversity 
information to allow an assessment of impacts, and the efficacy of any proposed 
mitigation or  compensation.  It is recommended that applicants seek pre-
application advice to establish what information is required.  
 
5.20 Trees and hedges provide very important habitats for wildlife. Trees help to 
improve air quality, reduce the effect of heavy rain, provide shelter and are integral 
to the character of the New Forest. Trees also play  a significant role in the 
sustainability of new develop ments and by retaining existing trees and carefully 
planting new trees in a well -designed layout, new developments can be 
successfully integrated as outlined in Policy DP2. The Authority’s Tr ee Guidan ce 
Leaflet14 provides advice on how this can be achieved.  
 
5.21 Older mature trees, especially oak and beech, are a particular characteristic of 
the New Forest.  They are a feature not only of the ancient woodlands of the Open 
Forest, but of the villages and ot her settlements that have developed over time as 
an integral part of the Forest landscape. The New Forest is recognised to be one 
of the most important sites in north -west Europe for ancient and veteran trees. 
The Authority will seek to conserve and protec t mature trees in order to maintain 
the local landscape character, cultural history and wildlife value of the area.  
 
5.22 All trees, regardless  of their protected status, are deemed a material 
consideration in planning applications. The Authority can make Tree Preservation 
Orders (TPOs) when considering planning applications to either prevent the 
removal of significant trees, or to protect significant trees from damage.  
 
                                            
13 In particular, for greenfield development, replacement dwellings and extensions affecting roof 
structures.   The Authority’s biodiversity checklist provides guidance.  
14 See  http://www.newforestnpa.gov.uk/downloads/file/1194/new_forest_npa_ tree_gu idance_leaflet 34 
 5.23 Hedgerows provide corridors for wildlife and link together the patchwork of the 
many habitat s that make up the countryside. They also protect soil and water, add 
beauty and character to the landscape, and provide a significant contribution to 
the local heritage and distinctiveness of the area. Hedgerows are of particular 
importance for the conser vation of farmland and woodland birds and for 
mammals, but over recent years field and domestic boundaries in the New Forest 
have been changing .  Creating links between habitats through a better network of 
hedgerows is an identified  action of the Partnership Plan  and the landscape and 
biodiversity value of hedges is outlined in the Authority’s Design Guide15, which, 
together with the New Forest Land Advice Hedgerow guide16 provide guidance on 
how to establish a hedge and what native sp ecies can be used. Opportunities to 
include new hedges in developments will be encouraged through Policy DP2.  
Hedgerows are protected by the Hedgerows Regulations17 and many require 
permission from the Authority if removal is being considered.  
 
Conserving a nd enhancing the l andscape  
 
5.24 The diverse landscape of the New F orest , including the ancient woodlands, 
heathlands, unspoilt coastline, farmed landscapes and rural villages, are special 
qualities integral to the designation as a National Park.  
 
5.25 National planning policies are particularly important in the New Fore st as they 
provide the highest  status of protection to landscape and s cenic beauty in National 
Parks.  The conservation of wildlife and cultural heritage are also given great 
weight when assessing planning applications. The whole of the New Forest 
National Park is designated as a nationally protected landscape and therefore all 
applicants will need to take account of this level of protection in any development 
proposal. The Authority will seek to en sure that the high quality, diverse and 
distinct landscapes and seascapes of the New Forest National Park will be 
conserved and enhanced.  
 
5.26 The National Parks Circular (2010) also recognises the significance of the living, 
working landscapes that have been created through history by local land 
management practices  and, in the case of the New Forest, the ancient practice of 
commoning. Seeking opportunities to enhance large -scale  landscapes and 
habitats that are characteristic of the New Forest is also one of the priority actions 
of the Partnership Plan (2015). Proposals include the restoration of land to lowland 
heathland and measur es to improve the condition of S ites of Special Scientific 
Interest, such as wetland restoration.  Restoration of landscapes where features 
have been lost or degraded will be supported by the Authority, where it contributes 
positively to landscape character.  
 
5.27 Consideration of the landscape character of l ocal areas throughout the National 
Park should inform planning applications. The New Forest National Park 
Landscape Character Assessment 2015 (LCA) provides an evaluation of the 
different areas and types of landscape character in the New Forest.  It divides  the 
New Forest landscape into a number of character areas which help to identify key 
                                            
15 See http://www.newforestnpa.gov.uk/info/20040/planning_policy/107/design_guide  
16 http://www.newforestnpa.gov.uk/downloads/download/327/hedgerow_management  
17 See https://www.gov.uk/guidance/countryside -hedgerows -regulation -and-management  35 
 attributes, differing pressures, trends and opportunities. It identifies those 
landscape features, such as variations in the natural environment,  condition of the 
landsca pe, settlement pattern and land uses, that give a locality its ‘sense of place’ 
and pinpoints what makes it different from neighbouring areas. It also acts as a 
landscape framework to inform decisions regarding the location and design of 
development and th e capacity of the landscape to absorb potential changes.  
 
5.28 The New Forest’s unique landscape character is, however, under pressure from 
a number of trends and factors  that are likely to affect the National Park over time. 
The Landscape Action Plan (LAP) de tails those issues and pressures and sets 
out objectives, management guidelines and actions for the next 20 years. It offers 
practical advice and guidance, aimed at both organisations and individuals, to 
help maintain the special character of the New Fores t.  
 
5.29 An important aspect of national policy is its recognition that planning should 
recognise the ‘intrinsic’ character and beauty of the countryside. Landscape 
character cannot be solely determined by what is visible from a publicl y accessible 
location. I t is the combination of all the various elements  and features of the 
landscape described in the LCA  that make the National Park’s landscape 
character special.  
 
5.30 The following policy seeks to ensure that development avoids detrimental impact s 
on the intrinsic landscape character and its key features.  
 
5.31 Proposals which are considered to be significant in terms of scale and/or impact 
should provide a professional landscape and visual impact assessment (LVIA) as 
part of the application submission.  
 Policy SP7 : Landscape Character  
 
Great weight in planning decisions will be given to conserving the landscape 
and scenic beauty of the National Park and to its wildlife and cultural heritage.  
Development proposals will be permitted if  they conserve and enhance the 
character of the New Forest’s landscapes and seascapes  by demonstrating 
that:  
 
a) they are informed by New Forest National Park  Landscape Character 
Assessment  and are compatible with the distinct features and type of 
landscape in which the development is located;  
 
b) the design, layout, massing and scale of proposals conserve and enhance 
existing l andscape and seascape character  and do not detract from the 
natural beauty of the National Park;  
 
c) the character of largely open and undeveloped landscapes between and 
within settlements will not be eroded or have their setting harmed; and     
 
d) landscape schemes reinforce local landscape or seascape character. 
Where planting is appropriate, it is cons istent with local character and  
native species  are used .  
 36 
  Water Resources  
 
5.32 The Environment Agency (EA) monitor the water quality of rivers in the National 
Park, based on both ecological and chemical status. Of the total river length of 
482 km, about 280 km are covered by Water Framework Directive monitoring 
stations. About one quarter of the rivers in the New Forest that are monitored are 
of good ecological status, but the majority are moderate, while a significant 
proportion are poor . There has been a decline in the length of rivers with ‘poor’ 
and ‘good’ ecologi cal status between 2011 and 2014, and a rise in those in 
‘moderate’ condition. The Environment Agency objective is to achieve high or 
good ecological status for 70% of the monitored rivers in the New Forest by 2027.  
 
5.33 The New Forest Catchment Partnership wa s establ ished in 2012. The  Authority 
will continue to facilitate its work and seek to deliver collaborative projects that are 
in accordance with the partnerships aims. The Partnership complements the work 
of the Environment Agency by undertaking more wides pread monitoring of 
waterbodies in the National Park, including standing water bodies which are often 
of national and international importance. This work highlights the need to address 
diffuse pollution which is preventing waterbodies across the National P ark 
reaching their potential and delivering ecosystem services such as biodiversity 
quality. The Partnership’s Water Environment Improvement Plan identifies 
priorities for strategic action and localised project delivery.  
 
5.34 The issues and press ures affectin g the long term quality of the region’s water 
resources  include abstraction,  pesticides, phosphates, nitrates, physical 
modification  and transport pollution18. Opportunities will be sought to support 
diffuse pollution reductions  and appropriate proposals to  mitigate impacts and 
provide clean water environments (such as new pond complexes) will be 
supported. The Authority will also support the Environment Agency, Southern 
Water and Natural England in the development of any strategic solution to 
reducing nutri ent inputs to the Solent from wastewater discharges.  
 
5.35 The EA have also defined Source Protection Zones (SPZs)19 for groundwater 
sources used for public drinking water supply. These zones show the risk of 
contamination from any activities that might cause po llution in the area, and the 
closer the activity  to the source , the greater the risk  of pollution .  
 
5.36 National planning policy emphasises that sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) 
should be provided in new developments wherever appropriate. This particularly  
applies to new development in areas at risk of flooding and to planning 
applications for major development – developments of 10 dwellings or more, or 
equivalent non -residential or mixed development – unless it is demonstrated to be 
inappropriate  or unnece ssary .  
 
5.37 Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) are designed to mimic the natural 
drainage of surface water, typically managing rainfall close to where it falls. 
Surface water flows are then slowed down and discharged at a controlled rate 
before entering a wa tercourse. The Habitats Regulations Assessment for this Plan 
                                            
18 Environment Agency, South East River Basin – Significant Water Manage ment Issues 2008 
19 http://apps.environment -agency.gov.uk/wiyby/37833.aspx  37 
 identifies that more specific mitigation may be necessary to ensure that 
contaminated surface run -off is not likely to have significant effects on any 
designated nature conservation sites.  
 
5.38 In 2013 the Environment Agency20  looked at the current and future water usage 
against climate change scenarios to provide an indicative stress situation for each 
water company. The Southern Water area is identified as being in both current 
and future water st ress. The South Hampshire area of Southern Water ’s operating 
area takes approximately two -thirds of its water from the Rivers Test and Itchen. 
Southern Water’s Water Resource Management Plan 2015 -2040 sets out a 
number of initiatives to reduce water usage and improve efficiency in supply.  
 
5.39 In addition to measures being put in place by water companies, new development 
should manage demand for water and make efficient use of this resource. All new 
homes currently have to meet the Building Regulations standard  of 125 litres per 
person per day. However, given that part of the National Park water supply is 
classed as being water stressed, requiring the tighter optional Building 
Regulations requirement of 110 litres per person per day will help to manage water 
demand and make efficient use of this resource. There is more guidance on the 
implantation of this standard in the Government’s Approved Document G 
(Sanitation, hot water safety and water efficiency).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Green Infr astruct ure and Open S pace 
 
5.40 Green  infrastru cture can be defined as a planned and managed network of open 
spaces  that perform a number of functions. It can bring a wide range of benefits 
to both communities and the natural environment, and particularly has  a role 
                                            
20 ‘Water stressed areas – final classification’, Environment Agency, 2013  Policy DP8: Safegu arding and Impro ving Water Re sources 
 
Development will not be permitted if it would risk harm to the quality and yield 
of water resources, including abstraction sites, groundwater, rivers, streams , 
still and coastal waters.  
 
In addition, all new residential development within the Southern Water 
company supply area of the National Park should be designed to achieve a 
required level of 110 litres maximum daily allowable usage per person, in line 
with the Government’s Housing Optional Technical Standard for water 
efficiency. This standard will  be encouraged in new homes elsewhere across 
the National Park area.  
 
To reduce the risk that pollutants likely to be contained in surface water run -
off will enter watercourses new development must either:  
 
a) implement appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS); or  
 
b) demonstrate that surface water run -off from the development will not 
adversely affect any designated nature conservation sites.  
 38 
 to play in providing  recre ational  opport unities,  mainta ining a good quality of life 
for local communities, and encouraging a healt hy lifestyle . Gre en infrastruc ture 
includes such  areas as parks  and gardens, green cor ridors, amenity  greenspa ce 
and allotments. 
 
5.41 A study of accessib le greenspace  in the South  East identified that the Natio nal 
Park has around 30,769 hectares of access ible natural greenspace, amounting  
to 54% of the area of the Natio nal Park21. Furthermore,  it conclu ded that all 
households  in the Park had access to natural greenspace  using  the definitions 
of the Accessible  Natural Greens pace Standard (ANGSt).  However, this does  
not take account of any effects  from t he high level of visitors to the Park. 
 
5.42 The New Forest  Open Space  Study22 ackno wledges the impor tance of open 
space and  recreational facilities within,  and close to, the National Park in 
protecting the National Park through potentially relieving some of the recreational 
pressures  on it by directing  recre ation away from such areas and the provision 
of alternati ve greenspace  in more suitable and robust lo cation s.  
 
5.43 Within the National Park, the Authority will continue to work with partners and 
communities to support opportunities to create or enhance green infrastructure. 
In recent years the Authority has supported  a range of open space enhancements, 
includ ing the prov ision of new equipment at open spaces in the main villages and 
the creation of new wil dplay sites . Green infrastructure can provide additional 
opportunities for local communities to access open space and provides for healthy 
recreation. Provision or improvement of alternative greenspaces may also be 
considered along with a range of other measures23 to mitigate the recreational 
effects of development within the National Park on the internationally important 
nature conservation designations.  Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspaces 
(SANGs) are usually large greenspaces designed to provide mitigation for 
housing development. SANGs are typically part of the strategic mitigation 
package for larger scale residential development and therefore, are  unlikely to be 
appropriate for the scale of development envisaged in the National Park.  
 
5.44 To deliver its first purpose,  the Authority believes that it is importa nt to consid er 
lands capes  on a wider scale. The Authority is delivering, together with 10  partner 
organisati ons, the Our Past Our Future  Partnership scheme for the New  Forest,  
which undertake s projec ts to restore  lost habitats.  The Aut hority has also brought 
together public, private and third sector organisations into the Green Halo 
Partnership to recognise the economic and social value of the natural environment 
– its natural capital and the ecosystem services it provides – and ensure th is 
guides decisions about how we manage or develop our area. This will include 
exploring opportu nities for new green infrastructur e. For example, green 
infrastructure  will be delivered as part of the Green Infrastruc ture Strategy for the 
South Hampshire sub-region that will be implemented by the Partn ership for 
Urban South Hampshire (PUSH ). 
 
                                            
21 An analysis of accessible natural green space provision in the South East, (McKernan & Grose, 2007) 
22 New Forest Open Space Study, commissioned by the National Park Authority and New Forest District 
Council (2007)  
23 The Authority will decide what measures are acceptable for a development to comply with the Habitats 
Regu lations – see Policy SP5 and accompanying text.                                                                                                                                                             39 
  
Policy SP9: Green Infrastructure 
 
Proposals which create, maintain and enhance green infrastructure will be 
supported, particularly where they:  
 
a) encourage connectivity between different habitats and designated sites;  
b) provide opportunities for local communities to access open space and 
provide for healthy recreation; and  
c) reliev e recreational pressure on internationally important nature 
conservation sites.  
 
The Authority will work with other partners and adjoining authorities to develop 
green infrastru cture, and to ensure the impacts of development both within and 
outside the National Park’s boundary do not adversely affect the landscape 
character of the National Park or the internationally important nature 
conservation designations. However, providing new Suitable Alternative 
Natural Greenspace (SANG) in the nationally protected landscape of the 
National Park as mitigation for development outside the National Park is not 
appropriate, and will only be considered in exceptional circumstances where 
very si gnificant benefits for the landscape, biodiversity and internationally 
designated sites of the National Park can be clearly demonstrated.  
 
 
5.45 The Authority will also work with Natural England and other local authorities, as 
well as a range of relevant stakeholders, to develop a strategic approach to 
prevent adverse effects on internationally designated nature conservation sites in 
the New Forest.  
 
5.46 With the population who live within an easy journey of the New Forest increasing 
rapidly, and planned devel opment immediately surrounding the Park set to rise 
significantly, an increased number of visitors are likely to come to enjoy the 
National Park in the coming years. Clearly this will present challenges in how to 
balance the enjoyment of visitors with the conservation and enhancement of the 
special qualities of the National Park. Recreation management will be critical, and 
a review of the New Forest National Park Recreation Management Strategy 
(2010 -2030)  is being undertaken.  
 
5.47 To take forward the actions w ithin the Recreation Management Strategy (RMS) a 
RMS Steering Group comprising six organisations with statutory responsibilities 
for aspects of recreation, and an RMS Advisory Group, comprising the same six 
organisations plus 10 key other organisations, ha ve adopted the following Priority 
Task:  “…to agree an overall plan for where within and around the National Park 
we should encourage people to go to enjoy outdoor recreation, and how this  
should be achieved. The aim would be to both improve the New Forest’ s 
recreational experience and enhance the other special qualities (including its rich 
wildlife, tranquillity and commoning tradition) and to avoid inadvertently damaging 
the special qualities which people come to the New Forest to enjoy .” 
 
5.48 National plannin g policy defines open space as including all open space of public 
value, including not just land but also areas of water which offer opportunities for 40 
 sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity. It confirms the importance 
of access to high qualit y open spaces and opportunities for sport and recreation, 
and Policy DP10 supports this approach. The open space requirement of 3.5 
hectares of open space per 1,000 population has been developed from the Open 
Space Study co mmissioned by the Authority and N ew Forest District Council. The 
standard comprises the 0.2 hectares per 1,000 population of designed play 
spaces for children and young people, 1.25 hectares of formal recreational space 
per 1,000 population and 2 hectares of informal open space per 1,000 population. 
Based on the open space requirement as set out above, the Authority requires 35 
square metres of public open space to be provided per person.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.49 New housing  development should incorporate  open amenity  areas  and features,  
preferably  within its site boundary to enhance  the quality of the environment 
for the benefit of residents, biodiversity  and the lo cality. The requirement to 
provide public open space is separate to, and in addition to, the provision of 
alternative greenspace for mitigation against impacts on the internationally 
designated nature conservation sites.   
 
Climate Change 
 
Strategic Ob jective for Planning f or Climate Change  
 
Plan for the likely  impacts of climate  change, particul arly on the Special 
Qualiti es of t he area 
 
5.50 Climate  change will be one of the most significant  factors influencing chan ge in 
all aspects  of the National Park in the future. The government is now clear that 
climate change is happening, and it is due to human activity. The Committee 
on Climate Change has identified24  six key areas  of climate change risk th at 
need to be managed as a priority: 
 flooding  and coastal change 
 the impact of high temperat ures on health and wellbeing 
 risks to natural c apital 
 risks of future water shortages 
 impacts  on the global food system 
 risks arising from new and emerging pests and diseases  
 
                                            
24 UK Climate Chang e Risk Assessment 2017 Synthesis repor t 
    
 Policy DP10: Open  Space 
 
Propo sals that result  in the loss of existing  open s pace will not be permitted. 
 
Development should either  provide for the enhancement of existing  open 
space  and amenity  areas, or provide on-site open  space to the minimum 
provision standard  of 3.5 hectares of public open space per 1,000 
populatio n. 41 
 5.51 The main impacts  from a changing climate  in the National Park  are expected to  
affect habitats, landscape, archaeology, property, human safety, recreation, land 
management, water resources and the rural economy .  
 
5.52 The UK Climate Projections were published in August 2009 and estimate d that by 
the 2080s southern England could face an increase in average summer 
temperatures of between 2 and 7 degrees Celsius. There could be about a 40% 
decrease in average summer rainfall in parts of the far south of England. This 
emphasises that the UK’s  climate is changing and that in order to prevent the 
problem becoming worse, carbon emission s in the UK need to be reduced.  
 
5.53 Through the Climate Change Act the  Government has set statutory targets to 
reduce UK greenhouse gas emissions by 80% on 1990 level s by 2050, and to 
achieve at least a 34% reduction by 2020, and 57% by 2030.  
 
5.54 The Authority aims to minimise the vulnerability and maximise  resilience to the 
impacts of climate change on the National Park, in particular on its special 
qualities.  
 
Policy SP11: Climate C hange  
 
The Authority will support proposals to mitigate climate change and adapt to 
the impacts of climate change through:  
 
a) avoiding development in areas at highest risk of flooding;  
b) locating development so as to reduce the need to travel by c ar; 
c) sustainable  design  and  construction of buildings  including  improved  
water  and energy efficiency25; 
d) supporting small scale renewable and low carbon energy generation; and  
e) enabling wildlife and habitats to adapt to climate change .  
 
 
 
5.55 There is some  uncertainty  over how individual spec ies and habitats in the 
New Forest  will respond to climate change, but it is likely that some habitats will 
chan ge or be lost, particularly  coast al habitats,  together with the appearance 
of new  species.  Mainta ining a network of  green i nfrastructure c an help  to increase  
the robustness of habitats by reducing  their fragmentation by c reating  and 
restor ing habitat and wildlife networks.  
 
5.56 Measures  to reduce the National Park’s vulnerability to climate change include  
sustainable  transport,  consi dering flood risks, supporting  more energy efficient 
new development and local food production. 
 
Flood  Risk   
 
5.57 The Authority has no direct responsibility for flood protection or coastal defence. 
As the local planning authority for the coastline in the National Park, however, it 
is important that future strategic planning and development management 
decisions are consistent with the North Solent Shoreline Management Plan 
(2010).  
                                            
25 Consistent with the Government’s zero carbon buildings policy . 42 
 5.58 Shoreline Management Plans are non -statutory plans that evaluate the known 
risks to people, property and the built and natural environment from the sea and 
coastal processes . They feature policies for each section of coast based on the 
findings. The coastline of the National Park is covered by the North Solent 
Shoreline Management Plan, and it sets out detailed policies for coastal 
management over the next 100 years.  
 
5.59 Within the National Park the Shorel ine Management Plan26 propo ses to ‘Hold 
the Line’ (i.e. maintain or upgrade the level of protection provided by existing 
coast al defences) in built-up locations on the coast such as around Lymington, 
but proposes ‘No Active Intervention’ (i.e. a decis ion not to invest in  providing  
or maintaining  any defences) for other less inhabited areas. It also  makes 
allowance  for landowners to maintain  their own defences where t hese already 
exist, even though landowners are advised to contact the Aut hority before 
undertaking  any works.  The Authority will consult  New Forest D istrict Council as 
the Coastal Authority on planning applications where neces sary. The Authority 
will also contin ue to be a member of the Solent Foru m, which cons iders and 
provides advice on strategic issues for aut horities involved in planning and 
management of the coast in the Solent area.  
 
5.60 Flood  zones  have been developed by the Environment Agency  and their use is 
outlin ed in the National Planning Practi ce Guidance (NPPG)27. Zone 1 is 
where t here is little or no risk of flooding, in Zone 2 there is a low to medium risk 
and in Zone 3 there is a high risk. The Environment Agency publishes maps 
of flood risk on its website  which shows the location of these  zones  and should 
be referred to as the most up to date source of information  on flood risk. 
These  maps  are  continually  being  updated  and  will  be  used  in  the 
consid eration of policy DP12 . The National Park is at most risk of coastal 
flooding, but there is also significant flooding from the Lymington River in 
Brocke nhurst and to a lesser degree the Beaulieu Ri ver. The Cadnam  area of the 
National Park is also affected by surface water flooding and part of the evidence 
base for this Local Plan includes a Level 1 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA) commissioned  jointly  by the National Park Authority and New Forest 
District Co uncil in 2017.  
 
5.61 Natio nal Planning  Practice Guidance sets out the ‘sequential  test’ that will be 
used  to assess all planning  applications to direct development away from 
flood Zones  2 and 3 as the areas  at highest risk of flooding. This will also 
need to take account of the broader consi derations  set out in the New Forest 
Strate gic Flood  Risk Assess ment 2017, and consider all localised flood risk areas 
and all surface water flood risks.  Only if there are no  suitable alternati ve sites 
shou ld development in areas of higher risk (Flood Zones 2  and 3) be  considered. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
26 See http://www.northsolentsmp.co.uk/  
27 See NPPG and the Environment Agency’s Flood Maps at 
http://planningguidance.communities.gov.uk/ and Environment Agency floodmaps  43 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.62 It will be necessary  to ensure  that the main settlements are  given protection 
through carefully designed defences  which do not adversely  affect the sites of 
European nature conservation  importance or create additional flooding issues 
for other parts of the coast. In addition  to coast al protection works,  other small 
scale  coastal development might include coast al access works, upgrading  
existing  coast al car parks and replacing bea ch huts and e xisting  mooring 
facilities. The aim of this approach is to maintain the character of the undeveloped 
coast, protecting and enhancing its distinctive landscape.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.63 Policy DP13 seeks to protect the undeveloped nature of the National Park 
coastline. The policy ensures a level of protection consistent with the 
Government’s Marine Policy Statement (MPS) and the emerging South Marine 
Plan. Once adopted, the South Marine Plan will help integrate marine and land 
planning, contributing to vibrant coastal co mmunities and consideration of 
cultural heritage, seascape and local environmental quality. The Authority will 
work with the marine planning authority to ensure that the seascape quality of 
the New Forest coastline is maintained  and enhanced . 
 
5.64 The England Coast Path (ECP) is a new national trail being created by Natural 
England  through the  Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009, and  will extend along 
the coast of  the New Forest. It will allow people to gain access along  the coast 
and provide opportunities to enjoy one of the special areas of the National Park. 
Any small -scale proposals associated with the coast path will be considered 
against Policy DP13 on coastal development .  Policy DP12: Flood  Risk  
 
Development proposals will not be  permitted if they: 
 
a) would increase the risk  of coastal, fluvial, or surface  flooding , or coastal 
erosi on; 
b) do not comply with the sequential  test or are inappropriate in high flood 
risk areas  (as defined by the Environment Agency’s Flood  Zones 2 and 3 
categories and the New  Forest  Strate gic Flood Risk Assess ment, 2017 ); 
or 
c) are not compatible with the appropr iate Shoreline Management Plan 
and Coastal Defence Strate gy. 
 
Relevant developments will require a flood risk assessmen t. 
 
Policy DP13: Coastal D evelopment  
 
Small scale  proposals for development on the coast will be permitted provided 
that they:  
 
a) will not have adverse impacts on coastal processes;  
b) are in keeping with the character of the coast;  
c) will not significantly prejudice landscape interest and will have regard to 
the importance of seaward and landward views;  
d) protect or enhance coastal habitats and species; and  
e) will not lead to the consolidation of scattered development.  
 44 
 Renewable Energy  
 
5.65 The NPPF supports  the delivery of renewable and  low carbon  energy and 
associat ed infrastructure  and requires local planning authorities to have a positi ve 
strategy to promote energy from rene wable and low  carbon sources.  The NPPF 
places the responsibility on all communities to contribute to energy generation 
from renewable or low carbon sources. In response to this requirement, the 
Authority has taken a positive approach to appropriate renewable energy 
proposals in the Nat ional Park. This includes the allocation of grant funding to 
support local community renewable energy projects; and the support offered 
through the planning system to proposals that respect their location within a 
nationally protected landscape.  
 
5.66 Natio nal planning policy states that planning authorities should design their 
policies to maximise  renewable and low carbon energy development while 
ensur ing that adverse impacts  are addressed  satisfactorily, including cu mulative 
landsca pe and visual impacts.  In addition, the NPPF  clarifies that great weight 
shou ld be given to conserving landscape and scenic beauty in  Natio nal Parks .. 
Consequently, the potential  for renewable ener gy generation  within the National  
Park will need  to be balanced against t he potential adverse visual and amenity 
impacts  on the landsc ape, including views into  and out of the Park. 
 
5.67 To avoid compromising the landscape character and beauty of the National Park, 
the policy emphasis is on supporting appropriate, small scale renewable energy 
developments that provide energy for an individual household or business use, or 
for a small local  community facility within the National Park. Proposals will be 
supported in appropriate areas of the National Park outside areas designated as 
nature conservation sites (including Natura 2000 sites, Sites of Special Scientific 
Interest and National Nature  Reserves), where they do not cause damage to the 
natural beauty, wildlife, cultural heritage, tranquillity and other special qualities of 
the National Park, in accordance with the statutory purposes and national policy. 
The New Forest is not an appropriat e location for large on -shore wind 
development due to insufficient wind speed and the impact such development 
would have on the landscape and statutory National Park purposes. Similarly, 
larger renewable energy developments to meet a wider -than-local need are not 
appropriate within th e National Park.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy SP14: Renewable Ener gy 
 
Development proposals for, or in corpor ating, rene wable energy generation will 
be permitted where the y: 
a) are smal l-scale and provide energy for individual households or 
busin esses, or  for small local co mmunity facilities ; and 
b) are loca ted and designed to have minimal  visual impact; and 
c) do not have adverse  impact  on the landscape character, natural beauty, 
wildlife, tranquillity or other special qualities of the N ational Park.  
 
Planning permission for renewable energy developments likely to have an 
adverse effect on a designated nature conservation site (including Natura 
2000 sites, Sites of Special Scientific Interest and National Nature Reserves) 
will not be granted.  45 
 5.68 All forms of small scale energy production will be supported where these meet the 
criteria set out in Policy SP14. Evidence suggests, however, that the most 
appropriate forms of renewable energy production in the New Forest are likely to 
be solar and bioma ss.  
 
5.69 Some small scale renewable energy development does not require planning 
permission, such as the use of solar panels in a domestic setting. However, 
domestic scale wind turbines do require planning permission and the above policy 
will apply. It is rec ommended that applicants seek advice on their proposals from 
the Authority before making an application.   
 
5.70 Proposals should take account of the need to protect the natural and built 
environment, including consideration of potential visual and noise impact s of this 
type of develo pment. The Authority’s Design Guide provides advice on the 
incorporation of energy efficiencies into the design of buildings.  
 
Pollution  
 
5.71 Lying as it does  between the large urban areas of Southampton, the industrial 
areas  along Southampton Water and the South East Dorset conur bation, the 
National Park is vulnerable  to pollutants from industry, vehicles and many ot her 
sources which can harm human and other species health, together with general 
noise and light pollution associat ed with urban areas. 
 
5.72 An unpolluted environment is recognised as one of the key ingredients to a good 
quality of life . There is a n air quality  problem in Lyndhurst, where an Air Quality 
Management Area has been designated due to the presence of excessive 
transport related pollutants. The Air Quality Action Plan for Lyndhurst28 prepared 
by New Forest District Council sets out traffic management me asures including 
the restriction of  HGVs  using the High Street, controlling traffic lights , and 
reviewing signage in Lyndhurst  directing  visitors into Lyndhurst ’s main car park.  
 
5.73 The impacts on air quality arising from the increased traffic generated by the 
development planned in this Local Plan has been assessed29 to determine 
whether it would raise pollution levels that could affect the integrity of the 
internationally designated nature conservation sites in and around the New 
Forest. The evidence concluded that this would not be the case but highlighted 
that, when combined  with traffic growth generated from surrounding areas, the 
impact of ammonia and acid deposition  is uncertain and  require s monitoring. 
Consequently the National Park Authority will work with surrounding local 
authorities and other partners to mon itor the in combination impacts on the 
protected habitats and to identify any changes that occur during the life of the 
Local Plan. If monitoring at any time shows that the change is likely to have a 
significant effect on the designated sites, the Authorit y will support other 
authorities in devising an appropriate strategic mitigation strategy.  
 
 
                                            
28 See http://www.newforest.gov.uk/airquality  
29 See HRA of the local Plan together with supporting air quality evidence documents  46 
 Tranquilli ty 
 
5.74 The NPPF confirms that planning policies should aim to protect areas of 
tranquillity which have remained relatively undisturbed by noise and are prized for 
their amenity value . The tranquillity that can still be found in many  parts of the 
New Forest National Park is cited as one of its valued ‘special qualities’ and 
therefore  the Authority will seek to protect it. The National Park’s Management 
Plan describes tranquillity as the  relative peace and naturalness, combined with 
the open and unfenced landscape of much of the area that gives a sense of space, 
remoteness and freedom. This contrasts with the increasingly built up and 
intensively managed lan dscape of southern England and provides a means of 
release from the pressures of modern life.  
 
5.75 Tranquillity can be damaged by intrusive sights and sounds, particularly from 
man-made structures such as new roads, poorly -designed lighting and overhead 
power lines. To help protect tranquillity the Authority has developed a map 
highlighting the tranquil areas of the New Forest30. It identifies areas in the north 
and south -east of the New Forest as being the most tranquil in the National Park. 
The key criteria used to determine the levels of tranquillity were the amounts of 
man-made noise and visual disturbance in the natural environment. In order to 
retain this special quality for future generations the potential impacts of noise and 
light pollution will be car efully controlled in Policy SP15. Visual intrusion and 
landscape character will also be protected through Policy DP2 and Policy SP7. 
The Authority will aim to acquire International Dark Sky Reserve status from the 
International Dark Sky Association.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                                            
30 See http://www.newforestnpa.gov.uk/info/20096/unspoilt_landscape/358/tranquil_areas_mapping  Policy SP15: Tranquillit y 
 
New development should avoid, or provide mitigation measures, if the proposal 
will lead to noise, visual intrusion,  nuisa nce and other unac ceptable 
environmental impacts  on the National  Park and its special qualities. 
 
This should include reducing  the impacts of light pollution on the  ‘dark skies’ of 
the National Park and control  of development to prevent artificial lighting from 
eroding  rural darkness and tranquillity.  
 
Development proposals that seek to remove visually intrusive man-made 
structures from the landscape will be supported.  
 47 
 6. Protecting and Enhancing the Historic and Built Environment 
 
6.1 This chapter takes forward the spatial objectives for protecting and enhancing the 
historic and built environment of the National Park.  
 
6.2 The New Forest has a distinctive character which is made up not only of the 
numerous Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas and Scheduled Ancient 
Monuments, but also the many and varied locally important features. Many 
unlisted cob buildings,  simple brick cottages, and early bungalows give parts of 
the New Forest their distinctive character .  
 
6.3 There is a variety of historic landscapes within the National Park that have been 
shaped by past human interaction with the land. Significant components  of historic 
landscapes include field systems (including lynchets, ridge and furrow), historic 
woodland management, medieval settlements, traditional farmsteads and 
settlements, and networks of ancient routeways.  
 
6.4 Archaeological sites and evidence in the N ew Forest range from finds that date 
from up to 500,000 years ago to observation posts from the Cold War period. 
Known sites and features are recorded on the publicly available Historic 
Environment Record, but it is likely that many still await identificat ion and 
recognition.  
 
6.5 Small -scale changes to the local landscape, buildings, settlements and sites take 
place almost constantly in responses to shifting values, fashions, availability of 
products and new technology. Although change is inevitable it is ofte n at the 
expense of those features which give the New Forest its particular character. Over 
time this can cause a negative impact leading to suburbanisation and loss of 
character.  
 
 
Strategic Ob jective for Protecting t he Forest’s Hist oric and Built 
Environm ent 
 
Conserve and enha nce the cultur al heritage and historic environm ent of 
the National  Park, especially the wealth of individual  character istics  that 
contribute to  its lo cal distincti veness 
 
Heritage  Assets  
 
6.6 The NPPF  defines a heritage asset as a building, monument, site, place, area 
or landscape identified as having a degree of significance meriting consid eration 
in planning decis ions becau se of its heritage interest. Designated heritage assets 
in the National Park include Sche duled Monuments, Registered  Parks and 
Gardens, Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas.  
 
6.7 However, the New Forest also contains a wealth of locally important historic 
interest that are not statutorily designated as heritage assets. These include sites 
on the Authority’s local list of buildings  that contribute to the character and 
appearance of the National Park. There are at least 1,765 buildings that have 48 
 been identified as locally important within the National Park. The Authority uses 
criteria set out by Historic England to d etermine whether a building should be 
included on the local list. At the moment the local list comprises buildings of local 
interest in Conservation Areas; but additional buildings of local interest have also 
been identified by local communities when devel oping Village Design Statements. 
The Authority intends to work with parish and town councils to identify additional 
buildings of local interest outside Conservation Areas, as well as with local groups 
through initiatives in the ‘Our Past Our Future’ landsc ape scheme.  
 
6.8 Where proposals for new development may have an impact on a heritage asset, 
applicants are required to produce a heritage statement setting out the 
significance of the asset, and justify the development proposals in relation to the 
character and setting of the heritage asset, in accordance with the NPPF. The 
more important the asset, the greater the weight, and any harm or loss should 
require clear and convincing justification, as emphasised in the NPPF.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas 
 Policy SP16: The Historic and B uilt Environm ent 
 
Propo sals sh ould pr otect, maint ain or enhance national ly, regionally and loc ally 
importa nt sites and features of the historic and built environment, including  local 
vernac ular bui ldings, arc haeological sit es and designed and histor ic 
lands capes, and, where appropr iate, help secure  a sustainable future for those  
heritage assets at risk. 
 
a) Propo sals will be s upport ed where t hey conserve and enhance the 
significance of desi gnated or non-designated heritage assets, including 
their settin g. In particu lar where:  
 
(i) It does not harm the special interest, character or appearance of a 
Conservation Area or its setting; or  
(ii) it does not harm  the significance, or result in the loss  of a sche duled 
monument, listed building, or registered park a nd garden; and  
(iii) it makes a  positive contribut ion to, or better reveals the significance 
of a heritage asset or its sett ing; and  
(iv) any harm is outweighed by the public benefits of the proposal 
including  securing its optimum viable use; and 
(v) helps secu re the long term conser vation  of a heritage asse t. 
 
b) All d evelopment proposals that affect, or have the potential to affect,  a 
designated or non-designated her itage asset will need to  be accompanied 
by a clearly evidenced justification setting out the impact of the development 
on the heritage asset and a suggested mitigation that is p roportio nate to 
the impact and  significance of the asset, includ ing any contribut ion made 
by its settin g. 
 
c) Where proposals are likely to affect a site of known or potential 
archaeological interest, an appropriate desk -based assessment will also 
be required, including field e valuation where necessary. 49 
 6.9 Listed buildings are buildings officially defined as being of special architectural or 
historic interest and there are 624 Listed Buildings in the National Park, which 
range from palaces and country houses to many smaller but more typical cottages 
and ‘hovels’ built of brick, timber frame or cob.  
 
6.10 Conservation Areas are 'areas of special architectural or historic interest, the 
charact er or appearance of which is desirable to preserve or enhance'. There are 
17 conservation areas wholly within the National Park, with a further three 
straddling the boundary with New Forest District Council. The boundaries of all 
these conservation areas a re shown on the Policies Map.  
 
6.11 In pursuance of its responsibilities under both National Park purposes and through 
the duty imposed by the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act, 
the Authority is developing a framework for the management of conservation 
areas in the National Park. This comprises:  
 
 Conservation Area character appraisals , one for each conservation area, 
which identifies the special historic and architectural qualities of an area 
which justify its designation  
 Conservation Areas Management Plan , covering all conservation areas 
(adopted October 2008)  
 Conservation Area specific management plan covering individual 
conservation areas.  
 
6.12 Development to listed buildings and in Conservation Areas, and their settings , will 
be carefully controlled to ensure that their character is retained. The Conservation 
Area Character Appraisals are important sources to refer to in making planning 
applications and they will be used in evaluating the appropriateness of 
development pr oposals in those areas.  
 
6.13 On the Historic England register there are seven historic parks and gardens in the  
National Park31, whilst a much longer list of locally important sites is set out on the 
Hampshire Register of Historic Parks and Gardens32. 
 
6.14 Where pla nning applications involve listed buildings Grade I or II*, scheduled 
monuments, registered parks and gardens, or a registered battlefield Historic 
England must be consulted. In addition, the Authority is required to consult the 
National Amenity Societies33 where the proposal would include full or partial 
demolition of a listed building.  
 
Archaeology  
 
6.15 There are around 200 Scheduled Monuments in the National Park, but over 3,700 
known non -designated sites recorded on the publicly available Historic 
Environment Record (HER)34 many of which are yet to be fully understood.  
 
6.16 Historic England maintains the Heritage at Risk  register that identifies sites most 
                                            
31 Avon Tyrrell, Bro ckenhu rst Park, Cadland House, Exbury House, Hale Park, Pylewell Park, Rhine field. 
32 ‘Hampshire’s Historic Parks and Gardens’,  Hampshire Co unty Coun cil, 2007.  
33 See Glossary for full list of societies.  
34www.hants.gov.uk//historicenvironmentrecord    50 
 at risk of being lost as a result of neglect, decay or inappropriate development. On 
the register w ithin the National Park there are currently 10 Scheduled Monuments 
and two buildings. The Authority will monitor buildings or other heritage assets at 
risk through neglect, decay or other threats, proactively seeking solutions for 
assets at risk through discussions with owners and willingness to consider 
positively development schemes that would ensure the repair and maintenance 
of the asset, and, as a last resort, using its statutory powers.  
 
6.17 National planning policy emphasises that where a proposed deve lopment will lead 
to substantial harm to, or loss of, a designated heritage asset the applicant must 
demonstrate that the harm or loss is necessary to achieve substantial public 
benefits that outweigh the harm or loss, or all of the following apply:  
 the na ture of the heritage asset prevents all reasonable uses of the site; and  
 no viable use of the heritage asset itself can be found in the medium term 
through appropriate marketing that will enable its conservation; and  
 conservation  by  grant  funding  or  s ome  form  of  charitable  or  public 
ownership is demonstrably not possible; and  
 the harm or loss is outweighed by the benefit of bringing the site back into 
use. 
 
6.18 As part of 'Our Past, Our Future' the Authority aims to facilitate the conservation 
and enhancement of the historic built environment of the National Park, through 
raising awareness, developing specialist building skills, encouraging sensitive 
management and promoting availability and access to these skills.  
 
Local Distinctiveness  
 
6.19 The diffe rent villages and landscapes in the National Park all have a distinctive 
character, although they are also all recognisably part of the New Forest, linked 
by its particular history, economy and culture.  
 
6.20 The first National Park purpose, together with natio nal planning policy, recognises 
the importance of conserving and enhancing an area’s local character. The level 
of development pressure within the National Park is evidenced by the level of 
planning applications received by the Authority each year. Since b ecoming a 
Local Planning Authority in 2006 the Authority has determined an average of just 
under 900 planning applications per year35. 
 
6.21 Whilst the vast majority of these applications entail minor development, 
increasing  amounts of such  small scale household development can result in 
a creeping  suburbanisati on of the National Park, slowly eroding  the Fo rest’s 
distincti ve character36. 
 
6.22 Many of the grass verges within the Forest are designated as Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest (SSSIs) and are of national importance for nature conservation. 
They are therefore legally protected against damage. In addition, grass verges 
contribute to t he appearance and rural character of the National Park. Parking, 
driving or storing building materials on the grass verges can cause serious 
                                            
35 Developmen t Management statistics, NFNPA 2017  
36 National Park Authority ’s Annual Monitoring Report 2016  51 
 damage and have a harmful impact on their landscape, ecological and grazing 
value. Much work has been undertaken on  this issue in the Western Escarpment 
Conservation Area, and through the work undertaken by the Verderers of the New 
Forest and Forestry Commission as part of the Higher Level Stewardship scheme.  
 
6.23 To build a new drive or access over a SSSI verge, planning consent from the 
National Park Authority and approval from Natural England and the Verderers of 
the New Forest is required , as well as consent from the Forestry Commission if it 
is on Crown Land. In most cases , the Authority will consider the use of planni ng 
conditions restricting the storage of building materials and parking of contractor’s 
vehicles on the protected grass verges.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Design Principles  
 
6.24 Development, whether of a traditional or modern design, should  be sympathetic 
and in keeping  with its context and  surroundin gs. New buildings should  have a 
low (or no) carbon  footprint and all new develo pment should make a positive 
contribut ion to the National  Park particu larly through its design, size, scale , 
materials  and la yout. 
 
6.25 Sustainable design and construction focusing on maximising a site’s natural 
resources and energy efficiency can include the use of passive design techniques, 
where this would not be inappropriate due to any impact it may have on the historic 
environment.  
 
6.26 A Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document for the National Park was 
adopted by the Authority in 2011, which sets out more details on the 
characteristics of the New Forest and ways of maintaining  local distinctiveness 
and embed the  principles  of good d esign  into new development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy SP17: Local Distinctiveness 
 
Built development and changes of use which would individually or 
cumulatively erode the Park’s local character, or result  in a gradual 
subur banising effect within the N ational  Park will not be  permitted. 
 
Policy DP18: Design P rinciples  
 
All new development will be required to achieve the highest standards for 
new design: including  location, layout, size, scale, details and materials  of 
new development within t he National  Park, with particular regard to: 
 
a) enhancing  the built and historic environment  of the New Forest;  
b) creating  a safe environment where people want to  live, work a nd visit; 
c) ensur ing new development is ac cessible where appropriate; 
d) ensur ing all new development incorpora tes sound sustainable design 
and constru ction principles and good environmental practices;  and 
e) ensur ing development is contextually appropriate  and does  not harm key 
visual features, landscape setting  or ot her valued co mponents of the 
landsca pe, and enhances these where appropr iate. 
 52 
 6.27 National planning policy emphasises that new development should create safe 
communities where crime and disorder, or the fear of crime do not undermine 
quality of life. Employing the principles of ‘Secured by Design’, which is a national 
police initiative focussing on ‘designing out crime’ in the  design and layout of new 
residential and commercial development, can help address these concerns. 
Principles, which include places where publicly accessible spaces are 
overlooked and places that promote a sense of ownership and respect, should 
be taken into account in new development proposals.  
 
6.28 In addition, several communities within the National Park have produced a 
Village De sign Statement which sets out a statement of the individual character 
of a particular tow n or village. These are then adopted as Supplementary 
Planning Documents by the Authority and are used in assessing relevant 
planning applications. The Authority will continue to support parishes that wish 
to undertake a Village Design Statement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sustainab le design and construction  
 
6.29 Natio nal planning policy expects  all new de velopment to ad opt and inc orpora te 
sustainable construction  standards and techni ques. 
 
6.30 New buildings should  be designed to maximise  energy efficiency and take 
acco unt of landform, layout, building orientation, massing  and landscaping  to 
minimise energy use and CO2 emissions. Innovative design and technolo gies, 
such  as low carbon  technolo gy, will be encouraged, and the use of materials 
sourced as locally as possible  will be pr eferred. 
 
6.31 The National Park Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document sets out 
more details on how to incorpora te sustainable design features into the design 
and layout of new development propo sals. 
 
  Adopte d Village Design Statements  (as at 2018)  
 
 Hordle Village Design Statement  (2015)  
 Sway Village Design Statement  (2013)  
 Boldre Parish Design Statement  (2013)  
 Ashurst & Colbury Village Design Statement  (2013)  
 Hyde Village Design Statement  (2012)  
 Landford  Village Design Statement  (2011)  
 Wellow Village Design Statement  (2011)  53 
 7.  Vibrant Communities 
 
7.1 National planning policy recognises the need for small -scale, sustainably located 
development within National Parks to support the socio -economic well -being of 
their communities. This includes the provision of local affordable housing and local 
community facilities. This chapter therefore takes forward the strategic objectives 
to promote affordable housing to meet local needs and to strengthen the well -
being and sustainability of rural communities.  
 
Strategic Objectives for Supporting Vibrant Co mmunities  
 
Promote appropriate housing to meet local  needs and maintain the vibrant 
communities of the National Park  
 
Strengthen the well -being, identity and sustainability of rural communities 
and the pride of local people in their a rea 
 
Housing  
 
7.2 The provision of housing to meet the local needs of people living within the 
National Park is a key part of supporting the communities of the New Forest. The 
Local Plan establishes the level of new housing to be deli vered in the National 
Park between 2016 and 2036 in a way that is consistent with the two statutory 
Park purposes and related duty.  
 
National Policy Context  
 
7.3 The Government ’s National Parks  Vision and Circular (2010) – cross-referenced 
within the NPPF - recognises that National Parks are not suitable locations for 
unrestricted housing. The expectation is that new housing in National Parks will 
be focused on meeting local affordable housing needs, rather than catering for 
external demands. National Park auth orities are expected to work with local 
housing authorities and other agencies to ensure that the needs of local 
communities in the National Parks are met and that affordable housing remains 
so in the longer term. Previous strategic and local plans for the  New Forest have 
acknowledged the sensitivity of the New Forest and its landscape and the area 
has been protected from large scale new development.  
 
7.4 The NPPF confirms that local plans should meet ‘objectively assessed needs’ 
identified for Housing Market A reas unless the adverse impacts of doing so would 
outweigh the benefits . Specific policies in the NPPF indicate development  in 
National Parks  should be restricted. These include policies relating to National 
Parks, sites protected under the European Birds and Habitats Directive, Sites of 
Special Scientific Interest, and designated heritage assets. The New Forest 
National Park is covered by a wide range of national and international landscape 
and ecological designations and therefore national planning guidan ce on meeting 
housing needs must be considered alongside the protection afforded to the New 
Forest’s landscape and habitats in primary legislation. Within this context, and 
when considered against the NPPF, meeting the area’s full housing need is not 
achie vable within the National Park without having a detrimental impact on the 
reasons for its designation  and the statutory National Park purposes . 54 
 7.5 The NPPF also states that planning authorities should plan for a mix of housing 
based on current and future demo graphic trends, market trends and the needs of 
different groups. One of the roles of a Local Plan is to identify the size, type, tenure 
and range of housing required.  
 
New Forest Strategic Housing Market Assessment and Objectively 
Assessed Housing Needs  
 
7.6 In line with Governme nt policy, the process for determining the amount of 
housing  to be delivered in the Natio nal Park starts with the identification  of the 
‘objectively assessed  need’ for new housing. This should  be informed  by a 
Strate gic Housing Market Assessment  (SHMA), which in the case of the New 
Forest  was jointly  commissioned by the National Park Authority and New 
Forest  District Council in 2014. This Asses sment concluded that the National 
Park falls within three separ ate housing  market  areas  centred  on the 
Southampton, Bournemouth and Salisbury  urban  areas,  but that there is no 
spec ific ‘New Forest  Housing Market Area’.  
  
7.7 In 2017 the National Park Authority and New Forest District Council jointly 
commissioned an updated assessment of housing needs in the New Forest based 
on the latest household projections. This report37 concluded that o ver the twenty 
year period 2016 – 2036, the objectively assessed housing need in the New 
Forest National Park is 63 dwellings per annum , or 1,260 new dwellings over the 
Plan period. This figure is based on anticipated changes in households  in the 
National Park area. The Authority considers this evidence to be robust and the 
best available information on the ‘policy off’38 housing needs arising within the 
National Park. It should be noted that the New Forest National Park boundary 
does not align with local authority boundaries (it includes land within New Forest 
District, Wiltshire and Test Valley Borough) and therefore available data does not 
allow local housing ne eds to be calculated using the Government’s standard ised 
method ology  as proposed in 2017 .     
 
7.8 The NPPF  and NPPG  are clear that the assessment  of need should not take 
account of development constraint s, such as those rel ated to the  environment or 
land availability. These factors will however clearly  affect the potential s upply of 
land for housing  and are rele vant in  translating the assessments of need into 
policy. The objectively assessed housing need figure for the National Park 
therefore represe nts an objective, ‘policy off’ analysis and takes no account of 
land supply or development constraints  within the New Forest,  including  its 
National Park st atus and the significant areas  subject  to national and 
international nature conser vation  designations.  
 
7.9 Policy SP19 sets out the planned level of new housing (affordable housing and 
market housing) to be provided within the New Forest National Park over the Plan 
period. This figure of 800 additional dwellings in the National Park between 2016 
                                            
37 Justin Gardner Consulting, October 2017.  
38 Assessments of housing need are required by national policy to be ‘policy off’, meaning that 
consideration is not given to the constraints and designations that cover an area in assessing  needs. 
These considerations are, however, important in preparing a Local Plan.  55 
 and 2036 is an increase in the scale of development in the National Park from 
previous Local Plans. This figure is informed by the evidence from the New Forest 
Strategic Housing Market Area Assessment; evidence on constraints and the 
wealth of habitat designations that c over the New Forest and its coastline; an 
assessment of previous levels of development; a review of the Defined Village 
settlement boundaries; and an assessment of potential development sites through 
the ‘Call for Sites’ and ‘Call for Brownfield Sites’ pro cesses. Importantly the 
dwelling provision takes into account national planning policy set out in the NPPF 
and NPPG which seeks to protect the landscape and natural beauty of National 
Parks. Given the wide range of designations covering the New Forest Nati onal 
Park, it is clear that the full identified need for housing will not be met . To do so 
would clearly conflict with the statutory National Park purposes. Over half of the 
National Park is designated as being of international importance for nature 
conser vation and the NPPF is clear that development which would impact on the 
integrity of such sites does not constitute sustainable development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Addressing the Needs of an Ageing Population  
 
7.10 The New Forest Strategic Housing Area Assessment (2014) confirms that the 
population profile of the National Park is characterised by an older age structure 
than the surrounding county (Hampshire) and regional (South East) areas. The 
population of the Nati onal Park aged 60 and over has increased by 24% over the 
2002 – 2012 period with most age groups up to age 59 having decreased over 
the same period. This trend is predicted to continue over the Plan  period . 
 
7.11 Within the context of National Park designation and other housing policies in this 
plan, it is important that opportunities should be taken to address the local need 
for specialist housing for older people rather than simply catering for external 
demand an d continuing in -migration into the National Park. The provision of new Policy SP19 – New residential development in the National Park   
 
 
An additi onal 800 dwellings will be delivered within the New Forest  Natio nal 
Park b etween 2016 and 2036. To meet this, new residential development will 
be permitted within the National Park to maintain the vitality of local communities 
and support local services where the proposal involves : 
 
a) The development of sites allocated for housing in the Local Plan (300 
dwellings); 
b) The  implementation  of  extant  planning  permiss ions (standing at just 
over 100 dwellings at 31/ 03/17); 
c) The development of land previously unallocated or unidentified (windfall 
development) within the National Park (estima ted at 400 dwellings over 
the Plan-period, at an annual average of 20 dwellings per annum); 
d) Development that comes forward on appropriate rural excepti on sites 
(Policy SP28); and  
e) Housing for New Forest  Com moners (Policy SP29);  Estate Workers  
(Policy SP30)  and tied agricultural d wellings (Pol icy DP31 ). 
 56 
 specialist accommodation for older people will therefore be supported within the 
four Defined Villages as shown on the Policies Map where residents will have 
better access to the ancill ary services they require. Outside the Defined Villages, 
new developments would generate additional activities and traffic and therefore  
development will be limited to extensions to existing specialist accommodation 
where they can be achieved in a satisfac tory manner within the existing site.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.12 Given the limited availability of sites; clear national guidance that development in 
National Parks should not be catering for external demand; and the Authority’s 
duty to foster the socio -economic well -being of communities within  the National 
Park, a planning obligation will be placed on new housing for older people to 
ensure it meets the needs of the local communities within the National Park. This 
will apply to the development of Use Class C2 of the Town & Country Planning 
(Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) where affordable housing would not 
usually be sought. Age -restricted housing falling within Use Class C3 will be 
expected to provide on -site affordable housing to ensure a proportion of the 
development is directed towards m eeting local housing needs.  The local 
occupancy tie  will ensure C2 development address es the locally arising needs of 
the National Park’s older residents and other  vulnerable mem bers of the 
community, rather than contributing to a  potential increase in old er households 
moving to the area.    
 
Size of New Dwellings  
 
7.13 The NPPF  states that local planning authorities should  plan for a mix of housing  
based on current and future demographic  trends;  and id entify the size of housing 
that is re quired, reflecting local need . The housing stock in the New Forest 
National Park as a whole  should provide a range of accommodation types, sizes 
and tenures to meet the needs of local communities. The Local Plan necessarily 
focuses on new development, which will make up a sm all proportion of the 
National Park’s housing stock by 2036. Policy SP21 aims to ensure that, in terms 
of size, type and tenure, new housing permitted within the National Park will result 
in a better mix of dwellings across the National Park and a focus on  meeting the 
identified local needs.  
   Policy SP20  – Specialist Housing for Older People (U se Class C2)  
 
Proposals which address an identified local need or requirement for specialist  
housing for older people  will be permitted within the Defined Villages o f Ashurst, 
Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst and Sway. Outside the Defined Villages, extensions 
to existing specialist housing for older people will be permitted providing this 
can be achieved in a satisfactory manner within the existing site and without 
having a ha rmful impact on the locality.   
 
A planning obligation will be secured to ensure that the occupancy of new 
specialist  housing  for older people is confined in perpetuity to a local person 
(and their dependents) who  has a minimum period of 5 years permanent 
residence within parishes in the National Park.   57 
 7.14 The existing dwelling stock in the New Forest National Park stands at around 
15,000 dwellings and is heavily skewed towards larger properties, with 75% of 
homes having 3 or more bedrooms. The New Forest Strategic Ho using Market 
Area Assessment (2014) identifies a clear need for smaller homes within the 
National Park, with the vast majority of local housing need being in the 1 – 3 
bedroom dwelling categories. The Assessment concludes that in the National 
Park - where the level of housing development is likely to be restricted - 
consideration should be given to focusing delivery towards smaller properties. .  
 
7.15 In response to the clear evidence on local needs relating  to dwelling size, 
Policy SP21  sets out a maximum floor area on the size of new d wellings to ensure  
that the new housing  delivered addresses  the identified local housing  needs as 
much as possible.  This approa ch is adopted within ot her English Natio nal Parks  
in respon se to the finite land resource for new de velopment and the need to 
target new development towards meeting t he identified local housing needs.  The 
Government’s Technical housing standards – nationally prescribed space 
standard  (2015) confirms that 100 square metres equates to a 3 -bed dwelling.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Housing Site Allocations  
 
7.16 In response  to the requirements of national planning policy, in updating the 
local planning policies for the National Park the Authority has undertaken a review 
of the Defined Village settlement boundaries and allocated land for new housing 
development in the National Park for the first time since its designation in 2005.  
  
7.17 To inform this, the Authority undertook a ‘Call for Sites’ exercise and a ‘Call for 
Brownfield Sites’ exercise which assessed a wide range of potential development 
sites for housing, employment and gypsy and traveller use. All of the sites 
submitted, as well as those identified through other sources, were assessed 
against a range of relevant criteria, including an assessment of the services and 
facilities within settlements across the whole of the National Par k. This was 
undertaken within the context of considering development within a landscape that 
has the highest status of protection in relation to landscape and scenic beauty due 
to its National Park status. In addition, the New Forest includes a wealth of 
internationally protected habitats and the potential impacts of the housing 
allocations have been considered through a Habitats Regulations Assessment.  Policy SP21: The size of n ew dwellings  
 
To ensure the dwelling stock of the New Forest  as a whole is balanced, new 
dwellings permitt ed in the National Park will have a maximum total internal 
habitable floor area of 100 square metres.  Where permiss ion is granted for 
new dwellings of up to 100 square metres, a conditi on will be attached 
removing permit ted development rights in re spect of extensions. 
 
This policy applies to applications re sulting  in net new dwellings. Proposals  for 
replac ement dwellings will be assess ed against Policy DP35  and proposals  
for commoners’ dwellings. Estate Workers dwellings and agricultural  / 
forestry workers dwellings will be assessed  against  their specific policies. 
 58 
 7.18 The following section of the Local Plan sets out the housing land allocations 
within the National Park. The distribution of these sites is in accordance with the 
spatial strategy for the National Park which seeks to direct new development 
towards the most sustainable locations (the Defined Villages) in accordance with 
the Government’s emphasis on sustainable development.  
 
Ashurst  
 
7.19 Over the last decade the village of Ashurst (2,100 residents) has seen significantly 
fewer residential completions than the other Defined Villages, with less than  20 
net new dwellings accommodated since the National Park was designated  in 
2005 . The assessment of the Defined Village boundary of Ashurst concluded that 
development to the south of the A35 raises significant landscape concerns and 
land to the north of t he main railway line is located within an area at risk from 
flooding. The south west part of the village is adjacent to the internationally 
protected habitats of the New Forest.  
 
7.20 Brownfield land may become available at the Ashurst Hospital site during the  Plan 
period, but this is dependent on a future decision from the NHS. Should the 
Ashurst Hospital site be deemed surplus to the requirements of the NHS within 
the Plan  period, the Authority will consider the best uses for this brownfield site. 
The immedia te proximity of the New Forest Special Protection Area (SPA) to the 
site would limit the type of any future residential use of the hospital site.  
 
7.21 Consequently attention has focused on the east of the village, which is less 
constrained by flood risk and t he range of national and international habitat 
designations that cover the Open Forest to the west of Ashurst. In doing so 
consideration has  also been given to the Ashurst Village Design Statement 
(formally adopted as a Supplementary Planning Document in J une 2013) which 
highlights the value  that residents of Ashurst place on the greenfield land around 
the edge of the village. The Village Design Statement expresses the desire to 
prevent the coalescence of the village and West Totton.  
 
7.22 Land off Whartons Lane is well screened  by mature trees which are protected 
through Tree Prese rvation Orders and therefore the development of this site 
would not open up adjacent fields for larger scale  development or have a wider 
landscape impact on the National Park . The 2.5 hectare site is well located for 
the facilities of Ashurst  and would not reduce  the gap between the village and the 
National Park b oundary to the east. There is an existing pedestrian pavement 
along the Whartons Lane frontage of the site that should be retained and the site 
is also well related to the cycle route running along Lyndhurst Road, linking the 
site with the services in Ashurst and Lyndhurst . The site is therefore allocated for 
up to 60 residential dwellings, with 50% of the development to be affordable 
dwellings for local people in housing need  in accordance with Policy SP27.   59 
 Policy SP22 – Land at Whartons Lane, Ashurst  
 
Land at Whartons Lane, Ashurst is allocated for the development of 60 
residential dwellings. Detailed proposals for the site that meet the following site 
specific requirements will be permitted :   
 
a) 50% of the dwellings must be provided as affordable housing for local 
peopl e in housing need;   
b) All of the dwellings on the site will be limited to a maximum total internal 
habitable floor area of 100 square metres ;  
c) The site must be developed in a comprehensive manner ;  
d) Measures must  be put in place to protect the trees subject t o Tree 
Preservation Orders that border the site ;  
e) Contributions will be required to enhance the adjacent Whartons Lane 
Recreation Ground located opposite the site ; and  
f) Development proposals must provide a connection to the nearest point of 
adequate capacity in the sewerage network, as advised by the service 
provider.    
 
 
 
Lyndhurst 
 
7.23 The village of Lyndhurst (popu lation  3,200 people) has the widest range of 
services and facilities of the settlements within the New Forest  National Park. 
The village has a strong built heritage focused on the High Street, but is also 
affected by traffic congestion,  with the village centre  covered by a designated Air 
Qual ity Management Area . 
 
7.24 The Defined Village boun dary of Lyndhurst  was established  in the 1980s and in 
response  to the requirements of the NPPF  a review of the Defined Village 
boundary has been undertaken . This review i dentified brownfield land at the 
former Lyndhurst Park Hotel as the main area with development potential.  
Although the site represe nts one of the lar gest brownfield sites within the 
Natio nal Park, its redevelopment presents a number of challenges and future 
redevelopment of the site would be required to respect  site specific factors.  
60 
      The site occupies a highly prominent gateway location into the village and lies 
within the Lyndhurst Conservation Area, linking the High Street with the 
popular Bolton’s Bench area.  
 
     The core of the hotel building has a hist oric association with Sir Arthur Conan 
Doyle. Historic En gland have confirmed that while  not meeting the criteria for 
listing, the demolition of the hotel building would be harmful to the historic 
environment both in terms of the loss of the non -designated  heritage asset 
and its adverse impact on the special interest of the Lyndhurst Conservation 
Area.  
 
     Large parts of the site are covered in mature trees which are subject to a Tree 
Preservation Order and provide a natural transition from the built envi ronment 
to the Open Forest at this important edge of village location.  
 
     The site is located immediately adjacent to the internationally protected New 
Forest Special Protection Area (SPA), Special Area of Conservation (SAC), 
Ramsar site and a Site of S pecial Scientific Interest (SSSI). The proximity of 
these protected habitats means the redevelopment of the site must 
adequately mitigate the potential urban edge impacts (including cat predation 
and the introduction of invasive species from fly -tipping of  garden waste). 
Mitigation measures could include the use of legal covenants and 
arrangements for grounds maintenance.    
 
Policy SP23 – Land at the former Lyndhurst Park Hotel, Lyndhurst  
 
Land at the former Lyndhurst Park  Hotel is allocated for a mixed -use 
development including tourism and residential. The site has potential for around 
50 dwellings alongside the retention of the historic elements of the existing 
building. Residential development on the site should secure the future 
conservation of the he ritage assets on the site. Detailed proposals for the site 
that meet the following site specific requirements will be permitted :  
 
(a) The site must be redevelop ed in a comprehensive manner ;  
(b) The historic elements of the existing hotel building must be retaine d and 
could be used for a range of uses, including tourism and residential use. A 
detailed heritage assessment will be required to justify any proposals which 
harmed their retention ;   
(c) The design and scale of the redevelopment of the site must conserve and  
enhance the character of this part of the Lyndhurst Conservation Area ;  
(d) Redevelopment proposals must retain the important trees on the site that 
contribute to the open verdant setting and the site’s edge -of-village location;   
(e) Adequate parking provision mu st be made on -site;  
(f) Proposals for C3 residential use must provide on -site affordable housing 
for local people in housing need as close to the Authority’s target of 50% 
affordable housing as is viable. Viability will be demonstrated through an 
open book ap proach ;   
(g) All of the dwellings on site will be limited to a maximum total internal 
habitable floor area of 100 square m etres;    61 
 (h) Any proposals for C2 use ( i.e. where no affordable housing for local people 
would be provided) must be accompanied by a legal agreement requiring 
the occupancy to be limited to those with a local connection.  
(i) Development proposals must ensure future access to existing water supply 
infrastructure for maintenance and upsizing purposes.  
(j) Development proposals must incorporate measures to mitigate potential 
significant urban edge impacts on adjacent protected habitats.  
 
 
 
Sway  
 
7.25 The village of Sway (popul ation 2,700) includes a station on the main railway 
line and a modest range of services, local shops,  businesses  and 
acco mmodation. A housing n eeds survey for the parish in 2013  identifies  a 
significant local housing need  for 98 additional dwellings arising from within the 
local community. Recent windfall site developments in Sway have not provided 
affordable housing for local people due to their modest size and rural exception 
sites have not been forthcoming. Therefore a site allocation through the Local 
Plan provides t he best route for securing affordable housing to meet the identified 
local community needs.  
 
7.26 The defined village boundary of Sway was identified in the 1980s  and has not 
been reviewed since. With internat ional nature conservation  designatio ns 
adjoining  the village boundaries to the north  and the east the only area of potential 
is to the south and west of the village, which is also located closer to the school, 
services and transport links in the village centre.  
 
7.27 Land to the south of Church Lane in Sway has been identified as suitable to 
make a significant contribut ion towards meeting the identified local housing 
needs  arising within the parish. The site is located within a short, level walk of the 
existing services within the village, including the station, shops and school. The 
site will also provide additional community benefits through the provision of 1 
hectare of informal greenspace to complement the more formal recreational 
facilities availab le at the adjacent Jubilee Field .   
62 
  
 
 
 
 
 Policy SP2 4 – Land  south of Church Lane, Sway  
 
Land to the south of Church Lane, Sway is allocated for the development of 40 
residential dwellings. The site will also provide 1  hectare of informal greenspace 
provision for the local community. Detailed proposals for the site must meet the 
following site  specific requirements:  
 
(a) 50% of the dwellings must be provided as affordable housing f or local 
people in housing need;   
(b) All of the dwellings on the site will be limited to a maximum total internal 
habitable floor area of 100 square metres ;  
(c) The site must be develo ped in a comprehensive manner;   
(d) Residential development on the site will be limited to the part of the site that 
lies outside the New Forest Special Protection Area 400 metre zone  
(illustrated in the red shading on the map below) ;  
(e) Measures should  be put in place to protect the trees that fringe the site that 
are protecte d by Tree Preservation Orders;   
(f) The access to the site off Church Lane must ensure adequate visibility 
splays and provide safe acces s on foot to the village centre;   
(g) The use of the  remainder of the site (green shading) that lies within the New 
Forest SPA 400 metre zone for informal greenspace will be supported. 
Proposals should be accompanied by details of the proposed layout and 
long term management arrangements f or the greenspace provision; and   
(h) Development proposals must provide a connection to the nearest point of 
adequate capacity in the sewerage network, as advised by the service 
provider.  
 
 
63 
 Other Settlements  
 
7.28 As well as assessing the capacity of the defined villages, the Authority has 
considered the potential of other settlements to accommodate development and 
two further housing allocations within the National Park are proposed in the 
Fawley / Calshot area. In  terms of the rest of the National Park, significant parts 
of the New Forest are affected by flooding and over two thirds of the National Park 
lies within or adjacent to internationally protected habitats. These factors , allied to 
the landscape protection afforded to the whole of the New Forest through primary 
legislation , significantly restrict the potential for further housing allocations. 
Consequently, outside the two further land use allocations proposed at Fawley 
and Calshot, the housing needs arising within the rest of the National Park will 
predominantly be met through appropriate rural exceptions schemes in  or 
adjacent to  settlements with basic local services.  
 
Land to the south of Fawley Power Station   
 
7.29 The Fawley Power Station closed in 2013. The 49 hectare brownfield site is within 
the New Forest District Council Local P lan area, but uniquely it is entirely enclosed 
by the New Forest National Park. The site is dominated by the former power station 
building, chimney and associated structures. Re -use of the existing structure 
appears unlikely to be practicable or viable so the site represents a major brownfield 
redevelopment opportunity. Redevelopment of the site involves a number of 
challenges.  
 
 The foreshore, estuarine and coastal areas adjoining the site are internationally 
and nationally designated for their ecological value (Hythe to Calshot Marshes 
SSSI, Solent Maritime SAC, Solent & Southampton Water SPA and Ramsar)  
 
 Parts of the site are in  Zone 3 for flood risk.  
 
 The northern part of t he brownfield site area (14.5 hectares ) lies within the 
Health and Safety Executive ’s middle hazard consultation zone for the Fawley 
refinery complex and also includes National Grid infrastructure which is 
expected to remain operational for the next 20 years.    
 
 Land adjoining the site within the National Park is designated a Site of 
Importance for Nature Conservation (Chambers Copse, Tom Tiddler’s Ground).  
 
7.30 National planning policy includes a long -standing major development test for 
National Parks. This confirms that major development should only be permitted in 
exceptional circumstances and where it can be demonstrated they are in the 
public interest. The assessment of such proposals should include:  
 
 The need for the development, and the impact of permitting it, or refusing it, 
upon the local economy.  
 The cost of, and scope for, developing elsewhere outside the designated area; 
and  
 Any detrimental effect on the environment, the landscape and recreati onal 
opportunities, and the extent to which that could be moderated.  64 
 7.31 The major development test rightly sets a very high bar and any proposals should 
be carefully considered against these criteria. The circumstances around the 
brownfield Fawley Power Station site are unique. The former Power Station 
buildings are vast in their scale and visually dominate the relatively flat terrain of the 
New Forest and the National Park coast line. The redevelopment of the site presen ts 
an opportunity to remove these dominant industrial structures and replace them with 
an attractive development that enhances this part of the National Park. In terms of 
the major development tests:  
 
 The former Power Station buildings were removed from the boundary of the 
National Park during its designation process due to the visual impact they have 
on this part of the New Forest. Redevelopment of the site provides the 
opportunity to positively remove  this harmful impact, which is in the public 
interest.  
 
 The comprehensive redevelopment of the site would deliver significant new jobs 
and services for the communities in the New Forest and adjacent Waterside 
areas.  The site also provides a strategic opp ortunity for the marine industry.  
 
 The scope for developing outside the National Park is restricted by the Health & 
Safety Executive exclusion zones around Fawley Refinery and the existing 
National Grid sub -station. Viability work c ommissioned by the  Authority and New 
Forest District Council concludes that without some limited development in the 
National Park , this major brownfield site could only come forward with a very 
high density development on the brownfield site outside the National Park – 
developme nt that in itself would have a detrimental impact on the surrounding 
National Park.  
 
 Significant landscape, habitat and public access benefits can be delivered over 
and above the levels required from the development given the single land -
ownership in the area. This enables any impacts to be fully mitigated.  
 
7.32 Given these unique, site -specific circumstances, the Authority has concluded that 
the comprehensive development of the Power Station site to include a limited area 
of adjoining land within the Na tional Park can be justified against the major 
development test s. As outlined above, to inform  this decision the  Authority and 
New Forest District Council jointly commissioned a detailed viability assessment 
of a wide range of redevelopment options for the former Power Station site, 
including focusing all of the built development outside the National Park. This 
viability assessment concluded that the redevelopment could not come forward 
without some development on adjacent National Park land. The viability 
assessment also concluded that the Authority’s Local Plan policy restriction on 
the size of dwellings could not be met in full if the development in the National 
Park was to be kept to a minimum.   
 
7.33 Consequently the Authority and New Forest District Council have worked together 
under the ‘duty to cooperate’ on aligned Local Plan policies to enable the delivery 
of a comprehensive and coordinated redevelopment of the former Fawley Power 
station brownfield site and the enhancement of the surrounding area. The 
comprehensive redevelopment of the site enables the largest brownfield site in 
the New Forest to deliver ar ound 1,500 homes, together with a package of 65 
 environmental and community benefits to mitigate or compensate for 
environmental impacts and achieve an overall net public benefit. These wider 
benefits to the National Park are, in part, deliverable due to the land ownership in 
the area. Policy SP25 therefore supports the production of a whole -Estate Plan to 
demonstrate how the ma jor redevelopment of the Power Station site will be 
integrated into the wider management of the surrounding National Park in terms 
of habitats, landscape character and access improvements.      
 
7.34 The respective planning policies for the Fawley Power Station site prepared by 
the National Park Authority and New Forest District Council have been prepared 
to be applied together. The District Council’s Local Plan policy addresses the 
elements within their Plan -area (including the majority of the housing and 
employment elements) and the Authority’s Local Plan addresses the elements 
within t he National Park.  
 
Policy SP25 – Land adjacent to the former Fawley Power Station  
 
As part of a comprehensive and integrated approach to regenerating the Fawley 
Power Station site within the New Forest District Local P lan area, the use of land 
adjoining t he former Power Station site within the National Park to provide habitat 
mitigation, supporting infrastructure and community facilities (including a primary 
school) that cannot reasonably be achieved within the District Council area will 
be supported.   
 
Support is subject to an exceptionally high standard of design and layout being 
secured  across the whole of the Power Station site with clear net positive public 
benefits being demonstrated in relation to the landscape a nd setting of the 
National Park;  public access improvements; the provision of suitable greenspace 
for recreation; and habitat enhancements to ensure net gains in biodiversity. To 
further demonstrate these benefits, the Authority will require the submission and 
approval of a whole -Estate Plan to show how the proposals integrate with the 
wider area.   
 
Proposals for new provision of Suitable Alternati ve Natural Greenspace (SANG)  
within the National Park must deliver significant benefits for the landscape 
character, biodiversity and internationally designated sites of the New Forest. 
Based on the scale of development proposed in the respective Local Plans, a t 
least  30 hectares of new SANG provision must be provided. The Authority will 
also require details of how the SANG areas will be managed suitabl y in 
perpetuity, to be agreed with Natural England.   
 
As part of the comprehensive redevelopment of the adjacent brownfield Power 
Station site, adjoining land to the south of the site within the National Park is 
allocated for around 120 dwellings. Detailed proposals for the site must meet the 
following site specific requirements:  
 
(a) 50% of the dwellings in the Southern Quarter of the deve lopment site must 
be affordable housing to meet local needs;    66 
  
 
 
 (b) The majority of the dwellings provided within the National Park must be 
smaller dwellings (less than 100 square metres) to meet the identified local 
housing need for smaller dwellings;   
(c) Proposals must be implemented as an integral and contiguous part of the 
redevelopment of the whole Power Station site pursuant to an approved 
comprehensive redevelopment master plan for the entire Fawley Power 
Station site. Housing on the land within the N ational Park will  not be 
supported in isolation; and   
(d) Any loss of the designated SINC must be kept to an essential minimum and 
compensated through the enhancement of the biodiversity value of the 
remaining habitat and/or the compensatory provision of alter native habitats 
of equivalent or higher value to achieve a net gain for biodiversity.  
 
Prior to the submission of the outline planning application for the site, the 
applicant must undertake site -specific bird surveys to confirm the status of 
SPA/Ramsar sp ecies at the site (particularly merlin, hen harrier and Dartford 
Warbler), to inform appropriate mitigation requirements as part of the site specific 
development and masterplanning.  
 
To ensure redevelopment is bought forward in a coordinated manner and fu lly 
mitigates its impacts, the promoter will prepare a master plan and supporting 
technical assessments for the entire Fawley Power Station site redevelopment, 
for submission as part of a redevelopment planning application. Future 
development phases will b e brought forward pursuant to the approved master 
plan, updated as necessary.  
 
 
 
67 
 Calshot Village  
 
7.35 The redevelopment of Fawley Power Station will deliver infrastructure improvements 
for the area, provide local employment opportunities and significantly improve the 
services on offer.  Linked to the Authority’s duty to foster the socio -economic well -
being of local communities within the National Park, the nearby community of 
Calshot should benefit from these improvements. The village has pock ets of relative 
deprivation and there is an opportunity to broaden the range of housing available in 
the village and provide local community facilities through the provision of a new 
primary school close to the village. This will provide a connection betwe en the village 
of Calshot and the Fawley Power Station site and a focal point for the local 
community in Calshot.   
 
7.36 A number of improvements - including landscape and public realm enhancements - 
can be implemented without the need for additional devel opment. In addition to 
these improvements, the village would benefit from a more mixed community with a 
better balance of housing tenures. Land adjacent to St George’s Church Hall has 
been identified as an important site to the village and is relatively un constrained.     
 
Policy SP26 – Land at Calshot Village   
 
Land at Calshot Village is allocated for 30 dwellings and cemetery use. Detailed 
proposals for the site must meet the following site specific requirements.  
 
(a) 50% of dwellings must be provided for affordable housing fo r local people in 
housing need;  
(b) All of the dwellings on the site will be limited to a maximum total internal 
habitable floor area of 100 square metres floor area of 100 square metres;   
(c) The site must be developed in a comprehensive man ner and ensure the 
proposed layout of the residential a nd cemetery uses are compatible;   
(d) Measures should be put in place to protect the trees in the centre of the site 
that are subj ect to Tree Preservation Orders;   
(e) The enhancement of St George’s Hall for t he benefit of the local Calshot 
community  should form part of the plans; and  
(f) Development proposals must ensure future access to existing wastewater 
and water supply infrastructure for maintenance and upsizing purposes.  
 
 
 
  
68 
 Windfall Development  
 
7.38 Successive local plans for the New Forest have not included specific housing 
allocations. Instead appropriate development proposals have been supported 
within the Defined Villages as ‘windfall developments’ (s ites not specifically 
allocated for housing or identified in a Housing Land Availability Assessment); on 
rural exception sites; and through the delivery of specialist housing (e.g. 
commoners dwellings, tied agricultural dwellings). In many National Park local 
plans housing delivery is based entirely on  windfall development, with no housing 
land allocated.  
 
7.39 The NPPF states that local planning authorities can make an allowance for 
windfall sites if they have compelling evidence that such sites have consistently 
become available and will continue to provi de a reliable source of supply. Any 
windfall allowance should have regard to historic windfall rates and expected 
future trends and development on windfall sites will contribute towards meeting 
the identified housing requirement  in the New Forest National Park. 
 
7.40 Evidence from the monitoring of dwelling completions in the National Park over 
the last decade highlights the consistent delivery of housing on windfall sites. A 
total of 249 additional dwellings have been completed within the New Forest 
between 200 6 (when the National Park Authority assumed its planning 
responsibilities) and 2017 on unallocated ‘windfall sites’ . This equates to an 
annual average of just under 23 dwellings per annum and justifies the inclusion of 
a windfall allowance within the Local  Plan.  
 
7.41 The Local Plan includes a future figure of 20 dwellings per annum from windfall 
developments, including dwellings delivered through the Permitted Development 
route which have increased in recent years through the office -to-residential rights. 
The w indfall allowance made within the Local Plan also reflects the new policies 
enabling Estate worker housing which is likely to result in new limited housing 
delivery on rural Estates; and the policy supporting appropriated mixed use 
developments on employme nt sites within the Defined Villages which is also likely 
to result in additional windfall housing development.    
 
Affordable Housing  
 
7.42 The provision of affordable housing in the New Forest is consistently raised as 
one of the biggest challenges facing local communities in the National Park. The 
affordability of housing is a major barrier to sustainable communities in the New 
Forest Nation al Park, where the average house price is around 15 times average 
earnings – making the New Forest the least affordable National Park in the UK. 
As already outlined, the Government’s National Parks Vision & Circular (2010) 
states that National Park authori ties have an important role to play in the delivery 
of affordable housing and the Local Plan should include policies that pro -actively 
respond to local needs. Therefore a strong justification exists for policies that seek 
to maximise the delivery of afford able housing , while at the same time upholding 
the purposes of National Park designation.  
 
7.43 The NPPF requires local planning authorities to identify the range of types and 
sizes of accommodation likely to be needed by the population in future. The 69 
 objectiv ely assessed housing needs in the New Forest Report39  concludes that 
there is a need for 71 affordable dwellings per year within the National Park (it 
should be recognised that the affordable need outputs are not just a number in 
relation to newbuild homes , but do include a number of households who have a 
home but where there is a mismatch in tenure). Based on this evidence and the 
current advice of New Forest District Council as the housing authority for the 
majority of the National Park, a strategic polic y target of 25% intermediate and 
75% affordable rented tenure would be appropriate. Local connection criteria will 
be applied to the affordable housing provided to ensure that local needs arising 
within the National Park are met and more detail on this is set out in Annex 3 of 
the Local Plan.   
 
7.44 National planning policy also requires planning authorities to balance meeting 
local affordable housing needs with the economic viability of development. To 
ensure viability, the costs of any affordable housing requ irements applied to 
development should provide competitive returns to a willing landowner and 
developer to enable the development to be deliverable. To inform the affordable 
housing approach taken in the Local Plan, the Authority commissioned a Local 
Plan Viability Assessment40. This assessment considered the proportion of 
affordable housing that could be sought on windfall and allocated development 
sites, as well as the approach to wards  rural exceptions sites within the National 
Park. The viabi lity evidence  demonstrates  the Local Plan requirement of 50% 
affordable housing on allocated sites and windfall development sites within the 
Defined Villages can be achieved.  
  
7.45 In addition, the viability evidence assessed the site size threshold above which it 
is viabl e to seek affordable housing to meet local needs. A large proportion of 
housing in the New Forest National Park is delivered on small windfall sites of 
fewer than 10 dwellings. National planning policy guidance establishes size 
thresholds for the delivery of affordable housing (either through a financial 
contribution or on site provision). Local planning authorities can prepare planning 
policies that depart from national guidance where this is robustly justified and 
strongly evidenced by local circumstances . The viability evidence commissioned 
as part of the Local Plan preparation process highlights that development remains 
economically viable with affordable housing provision on smaller development 
sites than that outlined in national policy. The Local Plan  seeks to maximise the 
delivery of affordable housing within the main villages and on site allocations. This 
applies to all development falling within Use Class C3, including any retirement or 
assisted living accommodation within this use class.   
 
7.46 Develop ers and landowners are expected to consider the overall cost of 
development prior to negotiating the sale or purchase of land. The Authority will 
not accept a case that a site is unviable to develop in line with the requirements 
of the development plan bec ause the landowner has paid too much for the site. 
Land purchase should take account of the likely costs of development, including 
adopted development plan policies. Affordable housing provision will therefore 
result in reduced residential land values.  
                                            
39 Justin Gardner Consulting, October 2017  
40 Three Dragons, November 2017  70 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rural Exception Sites  
 
7.47 The NPPF confirms that in rural areas authorities should plan housing 
development to reflect local needs, particularly for affordable housing, including 
through rural exception sites. Outside the Defined Villages of the National Park 
and the housing site a llocations, rural exception sites can provide an important 
source of affordable housing to meet local needs on land that would not normally 
be used for housing. Rural exception sites seek to address the needs of the local 
community by accommodating househo lds who are either current residents or 
have a connection to the area.  
 
7.48 The NPPF allows, at the Authority’s discretion, for small numbers of full market 
homes where it is essential to enable the delivery of significant additional 
affordable housing. This has been tested through the viability assessment (2017) 
that formed part of the evidence base for the Local Plan. The viability assessment 
concludes that an element of open market housing on rural exception sites is not 
necessary to make them deliverable i n the New Forest National Park. The 
evidence does highlight that a degree of flexibility may be required on the tenure 
of affordable housing on rural exception sites to ensure they are viable and the Policy SP27 – Affordable Housing Provision within t he Defined 
Villages and on Allocated Sites 
 
50% of net dwellings developed within the defined village boundaries of 
Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst and Sway and on sites allocated for 
residential development in the Local Plan will be provided as affordable 
homes to meet local needs. In practice:  
a) On developments of 1 – 2 net new dwellings, no aff ordable housing will 
be sought;  
b) On developments of between 3 – 10 net new dwellings, a target of 50% 
affordable housing will be sought on site.  Exceptionally, at the discretion 
of the National Park Authority, financial contributions in lieu of on -site 
provision will be accepted on small er sites;  
c) On development sites of 11 dwellings or more, a target of 50% affordable 
housing must be made on -site. 
 
The layout and design of affordable housing will be appropriately integrated 
into each development. Local connection criteria will be applied  to 
affordable housing to ensure local needs are met.  
 
The tenure (social and affordable rented, intermediate, shared ownership 
and other) of affordable homes will be based on up -to-date evidence of local 
needs. A suitable mix will be determined through l iaison with the local 
housing authority and the starting point is to seek 75% social/affordable 
rented tenure and 25% shared ownership / intermediate housing.  
 71 
 Local Plan therefore suppo rts an element of  shared  owner ship / intermediate  
ownership affordable housing (25%) alongside affordable rented housing (75%) 
on rural exception sites.   
 
7.49 The National Park Authority is part of the Hampshire Alliance for Rural Affordable 
Housing (HARAH) which seeks to address the nee d for affordable housing in rural 
villages across Hampshire. The Authority will continue to work with HARAH and 
local communities across the National Park to identify suitable affordable housing 
exception sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commoners Dwellings  
 
7.50 Providing affordable housing for commoners has long been recognised as 
essential for the future viability of the commoning system in the New Forest. The 
Authority is committed to supporting commoning through the Commoners’ 
Dwelling Scheme (CDS), which was originally established in 1992 to provide a 
mechanism by which commoners could enter into an appropriate legal agreement 
to meet the requirement for obta ining planning permission to build dwellings from 
which they could common. Successive previous local plans have included 
planning policies in support of the CDS.  
 
7.51 Since its inception in 1992, the CDS has delivered 20 new homes for commoners 
across the New Forest, and in most cases this has also included associated farm 
buildings to help establish viable new commoners’ holdings. In order to guarantee 
the long term availability of dwellings built for commoners under the CDS (which 
is administered by the Autho rity), applicants are required to enter into legal 
agreements and to demonstrate a long term personal and family commitment to 
the exercising (or use) of common grazing rights on the New Forest.  
 
7.52 The CDS comprises a three stage process:  Policy SP28 – Rural Exception Sit es     
Small -scale affordable housing developments may be permitted as 
“exceptions” on sites in or adjoining villages to meet the identified needs of 
local people in these areas. Proposals for exception sites should:  
 
a) meet a particular local need that cannot be accommodated in any other 
way; 
b) be subject to a planning obligation under Section 106 of the Town and 
Country Planning Act (1990) to ensure that the dwellings provide for low -
cost housing for local needs in perpetuity;  
c) be capable of management by an approp riate body, for example a 
Registered Provider , the Authority, or a community land trust or similar 
accredited local organisation; and  
d) be located where there are appropriate local services (e.g. shops, schools 
and public transport).  
 
The expectation is that  100% of the housing on rural exception sites will be 
affordable.  
 72 
 (i) Stage One is the consideration of an applicant’s commoning history and need 
for housing. This is undertaken by a Commoners’ Dwelling Scheme Panel 
which includes representatives from the Commoners Defence Association 
and the Verderers , as well as the National Park Autho rity. The Authority may 
also invite other organisations concerned with commoning onto the Panel as 
appropriate. The Panel assesses an applicant’s eligibility and makes a 
recommendation as to whether the application is within or without the remit of 
the Sch eme.  
 
(ii) Stage Two is th e consideration of the planning application by the Authority . 
Applicants are encouraged to seek pre -application advice about the design, 
location and siting of the proposed development. Acceptance at Stage One 
does not necessaril y mean that planning permission will be granted. All 
applications are reported to and determined by the Planning Committee .  If 
the Authority is minded to grant consent, the application proceeds to Stage 
Three.  
 
(iii) Stage Three is the completion of vario us legal agreements, obligations, 
transfer and leasing arrangements to ensure that the property remains 
available for commoning in perpetuity.  
 
7.53 The Authority will also encourage proposals for commoners’ dwellings to consider 
the re -use of existing buildings where appropriate and support the provision of 
suitable rented accommodation to better assist commoners on lower incomes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy SP29 – New Forest Commoners Dwellings  
 
Exceptionally dwellings to meet the specific needs for New Forest Commoner s 
may be permitted outside an existing settlement. As with other new dwellings 
in the National Park, the habitable floorspace of the dwelling should not exceed 
100 square metres.  
 
Proposals for commoners’ dwellings must fulfil the requirements of the 
Commoners Dwelling Scheme (CDS) and in this regard applicants must be 
able to demonstrate:  
a) an established recent history of active commoning;  
b) why they cannot common from their existing property; and  
c) that they do not have access to a property from which they can carry out 
their commoning.  
 
Applicants will be required to sign a legal agreement to ensure the dwelling 
remains in use for commoning in perpetuity.  
 
Consideration will also be given to proposals t hat provide rented 
accommodation to assist commoners on lower incomes where such 
accommodation is capable of management by an appropriate body such as the 
New Forest Trust. Proposals for rented accommodation must have common 
rights of pasture and include t he minimum amount of grazing land as required 
under the CDS. The appropriate management body will also be required to sign 
a legal agreement to ensure the dwellings remain in use for commoning in 
perpetuity.    
 
 
 73 
 Estate  Worke rs Dwellings 
 
7.54 Outside  the Crown Lands  at the core of the New Forest,  the National Park is 
character ised by a number of large land owning Estates including Beaul ieu, 
Cadland, Exbury and Meyrick. These Estates manage large land  holdings in the 
New Forest and include commercial, social and environmental activities. Between 
them the larger Estates manage a significant area of the National Park and play 
an impor tant role in the conser vation  of the landsca pe and cultural heritage of the 
New Forest,  as well as the development of a sustainable rural e conomy. However, 
given the increasingly broad range of work undertaken by Estate workers, many 
are ineligible for agricultural or forestry worker dwellings.  
 
7.55 The Local Plan recognises  the role large landowners play in the delivery of the 
two statutory Natio nal Park purpo ses and related socio-economic duty. Policy 
SP30  therefore encourages the producti on of Estate Plans to inform  the 
consideration of development proposals within the larger Estates. This allows a 
comprehensi ve picture  of the whole Estate to be shared  and helps  place  
individual development proposals within their  wider context. Whole Estate Plans 
will generally be most suitable for Estates with land  holdings in excess of 1,000  
acres  within the National Park with multiple activities taking place and employing 
or having residents in excess of 30 people.  
 
7.56 Whole Estate Plans may demonstrate a range of material considerations related 
to the National Park purposes and special qualities th at justify development 
outside the Defined Village boundaries. Where the need for additional 
development is identified through an Authority -endorsed Estate Plan, the 
Authority would encourage the re -use of existing buildings as a first preference. 
Where sm all-scale new housing is proposed (either through new build or a change 
of use) occupancy will be controlled through the use of appropriate planning 
conditions and/or planning obligations. In considering proposals for new build 
dwellings for Estate workers , the Authority will need to be satisfied that there is no 
existing accommodation available and affordable, or that the conversion / change 
of use of existing buildings is not a viable alternative. In accordance with Policy 
SP21, the floorspace of new dwel lings will be a maximum of 100 square metres.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agricultural and Forestry Workers Dwellin gs Policy SP30 – New F orest Estate Workers Dwellings  
Development proposals - including small -scale housing through the conversion 
or change of use of existing buildings as the first preference, and then new 
build - within the l arger Estates of the National Park will be supported where:  
a) The development proposals comply with other relevant policies in this Plan 
and are part of an comprehensive Estate Plan endorsed by the Authority;  
b) The development proposals as part of an agreed Estate Plan deliver 
multiple benefits in line with the purposes, duty and special qualities of the 
National Park;  
c) The housing is subject to an occupancy condition and remains available 
for Estate Workers in perpetuity; and  
d) No other suit able dwellings on the Estate have b een recently sold or let to 
non-Estate workers.  
 
For the purposes of applying this policy, small -scale housing schemes should 
not exceed a maximum of 3 units per site.  74 
 7.57 Natio nal planning policy has long acknowledged that certain  agricultural  and 
forestry  activities may require a worker  to live close  to the site. Where this is 
justified, it is crucial that any housing  provided is subject  to strict criteria and 
conditi ons to ensure they are only used for the accommodation of esse ntial 
workers.  
 
7.58 Agricultural  and forestry workers’  dwellings will not be permitted on holdings 
where other dwellings on or closely connected with that holding  have recently 
been disposed of, for example, by sale or by removal of restrictive condit ions so 
that the dwelling could be let out on the open rental market.  
 
7.59 The size restriction of 100 square metres is consistent with Policy SP21 and seeks 
to ensure that the size of a worker’s dwelling is commensurate with the needs of 
the holding. Permitted development rights to provide further accommodation will 
normally be removed by use of planning condition s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Removal of Agricultural Occupancy Conditions  
 
7.60 There are some 100 dwellings in the New Forest  Natio nal Park that are 
subject  to agricultural  occu pancy  conditions. These dwellings have usual ly 
only been  supported  due to a particular  agricultural  need and are located in areas 
where planning permiss ion would not usually be granted for housin g. 
 
7.61 A more detailed development management policy on the removal of 
agricultural  occupancy  conditio ns is justified to ensure  that dwellings which 
have been  permit ted spec ifically  to meet the needs of the rural econ omy Policy DP31 – Agricultural and Fo restry Workers Dwellings  
 
Permission will be granted for an agricultural or forestry  worker ’s dwelling 
provided: 
a) The nature of the work concerned  makes it essential  for one or more 
people en gaged in  the enterprise to live at, or very close to,  their place of 
work; 
b) The functional need could not be fulfilled by another existing  dwelling on 
the unit, or any other existing  acco mmodation in the area which is suitable 
and available for occupation by the workers concer ned; 
c) no other dwellings either  on or closely connected to the holding/enterprise 
have been  sold sepa rately or in some way alienated from the holdin g/ 
enterprise; 
d) the size of the proposed dwelling would not result  in the maximum 
total internal habitable floor area exceeding 100 square m etres ; and  
e) where practica ble and appropriate, first cons ideration has been given to the 
conversion of an existing  building under Policy DP49 . 
 
Where evidence of the financial  soundness and future sustainability of the 
holdin g/enterprise appears  inconclusi ve, consid eration may be given to 
permitt ing a caravan or other temporary  acco mmodation  for a limited period in 
order to provide time for the viability of the enterprise to be pro ven. 
 75 
 remain available for that purpose. It relates  not only to the needs of the particular  
holding  but includes the general need for workers’  dwellings in the surround ing 
area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.62 In order  to demonstra te that the long term agricultural  need  for the dwelling has  
ceased the applicant will normal ly be expected to show that appropr iate steps 
have been taken to try to sell the property with the occup ancy condition intact  
and that market ing has been correctly targeted, financially  realistic and 
sustained. This would be expected to include: 
 
 contacting other local land and estate owners in the vicinity of the dwelling to 
establish whether they require further accommodation either presently or in 
the near future ; 
 the property placed with local and specialist estate agents and advertised 
locally for at least a 12 -month period at a substantially discounted price that 
reflects  the fact that it is subject to an agricultural occupancy condition ;  
 the property being advertised widely in local newspapers and appropriate 
publications including specialist trade organisation journals; and  
 contacting  the Commoners Defence Association to establish whether the 
property would meet the requirements of a New Forest commoner in housing 
need.  
 
Neighb ourho od Planning 
 
7.63 Local communities across the National Park have the option of preparing their 
own Neighbourhood Development Plans and Neighbourhood Development 
Orders should they chose to. Neighbourhood Development Plans can be as broad 
or narrow in scope as the local com munities wish and the Authority will positively 
support any of the 37 town and parish councils within the National Park who chose 
to develop a Neighbourhood Development Plan. The allocation of further land to 
deliver affordable housing within settlements i n the National Park in accordance 
with the strategic policies in the Local Plan is an option that could be taken forward 
through neighbourhood planning. This Local Plan identifies the strategic policies 
(prefixed with ‘SP’) that communities preparing their  own Neighbourhood  
Development  Plans within the National Park should be in general conformity with. 
In addition, Neighbourhood Development Plans must conform to national planning 
policies and - in the context of the National Park – the statutory National P ark 
purposes established in the National Parks & Access to the Countryside Act 1949 .  
 
 
 Policy DP32 - Remo val of Agricultural Occu pancy Conditions  
 
An occupancy  condit ion restricting  the occupancy  of a dwelling to a person 
solely, mainly or last working in agriculture or forestry will not be removed 
unless  the Authority is satisfied that the long-term need for the dwell ing has 
ceas ed and there is no evidence of a continuing need  for housing  for persons 
employed or last employed in the locality in those categories, or practis ing 
commoning. 
 76 
 Self / Custom Build  
 
7.64 A significant proportion of housing development that takes place in the National 
Park – typically characterised by very small developments within the Defined 
Villages - is for self -build. The Governme nt wants to enable more people to 
build and own their own home. All relevant authorities are  required by the Self-
build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 to maintain a register of individuals 
and associatio ns of individuals who wish to acquire a serviced plot for  self-
building. The  register will be used  to help identify and address the local need 
for housing in the Natio nal Park.  
 
7.65 The Government defines custom build housing  as either  a builder being 
contrac ted by a home owner to create a ‘custom  built’ home or where a 
private individual builds their own home as a ‘self-build’. The National Park 
Authority has established a self-build register of people  interested in self-build or 
custom build. The register will be used  to help identify and address  the local 
need for housing. Custom / self -build will be considered within the Defined 
Villages of the New Forest National Park.  
 
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
 
7.66 The New Forest has a long history  of travelling communities and their needs are 
recognised in national p lanning policy. The Government’s Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites (2015) outlines the overarching aim to ensure the fair and equal 
treatment of gypsies and travellers in a way that facilitates their traditional way of 
life while respecting the interests of  the settled community.  
 
7.67 National policy requires local planning authorities to assess the need for gypsy 
and traveller provision using robust evidence. National policy also makes it clear 
that, as with any other forms of development, planning permission s hould only be 
granted in National Parks where it is demonstrated that the objectives of the 
designation will not be compromised by the development. It also confirms that 
planning authorities should strictly limit new traveller site development in open 
coun tryside away from existing settlements. The Hampshire Gypsy, Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople Accommodation Assessment (ORS, 2017) covers the 
whole of the New Forest National Park (including the Wiltshire part of the National 
Park). The Assessment concl udes that there is a need for one additional gypsy 
pitch within the National Park between 2016 and 2036, and this need is met by 
the site allocation in Policy SP33.  
 
7.68 Any planning permission granted will include a planning condition or obligation to 
ensure  that the occupancy of the site is limited to persons able to demonstrate an 
essential need for the accommodation.  
 
 77 
 Policy SP33 - Gypsies,  Travellers and Tra velling Sh owpeop le   
Land within the curtilage of the existing gypsy site at  ‘Forest  View’ in Landford 
is allocated for an additional permanent gypsy and traveller pitch (a net gain 
of one  pitch). The site benefits from existing access and site infrastructure. 
Detailed development proposals for the site must meet the following site 
specific requirement s:  
 
(a) a detailed landscaping plan must be submitted setting out how the site 
boundaries can be enhanced. To positively enhance the site and its 
surroundings within the New Forest National Park, high walls an d fencing 
will not be supported;   
(b) occupancy of the  site will be restricted to gypsies and travellers with a local 
connection to the New Forest National Park; and 
(c) due to the proximity of the New Forest SAC, measures must be put in place 
to adequately mitigate the potential for the introduction of invasive species 
from fly tipping of garden waste.  
 
Any planning permission will include a planning condition or obligation to 
ensure that occupancy of the site is limited to persons as defined in Planning 
Policy for Traveller Sites (2015) or any subsequent policy . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78 
 In addition to this allocation, further proposals  for the provision of per manent 
and / or transit accommodation to meet an established need of gypsies,  
travellers and travelling showpeople will be supported  within the Natio nal 
Park where it can be demonstra ted that there is a need  for the site to be lo cated 
within t he National Park; and 
a) the impact of the site on the landscape character of the National Park is 
accep table;  
b) Occupancy of the site will be restricted to gypsies and travellers with a local 
connection to the New Forest National Park ; 
c) the site is well located on the highway network and will not result  in a level 
of traffic generati on inappropr iate for the roads in t he Nati onal Park; 
d) there are adequate on-site facilities for parking and storage; 
e) in the case of any perma nent site, be located where there are appropriate 
local facilities (e.g. shops, sc hools and public transport ); and 
f) the site  does  not  detrim entally  affect  the  amenities  of  surrounding 
occupiers.  
 
 
7.69 The Hampshire Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople Accommodation 
Assessment (2017) also identifies a need for 21 additional plots for travelling 
showpeople in the National Park for households that meet the planning definition 
of a traveller. The Auth ority sought potential sites for travelling showpeople as part 
of the ‘Call for Sites’ process undertaken during the preparation of the Local Plan. 
However, no suitable sites were identified and as the National Park Authority does 
not own any land within t he National Park this is not an option for meeting the 
identified need. In response to the fact that no allocations have been possible 
Policy SP33 includes criteria that will be used to determine applications on 
unallocated sites.  
 
7.70 The following policies on residential development character , replac ement 
dwellings, extensions to dwellings and outbuildings reflect the local impor tance  
of these issues  and the cumulative impact  such  development can have on the 
Natio nal Park.  The policies in the Local Plan aim to protect the special  qualities 
of the New Forest,  while also recognising the need  for de velopment to meet 
the needs  of local communities. 
 
Residential Character of the Defined Villages  
 
7.71 The NPPF  highlights the great importance the Government attaches to the 
built environment and the need to plan positively for the achie vement of high 
quality development. National policy confirms that  local plans should  aim to 
ensure  that development responds  to local character and seek to  promote or 
reinforce local distincti venes s. 
 
7.72 This is particularly  pertinent  within the Defined Villages of the Natio nal Park.  
The four defined villages of Ashurst,  Brock enhurs t, Lyndhurst and  Sway are 
small in size (all less than 3,500 reside nts) and are an impor tant part of the 79 
 New Forest  landsca pe. The built character of these villages is var ied. The core 
of the villages are  often characterised by denser, close -knit development. The 
outer residential areas are generally more  spaci ous in character and 
distinguished by mature tre es and gardens, which make an important 
contributi on to the quality and character  of the villages in which they are situated. 
It is esse ntial that general pressure  for development within the National Park 
does not lead to inappropriate development in the Defined  Villages. It is 
therefore importa nt that propo sals for infilling and redevelopment within the 
Villages respond  to the local chara cter and reflect the local de velopment densities  
where appropr iate. This can include relatively high densities within the centre of 
the Defined V illages; and outside their cores lower density.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Replacement Dwellings  
 
7.73 The Authority continues  to recei ve a significant number of planning appl ications 
for replacement dwellings in the National Park.  To address concerns  raised 
regarding  the long term urbanisati on and the erosion of local distincti veness  
within the New Forest,  as well as a reducti on in the stock of smaller dwellings, 
successi ve local plans have sought to limit the impact  of replac ement dwellings 
throu gh the use of appropriate planning policies. A tighter approach to 
replacement dwellings is taken outside the Defined Villages as the landscape 
impact of replacement dwellings in these more rural locations can be greater.  
 
7.74 The Local Plan therefore includes  a detailed pla nning policy stating that outside  
the Defined Villages  repla cement dwellings should  be of a similar footprint, scale  
and size as the existing  dwelling. The fundamental aim of the policy is to reduce 
the loss of smaller homes in the National Park through replacement by substantially 
larger dwellings and to ensure replacement dwellings do not have an increase d 
impact on the protected landscape of the New Forest. T he Authority will conti nue 
to impose appropriate planning conditi ons to remove permitted de velopment 
rights to extend and/or alter appro ved replacement dwellings to ensure that the 
stock of smaller dwellings in t he National Park is maintained. 
 Policy DP34 - Residential Character of the Def ined Vil lages  
 
To ensure the conservation  and enhancement of the built heritage of the 
Defined Villages, development proposals within the villages must be informed 
by consid eration  of the charac ter of the local area.  The four Defined Villages 
are rural areas often character ised by spacious resid ential plots  set within 
mature landsca pes, and development densi ties shou ld reflect the strong built 
heritage of the villages and their location within a nationally protected 
landscape. 
 
 
 
 
 
 80 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.75 This policy does  not apply  to former dwellings that have either been 
demolished or abandoned. Abandonment is likely to have occu rred where 
there has been a deliberate  intention to cease  the residential use of the 
property  by: (i) leaving the dwelling vacant  for a considerable  period; (ii) 
allowing the dwelling to deteriorate  to the extent that residential  re-use would 
involve what would be tantamount to rebui lding; or (iii) introducing  a different 
use that supplants the earlier reside ntial us e. 
 
Extensions to Dwellings  
 
7.76 Even with extended  Permitt ed Development Rights, the Authority conti nues to 
recei ve a significant volume of applications each year for residenti al 
extensions. As with the concerns outlined above regarding  replac ement 
dwellings, proposals to incrementally extend dwellings in a nationally 
designated landscape can affect the locally distincti ve character of the built 
environment of the  New Forest.  In additi on, extensions can over time cause 
an imbal ance in the range and mix of hous ing stock available.  For these 
reasons  it is consid ered important that the Local  Plan continues to include a 
clear pol icy to guide decis ions for extensions to dwellings. Successive 
development plans for the New Forest have included such policies which strike  Policy DP35 - Repl acement Dwellings  
 
The repla cement of existing  dwellings will be permitted except where 
the existing  dwelling: 
a) is the result of a temporary or series of temporary permiss ions or the 
result of an unauthorised use; or 
b) makes  a positive contribution  to the historic character  and appearance  
of the locality. 
 
A replacement dwelling may be sited differently than the dwelling to be 
replaced, providing that there are clear environmental benefits.  
 
Cara vans and mobile homes may not be replaced  by permanent dwellings. 
 
In the case of small dwellings and those permitted by Policies SP19 – DP31 
of this Local Plan, replacement dwellings must not result in the  total internal 
habitable floor area exceeding 100 square metres . .  
 
In the case  of other dwellings outsi de the Defined Villages, the replacement 
dwelling should  be of no greater floorspa ce than the existing  dwelling.  
 
In exceptional circumstances, a larger dwelling may be permitt ed if it is 
essential to  meet the genuine family needs of an occupier  who works in the 
immediate locality. In respect  of this exception al circumstance, the 
maximum habitable floorspace of the replacement dwelling must not 
exceed  120 square metres.  
 81 
 an appropriate balance between meeting changes in householder requirements 
and maintaining a stock of smaller sized dwellings.  The extension limits apply 
outside the Defined Villages as extensions in these locations are likely to have 
a greater impact on the  protected  landscape of the National Park .  
 
7.77 The 30%  limit set out in Policy DP36 is not an allowance  or entitlement and it 
is important to emphasise t hat although an extension may comply with the 
criterion on size, there could be  other harmful impacts which would make the 
proposal  unacceptable. In all  cases,  the Authority will have regard to the scale  
and character  of the core element of the or iginal dwelling ( rather than 
subsequent additions) in det ermining  whether or  not an extension  is 
sympathetic to  the dwelling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.78 Where necessary  the Authority will use appropr iate planning conditio ns to 
ensure  that permi tted extensions are not used in conjuncti on with national 
Permit ted Development Rights to undermine the aims of  policy DP36 . 
 
7.79 For the  purposes  of applying Policies DP35  and DP36 : 
 
 original dwelling means the dwelling as first built;  
 existing dwelling means the dwelling as it existed on 1 July 1982, or as 
the dwelling was originally built or legally established, if the residential use 
post-dates 1 July 1982;  
 small dwelling means a dw elling with a floor area of 80 sq. metres or less 
as it existed on 1 July 1982, or as the dwelling was originally built or legally 
established, if the residential use post -dates 1 July 1982;  
 floorspace of original, existing and small dwellings will be meas ured 
as the total internal habitable floorspace of the dwelling but will not include Policy DP36 - Exte nsions to Dwellings  
 
Extensions to existing dwellings will be permitt ed provided that they are 
appropriate to the existing  dwelling and its curtilage. 
 
In the case of small  dwellings and new dwellings permitt ed by Policies SP19 
to DP31 of this Local Plan, the extension  must not result in a total internal 
habitab le floorspa ce exceeding  100 square metres. In the case of other 
dwellings (not  small d wellings) outside  the Defined Villages the extension  
must not increase  the floorspa ce of the existing  dwelling by more than 
30%.  
 
In exceptional circumstances a larger extension may be permitted to meet the 
genuine family needs of an occupier who works in the immediate locality. In 
respect of these exceptional circumstances, the total internal habitable 
floorspace of an extended smal l dwelling must not exceed 120 square metres . 
 
Extensions will not be permit ted where the existing  dwelling is the result  of 
a temporary  or series of temporary  permiss ions or the result  of an 
unauthorised use.  
 82 
 floorspace within conservatories41, attached outbuildings and detached 
outbuildings (irrespective of whether the outbuilding’s current use is as 
habitable floorspace);  
 floorspace of proposed extensions will include conservatories and 
attached outbuildings and any habitable floorspace provided within a 
detached outbuilding;  
 a conservatory is defined as having not less than three -quarters of the 
area of its roof and not le ss than one -half of the area of its external walls 
made of clear or translucent material;  
 a modest basement will not normally be regarded as habitable floorspace. 
However, some judgement will need to be applied in terms of whether it is 
genuinely a seconda ry space in association with the main dwelling. Key 
criteria to consider include availability of light; size (in relation to the main 
dwellings); access; use; layout and headroom.  Basements to houses set 
into a hillside with any form of exposed elevation will usually be treated as 
habitable accommodation.   
 genuine family need is defined as an exceptional and unique family need 
that could not have been reasonably anticipated at the time of purchase of 
the property. For example, additional floorspace may be  required to cater 
for specialist equipment and facilities required in connection with an 
unforeseen event, such as a severe disability arising from an accident whilst 
in occupation of the property; but, it normally would not cater for the  needs 
of growing families or the need to care for elderly relatives, as these needs 
are not considered to be so ‘exceptional’ as to warrant a departure from the 
floorspace restrictions set out in this policy.  
 
Outbuildings  
 
7.80 There remains considerable devel opment pressure to provide for larger 
outbuildings. Concerns have been raised that proposals for outbuildings are: (i) 
impacting on the character of the New Forest; (ii) increasingly being used to 
circumvent restrictions on residential extensions and repla cement dwellings; 
(iii) taking up important amenity space, including parking provision, within the 
curtilage of dwellings and this is resulting in parking being pushed beyond sites 
onto protected verges; and (iv) resulting in the overdevelopment of sites.  
 
7.81 The Authority therefore continues to carefully control proposals for outbuildings 
through its Local Plan, while at the same time recognising the role of 
outbuildings in supporting home -working for example. It is important that the 
number, scale and design  of any buildings within the curtilage of a dwelling 
should not detract from the character or appearance of the dwelling, the site 
and the surrounding area. The Authority will normally impose a planning 
condition limiting the use of the outbuilding to purp oses incidental to the 
dwelling on the site and excluding any use as habitable floorspace.  
 
                                            
41 This only applies to conservatories in New Forest  District that have previously been permitted as an ‘exception’ 
to policy and which are the subject  of a planning condition that limits their use as a conservatory. 83 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.82 The use of outbuildings to support home working and home -based businesses 
will be considered acceptable where this does not involve a change of use of 
the main dwelling or have an adverse impact on the residential amenities of 
adjoining occupiers or the special qualities of the National Park.  
 
Infrastructure Provision  
 
7.83 New development, even on the relati vely limited scale planned for in the 
Natio nal Park, can place  extra demands on existing  infrastruc ture. In such 
cases  where it is not possible  to make the neces sary provision on site, the 
Authority will seek  financial contrib utions  from the developer in accord ance 
with the framework provided by national  planning  policy and guidance. Within 
the context of the development that takes  place  within the National Park, 
developer contribut ions may be required towards: highway works;  affordable 
housin g; educati on provision; recre ation provision (including public open 
space  enhancements);  and nature conser vation  mitigation  measures. 
 
7.84 The Government was reviewing the national system of developer contributions 
and the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL)  in late 2017 . The National Park 
Authority is a charging authority under the relevant CIL Regulations, although it 
has not to date implemented CIL within t he National Park. This remains an 
option for the Authority in the future.  
 
7.85 However, even if CIL (or any future national tariff system to support 
infrastructure provision) was implemented in the National Park there is likely to 
remain a role for Section 10 6 agreements in the future to: (i) secure necessary 
contributions towards infrastructure that cannot be funded through CIL (for 
example habitat mitigation measures that are not deemed ‘infrastructure’, such 
as ranger provision or an education campaign ); and (ii) secure site -specific 
contributions from individual developments for measures that do appear on the 
general National Park -wide infrastructure list.  
 
 
 
 Policy DP37 – Outbuildings  
 
Domestic outbuildings will be permitted where the y: 
 
a) are proportionate and clearly subservient to the dwelling they are to 
serve in terms of their design, scale, size, height and massing ; 
b) are loca ted within the residential curti lage of an existing dwelling ; 
c) are re quired for purposes incidental to the use of the main dwelling; 
d) are not providing  additional habitable accommodation; and 
e) will  not  reduce  private  amenity  space  –  including  parking  provision  
- around the dwelling to an unacc eptable le vel. 
 84 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Community Facilities and Services  
 
7.86 In pursuing the two statutory National Park purposes, the Authority is committed 
to fostering, “ …the economic and social well -being of local communities within 
the National Park42.” The special qualities of the New Forest National Park 
include its strong and d istinctive local communities and one of the strategic 
objectives identified in this Local Plan is to further strengthen the well -being and 
sustainability of local communities.  
 
7.87 Local communities in the New Forest face similar challenges to those in many 
rural areas. Community facilities and key services that are essential in 
sustaining local villages are often under threat and therefore it is important that 
local planning policies for the area support their retention and improvement. In 
recent years the pla nning policy framework for the National Park has supported 
the development of new and enhanced community facilities, such as 
Woodgreen Village Shop , and this approach will be retained.  
 
7.88 The Local Plan supports the retention of existing community facilities  and the 
provision of essential facilities (including village shops and local educational 
services) in villages across the whole of the National Park where there are clear 
community benefits. Any proposals for the change of use of local commercial 
services  and community facilities will only be considered where robust evidence 
is provided to demonstrate there is no longer a need for a specific service or 
facility in the longer term, a suitable replacement service or facility is provided, 
or there is an exist ing similar facility accessible to the local community.  
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
42 Section 62(1), Environment Act 1995 Policy SP38 - Infrastruc ture Pro vision and D eveloper Con tributio ns 
 
Development proposals shall make provision for the infrastructure and 
measures necessary to ensure that the development is acceptable in 
planning terms in the context of the New Forest National Park Local Plan. 
Where appropriate, financial contributions for the provision of off-site 
infrastructure and measures will be sought. Appropr iate new and improved 
utility infrastructure will be permitted in order to meet the identified needs of 
the community.  
 
Contributions will be secured through the appropriate mechanism – including 
the Community Infrastructure Levy (or any future national t ariff system) and 
Section 106 agreements – as required by national policy.  
 
In  implementing  this  policy  regard  will  be  had  to  economic  viability 
consid erations  at the site specific level. 85 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.89 Essential  local community facilities are faci lities that are of direct benefit to the 
immediate local community  that provide an essential  service, including village 
shops,  pubs and village halls as well as small-scale  health and educational 
services, s ports a nd social faci lities. 
 
Retail Development within the National Park  
 
7.90 The NPPF states that to support a strong rural economy, local plans should 
promote the retention and development of local services and community 
facilities in villages, such as local shops, meeting places, sports venues, cultural 
buildings, public houses a nd places of worship. National policy requires local 
planning authorities to define shopping / retail areas and set out policies that 
make clear which uses will be permitted in such locations.  
 
7.91 In line with the Spatial Strategy for the National Park, although there are no 
designated ‘town centres’ within the National Park (the  Defined Villages  have 
less than 3,500 residents), successive local plans have sought to safeguard the 
role of the four Defined Village centres of the National Park in meeting som e of 
the day -to-day retail needs of local residents and visitors. The defined villages 
play a positive role in providing services for the communities of the National 
Park and the Local Plan seeks to protect that role. This has typically been done 
by settin g a proportion of the designated shopping frontages (as shown on the 
Policies Map) that should be kept in A1 (retail) use to help promote the retention 
and development of local shops within the Defined V illages of the National Park.   
 
 
 
7.92 The growing import ance of local produce to the New Forest eco nomy is 
ackno wledged and it is therefore appropriate that the Local Plan includes a 
local planning policy supporting  appropriate small-scale  retail development Policy  DP40 :  Change of Use from Retail in t he Defined Villages  
 
To support the role of the defined villages in meeting some of the retail needs 
of communities within the National Park, the change of use of ground floor 
premises from retail to other uses within the defined lo cal shopping frontages 
(as defined on the Policies Map) will only be permitted where it will not result 
in the proportion of retails units in the shopping frontages of Lyndhurst and 
Brockenhurst being reduced to less than 50%; and in the frontages of Ashur st 
and Sway to less than 40%.  Policy SP39 – Local Commu nity Facilities  
 
The Authority will support the retention of existing community facilities 
throughout the National Park and prevent their loss or redevelopment where 
they contribute to the sustainability of local communities.  
 
The Authority will support the development of  essential local community 
facilities where the proposal is of clear and direct benefit to the local village 
or rural community; the scale of the proposed facility is proportionate to the 
local areas; and they are accessible to the local communities they w ill serve.  86 
 (including farm shops)  outsi de the Defined Villages. 
 
7.93 Farm shops which sell goods produced on the farm do not normally require 
planning permission. In addition to goods produced on the farm, farm shops can 
also retail a small percentage of imported goods (t ypically 10%) without the 
need for planning permission. In each case, judgement needs to be exercised 
in determining whether the scale and proportion of imported goods amounts to 
a retail use requiring planning permission.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Policy DP41  - Retail Development  outside t he Defined Vi llages  
 
Outside  the Defined Villages, small-scale  convenience shops within rural 
settlements that serve local need s and farm shops that are part of a farm 
diversification  will be permi tted, together with small scale  extensions of 
existing  shops.  Any development should not extend into the open  
countr yside or have impacts on adjoin ing land uses.  The potential effects  
of farm shops  on other shops in  neighbouring villages will be assessed. 
 87 
 8. A Sustainable Local Economy  
 
8.1 This chapter set out the strategic objectives for a sustainable local economy, 
land management and tourism.  
 
8.2 A healthy local economy is essential in maintaining the life and vibrancy of the 
National Park, providing local employment, and sustaining its rural 
communities. This Local Plan aims to support a sustainable local economy 
which provides business and employ ment opportunities that benefit the National 
Park’s communities without compromising the special qualities and rural 
character  of the area . This approach will help to deliver the Authority’s duty43 to 
foster the social and economic well -being of its local c ommunities and, in doing 
so, will support New Forest District Council, Wiltshire Council and Test Valley 
Borough in their responsibility for promoting economic development in their 
respective administrative areas.  
 
8.3 Maintaining a high quality natural enviro nment can contribute substantial 
economic benefits by supporting tourism and helping to attract high value 
employees and businesses. Research suggests that National Park designation 
brings economic benefits for businesses both within a National Park and in  the 
wider region44. By successfully pursuing its two statutory purposes, therefore, 
the National Park Authority can make a positive contribution to economic 
prosperity both locally and in surrounding areas.  
 
8.4 The economic approach of this Local Plan takes i nto consideration some key 
aspects of the economic and employment characteristics of the National Park. 
There is a very low level of unemployment, which has been no higher than 
1.5%45 for the last ten years and has been consistently lower than regional and 
national levels during that period. Employment has been supported by a long 
history of investment in new business space with recent new floorspace 
development being consistent with the long term trend. The local economy is 
very diverse with the leisure, to urism, agriculture, health, and the professional, 
scientific and technical sectors all important in creating a wide range of 
employment opportunities. However, whilst many residents have high skill 
levels, the local economy would benefit from improved skil ls and business 
support. Looking forward to the next few years, a decline in the working age 
population is forecast.   
 
8.5 Within relatively short distances, the National Park is surrounded by local 
employment centres, such as Lymington, Ringwood and Totton, and large 
urban areas that provide significant employment opportunities. It is, therefore, 
not surprising to find that there is net out -commuting by re sidents to these larger 
centres  and, given their proximity, it is likely that some of the employment need s 
of National  Park residents in the future will continue to be met beyond the 
National Park’s boundaries.  
                                            
43 See Chap ter 1: Introduction  and the Environment Act 1995 . 
44 Prosperity and Protection: The economic impact of National Parks in the Yorkshire and Humber 
region. Coun cil for National Parks 2006; Valuing England’s National Parks: Cumulus Consultants Ltd 
and ICF GHK – Final Report for National Parks England 2013 . 
45 Unemployment measured by the % of the working age popu lation  that are claiming Job Seekers 
Allowan ce. 88 
 8.6 With strong economic expansion planned in the surrounding employment 
centres in South Hampshire, Southern Wiltshire and South East Dorset the task 
for the local economy will be to find ways of benefiting from the National Park’s 
advantages whilst retaining its special character. Taking into account the 
forecasted decline in the working age population, competition from surrounding 
areas, and the need to maintain the special environmental qualities of the 
National Park, supporting the economic well -being of the National Park’s 
communities will be best served by focusing on small businesses, with locally 
distinctive, higher value and low impact types of bus inesses being most 
appropriate. Given that most businesses in the National Park are relatively 
small46, the appropriate requirements for business space are likely to be of a 
modest scale.  
 
8.7 In relation to sustainable development that is appropr iate in a nationally 
designated area, throughout the National  Park the Local Plan w ill support:  
 
 the re-use and extension  of existing  buildings; 
 the redevelopment of existing  employment site s for a wider range of 
employment uses ; 
 retaining  existing  employment si tes 
 farm diversificatio n; and 
 home working.  
 
In addition to the above, in the Defined Villages, the Local Pl an will also s upport 
small scale employment development, and visitor facilities and accommodation  
using new buildings. 
 
8.8 This approach does not require the allocation of new land specifically for 
employment development. Neither the Authority’s previous Core Strategy 
(2010) nor any of the Local Plans prepared by the predecessor planning 
authorities (and inherited by the Authority in 2006) included employment l and 
allocations within the National Park in recognition of the protection afforded to 
the landscape and the high proportion of internationally protected habitats within 
the New Forest. Moreover, the very diverse nature of the local economy means 
that it do es not rely heavily on the B1 to B8 Land Use Classes that need office 
and industrial spaces. Coupled with a forecast decline in the working age 
population, it is not considered necessary to allocate any new land solely for 
employment use in this Local Plan . 
 
8.9 This approach  does not mean, however, that employment opportunities  will 
not be created. Indeed, past trends of development show that employment 
opportunities continue  to be generated for local communities  in the National 
Park area,  and unemployment has consis tently been  below regio nal and 
national levels since  the designation  of the Natio nal Park.  Given the long 
history  of business development that spans a wide range of econ omic sectors , 
it is anticipated that employment development will continue to come forward 
that will support the well-being of the National  Park’s communities. 
 
                                            
46 Over 90% of businesses in the National Park have 10 or fewer employees.  89 
 8.10 The Authority recognises, however, that the changes to permitted development 
rights could  lead to the loss of certain types of business spaces, which would 
have a negative impa ct on the local economy. These los ses will offset some of 
the new business space development that is brought forward in the future. In 
these circumstances, for the local economy to continue to provide sufficient 
employment opportunities for its communities , the Authority will not only retain 
all existing employment sites (where not impacted by the permitted 
development right changes), but will encourage the redevelopment of 
redundant brownfield employment sites for employment use by supporting a 
broader ran ge of business uses than the prior use.  
 
 
Strategic Ob jective for a Sust ainable  Economy 
 
Develop a diverse and sustainab le econo my that contributes  to the well- 
being of  local communities  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.11 It will be importa nt to support new small scale  busin ess development 
throughout the National Park to provide the employment and services needed 
by local communities.  The priority will be to locate such services within the 
Defined Villages to take advantage of existing  facilities and transport  links 
within these villages. However a consid erable number of current employment 
sites are already  locat ed outside the Defined Villages and it will be important to 
enable some further business development of an appropr iate scale where this 
helps improve the long  term sustainability of these more rural communities. 
 
8.12 Greater use of technolo gical and communication  advances that aid 
employment development will be supported  as these can improve efficiency 
and producti vity, raise  valueadd ing activity , and are identified as a key 
busin ess re quirement in the Business Needs  Survey (2014) . Busin esses that 
use such t echnology tend to have less environmental impacts and can also 
support ho me working to provide more employment opport unities.  Policy SP42: Business and Empl oyment  Development  
Small scale employment development will be permitted within the four 
Defined Villages of Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst and Sway.  
 
Outside these Defined Villages, small scale employment development that 
helps the well -being of local communities will be permitted through the re - 
use or extension of existing buildings, the redevelopment of existing business 
use employment sites, farm diversification schemes and through home -
working.  
 
Particular encouragement will be given to businesses that help to maintai n 
the land -based economy and cultural heritage of the National Park, or 
contribute to the understanding and enjoyment of the National Park’s Special 
Qualities. Providing local communities with a variety of employment 
opportunities will also be supported wh ere these do not have an adverse 
impact on the Special Qualities of the National Park.  
 90 
 8.13 Improving broadband and mobile telecommunications is an important objective 
set out in the Partnership Plan for the National Park. The Authority supports the 
rollout of superfast broadband across the National Park and initiative s to seek 
additional funding to provide complete coverage across the National Park.  
 
8.14 The visual impacts of telecommunications infrastructure will be considered 
using national planning policy and guidance, to ensure that any such proposals 
are sensitively designed and sited and demonstrate that there are no suitable 
alternative locations.  
 
8.15 Local distinctiveness h as an important part to play in  the local economy. Many  
existing producers and entirely new businesses related to the rural economy 
are benefiting from this through the local produce and products market. There 
is widespread recognition of the New Forest Marque and an increasing number 
of small businesses, farm ers markets and farm shops are using this New Forest 
brand. Proposals for farm shops will be considered under Policy DP41.  
 
8.16 The local economy would also benefit from raising productivity through 
improved skills and business support, which are both encoura ged by the 
Enterprise M3 and Swindon and Wiltshire Local Enterprise Partnerships and the 
New Forest LEADER Local Development Strategy. The Local Plan recognises 
the importance of increasing the skills of the local workforce to improve their 
employment pros pects. The Authority will support the role s of New Forest 
District Council, Test Valley Borough Council and Wiltshire Council in co -
ordinating the provision of skills training for the workforce. It will also support the 
provision of training facilities thr ough the re -use and extension of existing 
buildings and the redevelopment of existing business use employment sites . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy SP43: Existing Employment  Sites  
 
Existing  employment sites will be retained throughout the National Park. 
 
Within the four Defined Villages the Authority will retain existing employment 
sites and also consider additional uses on these sites to allow for mixed use 
developments where:  
 
a) There is sufficient space on the existing employment site to not only retain 
the same amount o f existing employment floorspace, but to also 
accommodate a further activity on the site;  
 
b) The intensified use of the employment space means that at least the  same 
level of employment will be retained on the site as during the previous full 
operational us e, and additional space is created for another type of use ; 
and 
 
c) the additional use on the site is compatible with the proposed employment 
use and the site’s neighbours in terms of its design, amenity impacts, and 
in relation to any parking and traffic imp lications.  
 91 
 8.17 In addition to support ing busin ess development to sustain the well-being  of 
local communities, it is import ant to recognise that existing  employment sites 
are under pressure  from higher value land uses such  as housin g, particularly 
given the high level of house prices in the National  Park.  The Commercial 
Property Market Assessment  (2017) concludes that the supply of employment 
sites is constrained by the limited availability of employment land and sites in the 
National Park. As there are limited alternative sites, it is important to retain existing 
sites47 for employment use to ensure a prosperous local economy and 
employment opportunities for local residents in the future. Retaining employment 
sites also aims to avoid cr eating unsustainable settlements with little or no 
employment and increasing out -commuting to jobs beyond the National Park.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.18 The redevelopment of existing employment sites for a range of employment 
uses should help to support the economic well -being of communities throughout 
the National Park. The Authority will encourage the redevelopment of redundant 
brownfield employment sites for employment use by supporting a wider range 
of business uses than the previous use, other than storage and warehousing. 
Proposals for small scale starter units /offices, rural business units and easy 
in/out units, will be considered favourably. However, the redevelopment of 
existing employment sites for general storage and warehousing purposes will 
not be encouraged as this type of development does not generate s ignificant 
employment opportunities relative to the space required, such development 
typically results in additional traffic and can have a greater impact on the 
landscape.  
 
Extensions  to Non-Residen tial Buildings  and Us es 
 
8.19 This policy applies to a range of non-resid ential buildings and uses including 
agricultural,  busin ess, community and tourism uses48 (excluding holiday parks 
                                            
47 The Policy applies to existing employment sites which are not subject to PD rights contained in the 
most recent version of The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) (England) 
Order.  
48 Extensions to existing serviced accommodation and uses will be supported by this Policy as long as 
the extension also opera tes as serviced accommodation – forms of self-catering accommodation and Policy DP44: Redevelopment  of Exi sting Employment  Sites  
 
The redevelopment of established  employment sites for industrial, office, 
and business uses will be permit ted where:  
a) there would be minimal additional effect on the visual impact of the site 
in the lands cape, or on the amenities  of nearby properties, or on traffic or 
other disturb ances  from the sit e;  
b) where feasib le, the redevelopment scheme deals  comprehensively with 
the full extent of the si te;  
c) the repla cement buildings would be appropriate to their surroundi ngs in 
terms of scale, design and materials; and 
d) the redevelopment scheme would be contained within the existing  site 
boundary. 
 92 
 and camp sites). It seeks to maintain existing  non-resid ential buildings and 
uses while avoiding potential adverse impacts on the National Park arising from 
additional activity, such as increased visitor pressures and traffic.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.20 A limited extension will normally be considered as one which is capable of being 
achieved with minimal impact on the overall physical appearance and 
prominence of the building and/or site in the landscape and which results only 
in marginal changes to the nature of the existing use.  
 
Sustainable Tou rism  
 
Strategic Ob jective for Sustainable Tourism  
 
Supp ort development  which encoura ges sustain able tourism and 
recreation,  and provides opportunities  for enjoying the Park’s  special 
qualitie s 
 
8.21 The New Forest National Park’s unique environment attracts many visitors and 
the tourism industry is of considerable importance to the National Park’s 
economy. Spending associated with leisure trips to the National Park is 
significant, supporting the accommodation, retail and other business sectors, 
providing employment, and thus supporting local communities.  
 
8.22 The development and impl ementation of sustainable tourism in the New Forest 
involves a wide range of partners and stakeholders. The key destination 
management role is operated by the New Forest Tourism Association, which 
has merged with Go New Forest Community Interest Company an d will promote 
and market the New Forest, and encourage sustainable tourism. The Authority 
is supportive of the delivery of sustainable tourism and recognises the important 
contribution it makes to the National Park’s communities and its economy.  
 
8.23 In addit ion to developing the competitiveness and economic success of the 
tourism sector, a great deal of work has been undertaken to promote 
sustainable tourism in the New Forest, based on bringing together the interests 
of visitors, the tourism industry, local c ommunities and the environment. This 
approach aims to support the local tourism economy, whilst ensuring that the 
                                            
uses that are separate from, and propo sed as extensions to, existing serviced accommodation will not 
be suppor ted by this Policy. Extensions to all forms of camping and caravan use  will be considered 
unde r Policy DP47.  Policy DP45 : Exten sions to  Non-Residential Buildings and U ses 
 
The limited extension of existing  non-resid ential buildings and uses will be 
permit ted where it: 
a) would not materially increase  the level of impact of the activity on the 
site; and 
b) is cont ained within the existing  site boundary. 
 93 
 special qualities and local distinctiveness of the New Forest are conserved. 
There is still, however, a need to raise the profile of tourism b usinesses as 
examples of good environmental practice and be bolder in developing the image 
of the National Park as a sustainable tourism destination focusing on the Special 
Qualities of the area.  
 
8.24 With regard to tourism related developments, the Authority aims to support 
sustainable tourism and provide opportunities for enjoying the National Park’s 
Special Qualities without compromising its purpose to conserve and enhance 
the National Park’s natural  beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage. To achieve this, 
new tourism development will be supported . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.25 Small scale development of new visitor facilities and accommodation will be 
supported within the four Defined Villages. These villages already provide many 
restaurants, shops and other services used by visitors and together with their 
access by public tran sport make them more sustainable locations for tourism 
developments49 than elsewhere throughout the National Park and less likely to 
have impacts on the landscape and natural beauty of the area.  
 
8.26 It is also important to recognise that existing serviced acco mmodation is under 
pressure from higher value forms of development, such as housing. Given that 
serviced accommodation makes a significant contribution to the local economy 
                                            
49 Consistent with paragrap h 28, National Planning Policy Framework Policy SP46: Sustainable Tour ism Development  
 
Sustainable tourism development will be supported where it provides 
opportunities for the understanding and enjoyment of the special qualities of 
the National Park in a way that either enhances, or does not damage the 
Special Qualities. This will be facilitated by:  
 
a) supporting small scale development of visitor facilities and 
accommodation using new or exist ing buildings in the four Defined 
Villages. Outside these villages visitor facilities will be supported through 
the re -use or extension of existing buildings in line with Policy DP45 and 
Policy DP49, and visitor accommodation will be considered as part of a 
farm diversification scheme as outlined in Policy SP48;  
b) retaining existing serviced visitor accommodation where it contributes to 
the sustainability of local communities;  and 
c) supporting opportunities to relieve visitor pressures where this would 
assist t he conservation or enhancement of internationally or nationally 
designated nature conservation sites.  
 
Extensions to existing tourism developments will be considered in 
accordance with Policies DP45 and DP47. Development of visitor facilities 
within the ex isting site of the major visitor attractions at Paultons Park and 
Beaulieu Motor Museum will be supported if the four criteria in Policy DP44 
can be satisfied.  
 94 
 by providing employment and supporting business services and local produce 
markets,  retaining the existing stock is considered important. Outside the 
National Park, the adjacent towns (including Ringwood, Lymington, 
Fordingbridge and New Milton) are likely to continue to perform a particular role 
as centres for accommodation and visitor facilities and in providing a greater  
range of services and cultural activities.  
 
8.27 Existing holiday parks and campsites provide significant opportunities to enjoy 
the special qualities of the National Park. They are well provided for in and 
around the New Forest and this means that no additional camping facilities50 
are needed. The New Forest National Park contains over three times the 
average number of camping and touring caravan bedspaces per square 
kilometre found in any other English National Park. It is  already under 
considerable recreational pressure. The Habitats Regulation Assessment of the 
Local Plan does not rule out a likely significant effect of recreation visits on the 
integrity of the internationally designated nature conservation sites, which m ake 
up over half of the total area of the National Park. Moreover, the New Forest 
has a higher proportion of unserviced versus serviced visitor accommodation 
than most other English National Parks. The large amount of unserviced 
accommodation is added to t hrough the high number of locations which have 
licences for seasonal 'pop -up' campsites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.28 Although many sites are seasonal they can have a significant impact on the 
New Forest environment, particularly those located in areas of designated    
nature conservation importance. Proposals for ancillary developments to 
support seasonal campsites, such  as hardstandings and toilets, will not be 
viewed favourably. In the longer term, it would be of benefit to the New Forest 
environment to reduce the overall number of camping and caravan pitches in 
the most sensitive areas.  
 
8.29 Recently there has been a large  increase in 28 day ‘pop up’ campsites which 
account for some extra 7 ,000 overnight stays in the Forest. If this trend 
continues consideration will be given to the use of an Article 4 Direction to 
ensure this type of development is properly planned.  
 
                                            
50 Including all forms of self-catering camping and caravan accommodation Policy DP47:  Holiday Parks  and Camp  Sites  
 
New campsites  and extensions to  existing  holiday parks,  caravan or camping 
sites will only  be permit ted to enable the removal of pitc hes from sensiti ve 
areas by the relocation to  a less sensiti ve area, providing: 
a) there would be overall environmental benefits; 
b) there would be no inc rease in the overall site area or site capacit y; and 
c) the area where pitches or other facilities are removed from would be 
fully restored to  an appropriate New Forest l andsc ape, and any existing  
use rights are rel inquished. 
 95 
 The land-based  economy 
 
Strategic Ob jective for t he lan d-based economy 
 
Encour age land manag ement  that susta ins the special quali ties of the 
National P ark 
 
8.30 The land -based economy in the New Forest encompasses agriculture, forestry, 
commoning and other traditional rural businesses.  Whilst providing only a small 
proportion of local jobs, farming, commoning, forestry and woodland 
management remain vital in maintaining the land use management practices 
that help conserve the landscape character and cultura l identity of the National 
Park.  
 
8.31 In relation to rural activities, the National Park’s Partnership Plan outlines the 
important role that agriculture and forestry play the in rural economy and 
maintaining characteristic New Forest habitats and landscapes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.32 In the National Park the practice of commoning is particularly recognised as 
being integral to the maintenance of the essential landscape character and 
cultural heritage of the area. Commoners’ animals remain part of the identity of 
the Forest and a major attraction for visitors. Whilst commoners have rights to Policy SP48: The Land -based Econo my 
 
Land-based businesses that help mainta in the overall character  and 
cultural id entity of the Natio nal Park will be supported  by: 
 
a) working  with  key  organisatio ns  to  ensure  the  future  viability  of 
commoning throu gh: 
(i) enabling afford able housing  for commoners that includes land 
suitable  for holdin gs (as set out in Policy SP29); and 
(ii) maintaining  the supply of land available for back-up grazing on 
the enclo sed lands; resisting  the loss of back-up grazing through 
development or change of use.  
 
b) Supporting farming and forestry that would be beneficial to the Forest 
through:  
(i) the provisi on of agricultural and forestry building s subject  to Policy 
DP50;  
(ii) farm diversification where this would help to sustain the long -term 
agricultural operation of the land and would be:  
- agricultural diversification based on an extensive system of 
land management, or  
- non-agricultural diversification, through the re -use of 
redundant farm buildings in line with Policy SP46 or Policy 
DP49, and  where it can be demonstrated that the new use 
would remain ancillary to the farming business;  
(iii) Helping to support markets for local produce and products.  96 
 graze their animals in the historic area of common grazing, they also require 
back -up grazing areas in the enclosed agricultural lands. Consequently it is 
important that agricultural land, which is u sed for these purposes, is not 
developed or lost to other uses.  
 
8.33 Farming and farm diversification will be given particular support to enhance or 
maintain the characteristic landscapes and habitats, provide local produce, 
allow greater public access or create local employment. Diversification of a 
scale or extent which is likely to provide an incentive to reduce the long term 
agricultural operation of the land will not be supported.  
 
8.34 Forestry has become an important feature of the New Forest over the pas t 150 
years, providing local employment and training and enabling much of the timber 
to be sourced and processed locally. It will be important for the industry to adapt 
to changing markets for forestry products, including wood fuel, and continue to 
champio n sustainable production in the local context . 
 
Re-Use of Ex isting Buildings  
 
8.35 The re -use of existing buildings is important for business and employment 
development to ensure the provision of future employment opportunities for 
local communities in the National Park. The following policy sets out the detail 
of the strategic policy wh ich supports the re -use of redundant buildings for 
employment purposes in order to support the rural economy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.36 This policy is intended to enable the re -use or change of use of existing buildings 
which are appropriate to their New Forest setting, are a re -usable resource 
capable of conversion without significant reconstruction and are on sites which 
meet highway and  other local authority standards. The policy enables the use 
of a building to change to an alternative use which is considered to be 
appropriate in the New Forest under the policies of this plan. The building to be 
re-used should be suitable for the new us e proposed without the need for 
additions or extensions. The Defined Villages are considered to be more Policy DP49: Re-use of Buildings outside t he Defined Villages 
 
The re -use of buildings outside Defined Villages will be permitted provided 
that: 
a) the proposal would not result in the loss of an employment use or 
community facility and accord with Policy SP39 and Policy SP43;  
b) the proposal would not involve a residential use (other than in 
accordance with Policy SP19);  
c) the building is appropri ate in scale and appearance to its location, and 
should be capable of conversion without significant extension or 
detriment to itself or its surroundings. The building must be structurally 
sound and capable of re -occupation without re -building; and  
d) in the case of agricultural or forestry buildings, the building must be 
genuinely redundant in its existing use and not capable of fulfilling any 
beneficial agricultural use.  
 97 
 sustainable locations for housing development, and the approach to housing 
outside the Defined Villages is described in Chapter 7.    
 
8.37 Given the importa nce that land management practices have in maintaining the 
landscape, the Authority will support farm diversification schemes which re -use 
existing farm buildings in accordance with Policies SP48 and DP49, where the 
proposal relates to the diversification of an existing and continuing farm 
business. However, where proposals for farm buildings do not relate to a farm 
diversification scheme, the Authority will take into account the potential of the 
buildings to continue in some form of beneficial agricultural  use, in particular 
one which serves the interests of the New Forest.  
 
8.38 The Authority is concerned to ensure that wherever practical, New Forest 
commoners should be given the opportunity of utilising the existing stock of 
agricultural/forestry buildings. Wh ile some agricultural buildings may no longer 
be required by a particular farm they may still be suitable for use by commoners, 
e.g. for storage of feedstuffs or housing animals, or for conversion to a 
commoners’ dwelling. Accordingly the Authority will ne ed to be satisfied that 
agricultural and forestry buildings cannot continue to fulfil any beneficial 
agricultural use before giving favourable consideration for their re -use 
independently of a farming enterprise.  
 
8.39 The re -use of purpose -built or pre -fabrica ted agricultural buildings, e.g. 
glasshouses or prefabricated barns, particularly those of a large scale, are 
unlikely to be considered favourably under this policy, as such buildings are 
often out of character with the New Forest  landscape . This policy do es not apply 
to agricultural buildings that are subject to a planning condition requiring their 
removal on the cessation of agricultural use.  
 
Agricultural and Forestry Buildings  
 
8.40 This policy seeks to enable development necessary to sustain agricultural 
activity, including forestry and commoning. However, development associated 
with agriculture can have a substantial environmental impact, and the Authority 
will not support buildings or other structures that would be damaging to the 
ecology, landscape or c haracter of the National Park.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Policy DP50: Agricultural and Forestry Buildings  
Permission will be granted for buildings required for agriculture or forestry 
purposes where:  
a) there is a functional need for the building and its scale is commensurate 
with that need and its setting in the landscape;  
b) the building is designed for the purposes of agriculture or forestry;  
c) the site is related physically and functionally to existing buildings 
associated with the business unless there are exceptional circumstances 
relating to agricultural necessity for a more isolated location; and  
d) they do not involve large or obtrusive structures or generate a level of 
activity which would have a detrimental effect on the National Park.  
 98 
 8.41 In the case of buildings required for pony and horse breeding, the Authority will 
need to be satisfied that the enterprise is a commercial operation carried out by 
commoners in conjunction with grazing the New Forest. In the case of buildings 
required in connection with the turning out of stock onto the Open Forest, the 
Authority will also need to assess the associated impacts of any additional 
grazing pressures on the Open Forest.  
 
8.42 A planning condition will normally be imposed requiring the building to be 
removed and the land restored to i ts former condition should the building no 
longer be required for agricultural purposes. In assessing the functional need 
for a building, first consideration will be given to the conversion of any existing 
building under the terms of Policy DP49.  
 
Horse riding and horse keeping  
 
8.43 Horse riding and horse keeping have a long history in the New Forest and are 
part of the cultural identity of the New Forest. In the region of 3,500 horses are 
kept within and immediately surrounding the National Park51. Together with 
horses kept by farmers and commoners, the local equine community makes a 
valuable contribution to the local economy.  
 
8.44 When it is done well, horse keeping can make a positive contribution to the 
management of the New Forest and assist farmers and commo ners seeking to 
diversify their activities. But also in the few cases when it is done badly there 
can be problems associated with overgrazed fields, poor fencing and 
inappropriate lighting, all of which can lead to a negative impression of horse 
keeping. T here are examples of both within the New Forest.  
 
8.45 Planning permission is usually required for most horse related development.  
However, under the General Permitted Development Order 2015 , there may be 
some scope to provide buildings or enclosures associated  with the keeping of 
recreational horses, incidental to the enjoyment of the dwelling house, in the 
garden of a domestic dwelling. It will be advisable to seek the advice on the 
need for planning permission for such buildings from the Authority.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.46 The Authority cannot control t he use of land for grazing. However, the keeping 
of recre ational horses  involves a more inten sive use of land which is subject 
to planning  control.  The distin ction between grazing and keeping is not al ways 
                                            
51 Recreational Horse Keeping in  the New Forest: Upda te of grazing survey 2007. Policy DP51: Recreational Horse  Keeping  
Permiss ion will be granted for recreational horse ke eping provided that the 
propo sal does not: 
a) have an adverse i mpact on  the landsca pe or any nature conservation 
interests;  
b) harmfully increase riding  pressures on the Open Forest; or 
c) result in the loss  of back-up grazing land.  
 99 
 clear although a judgement can normally be made on the basis of the area of 
grazing land available per animal. As a guideline, the keeping of horses 
generally occurs when there is less than 0.5 ha of land per horse52. 
  
8.47 Other key indicators can include the existence of stables and other facilities, 
and the condition of the land.  
 
8.48 Planning applications should be accompanied by sufficient information to 
demonstrate that the associated impacts of any new recreation al horse keeping 
use is positive rather than negative, for example by including details of fencing 
and landscaping.  
 
8.49 The high demand in land for horse grazing and keeping can reduce the amount 
of back -up grazing available for commoners’ animals and there i s a need to 
maintain an adequate supply of back -up grazing land available to commoners53. 
 
8.50 Policy DP51 also seeks to ensure that horse keeping does not impinge on the 
New Forest by adding to riding activity in the area and/or contributing to the 
erosion of the Open Forest.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.51 The Authority seeks to limit the proliferation of buildings in the New Forest, 
primarily because of their impact on the landscape. However, the need for field 
shelters (which are commonly characterised by one side of the building being 
left open) is recognised and therefore they will normally be permitted providing 
they are sensitively designed and can be accommodated witho ut being 
obtrusive in the landscape. The same considerations apply to stables although 
these should be located close to existing buildings.  
 
 
 
 
                                            
52  Defra Code of practice for the welfare of horses, ponies, donkeys and their hybrids (April 2013 ) 
repor ts that as a genera l rule, a horse will require a minimum of 0.5 hectares (1.25  acres) of good 
grazing if no supplementary feeding is being provided. 
53 New Forest Commoning Review 2007 Full  Repor t identified the need to protect backup grazing la nd 
from competing land uses such as private horse keeping Policy DP52: Field Shelters and Stabl es 
Permiss ion will be granted for field shelters provided that  the building is: 
a) sensiti vely sited to be unobtrusi ve in t he landscape;  
b) simple in  appearance  and modest in scale; and 
c) construc ted of appropriate materials.  
The same considerations apply to stables al though these should be located 
close  to existing  buildings. 
 100 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
8.52 Maneges are all-weather riding  arenas  used for the schooling of animals  and 
the training of riders.  While the Authority recognises  that the availability of 
maneges may reduce the use of the Open Forest,  particularly by riding schools, 
there are concerns about the physical impa ct of their development on the New 
Forest  landscape and ecology. The Authority wishes to minimise the 
environmental impact of these propo sals and consi ders that this form of 
development is likely to be acce ptable only where it is contained within or 
closely related to an existing  group  of buildings and makes  use of materials 
that blend in well with the New  Forest la ndscape. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Policy DP53: Maneges  
 
The development of outdoor maneges will be permit ted provided that: 
a) they do not result in any detrim ental impact on the landsca pe and 
ecolo gy of the New Forest; a nd 
b) they do not involve the inst allation of lighting.  
The development of indoor maneges will not be permit ted other than in 
accord ance with Policy DP49 (Re-use of buildings). 
 101 
 9. Transport and Access  
 
9.1 The National Park has an extensive road network, with a number of major trunk 
routes and several A -roads that carry high volumes of traffic from commuters, 
residents and visitors alike.  
 
9.2 Unlike many National Parks, the New Forest is easily accessible by train 
through four railway stations at Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Sway and Beaulieu 
Road, which are on the London Waterloo to Weymouth line. As such , there are 
real opportunities to encourage a rrival by train, although these stations are 
currently poorly  connected to other forms of public transport. Whilst a number 
of bus routes cross the Forest the services are greatly reduced in the evenings 
and at weekends.  
 
9.3 The New Forest Tour, a seasonal op en-top bus, is aimed at both visitors and 
residents, and operates during the summer months, with three interlinked 
routes across the Park stopping at popular villages and major attractions within 
the National Park. The Tour links to rail stations at Brocke nhurst, Lymington 
Pier, Ashurst and New Milton, as well as ferry services to the Isle of Wight and 
Southampton. In addition, a Beach Bus service also operates during the 
summer and links Hythe, Lepe, Beaulieu and Lymington.  
 
Strategic Ob jective for Transpo rt: 
 
Reduce  the impacts of traffic on the special qualit ies of the National 
Park  and provide a range  of sustainable  transport  alternati ves within  the 
Park  
 
9.4 Across the National Park traffic volumes are high, especially during the summer 
months, and trends indicate a general increase each year on a number of 
routes. The National Park receives an estimated 13.5 million visitor days each 
year, with the vast majority of both staying and day visitors using the car to reach 
their destination54. 
 
9.5 National predictio ns cite an increase in total car travel of between 19% and 55% 
(depending on different scenarios) by 2040 . Combined with the impacts of 
150,000 additional dwellings proposed in South Hampshire and South East 
Dorset between now and 2036, additional demands on the road network within 
the National Park  will be generated . 
 
9.6 In addition to residents and visitors, there are high levels of commuter traffic 
crossing the Park, particularly from the surrounding areas. A significant 
proportion of the local workforce is  either self -employed and work from home 
(about 11%) or commute to work outside the area, particularly to Southampton. 
Overall there is a significant net outflow of people from the National Park 
travelling to work in urban areas such as Southampton (provid ing employment 
for 15% of the National Park’s working population) and Bournemouth (providing 
employment for 8% of the National Park’s working population).  
 
9.7 The increase in traffic within and around the National Park raises a number of 
significant issues. C ampaigns in recent years have seen a reduction in the  
                                            
54 Tourism South E ast visitor survey 2004-2005. 102 
 numbers of commoners’ livestock (ponies, cattle, pigs, sheep and donkeys) 
killed or inju red on the Forest’s unfenced roads, but the figure still remains high 
with 98 animals killed or injured during 201 6. Every animal killed is a loss to the 
Forest and its commoners, and the Authority is working with partners to develop 
initiatives to reduce the numbers of accidents year on year, including the 
consideration of traffic calming measures where appropriate.  
 
9.8 Traffic speeds can be a concern to local communities and can contribute to 
human and animal accidents. Hampshire County Council has introduced 30 
mph speed limits in many New Forest villages and advisory 20 mph limits in the 
vicinity of many schools.  
 
9.9 Traffic also detracts from the tranquillity of the New Forest, and can conflict with 
other recreational users, especially on more minor roads. Over the coming 
decades, with a potential increase in recreation pressure on the New Forest, it 
will be important to  develop further education and traffic management initiatives 
to ensure quality of life, environmental quality and experience of visitors is not 
undermined.  
 
9.10 The principles of this transport objective are also carried through in a number of 
other policies in this Local Plan. In particular the Spatial Strategy (set out in 
Chapter 4) is based on the objective of reducing the need to travel and therefore 
the location of development is based on the most sustainable settlements in the 
National Park, which have t he best access to public transport, including rail, and 
existing community facilities and services.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.11 Only a r elatively limited amount of small scale  housing  and associa ted 
development is proposed for the National Park.  Additio nal new or impro ved 
transport  infrastru cture is not normally needed to service this level of 
development. Co nsequently the expansion  of the existing  road network will not 
be support ed within t he Nati onal Park, ot her than in exceptional ci rcumstances.  
 
9.12 Working in partnership with Hampshire County Council and Wiltshire Council, 
the Authority will use the transportation contributions it collects from larger 
development schemes within the Park under Policy SP38 to help mitigate the 
likely effects of increased levels of trip generation within the National Park by 
addressing accessibility, road safety, air quality and traffic congestion.  
 
9.13 Of greater concern is the impact of increas ed trip generation on the National 
Park arising from development outside the National Park boundary; some Policy SP54: Transport Infrastruct ure 
 
Further development of the strategic transport network will only be supported 
where:  
a) it is an integral part of a longer term strategy to address traffic congestion 
on the A31, or  
b) alternative solutions including potential traffic demand management 
measures have been explored and are not feasible or appropriate.  
 103 
 150,000 dwellings are proposed for South Hampshire and South East Dorset 
up to 2036. It is important that the likely impacts are researched and fully 
understood to allow the implementation of measures which will mitigate the 
impact on the special qualities of the National Park.  
 
9.14 The National Park Authority will take account of national transport policy and 
the Hampshire and Wiltshire Local Transport Pla ns with regard to the 
consideration of any major new traffic or demand management measures over 
the longer term of this Local Plan. Any such measures will not be considered 
without further detailed research and public consultation.  
 
9.15 Where proposed developm ent would generate significant amounts of traffic 
movement then a detailed Transport Statement or Transport Assessment will 
be required, as set out in national planning policy. This will be identified on a 
case by case basis.  
 
Parking standards  
 
9.16 The Hampshire Local Transport Plan 2011 - 2031 recognises that access to 
sustainable modes of transport is often more limited in rural areas, and identifies 
a major challenge for the area to be ‘Improving accessibility for people without 
access to a car, while recognising that the car is likely to remain the main mode 
of travel for many people in rural areas’ such as the New Forest. Similar 
objectives are echoed in The Wiltshire Local Transport Plan 2011 -2026.  
 
9.17 These standards are set out in Annex 2 of this Plan and identify the required 
level of car parking for new residential and non -residential development.  Policy 
DP2 (General Development Principles) in this Plan requires all new 
development proposals to make adequate provision for parking in accordance 
with the standards in Annex 2. Reduced parking provision may be acceptable 
in certain circumstances, such as where there is relatively good accessibility by 
public transport, or where there is clearly demonstrated alternative capacity. 
However, the preferen ce is for parking spaces to be provided within the curtilage 
of the dwelling.  It is recommended that applicants also consider the Authority’s 
adopted Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document which sets out 
general guidance on the design and integration  of parking into new 
development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  104 
 Access  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9.18 National planning policy and guidance and the local transport plans all 
emphasise the need to reduce reliance on the car, improve public transport and 
access to a range of services and community facilities. This will prove beneficial 
to both residents and visitors alike.  
 
9.19 The dispersed nature of settlements in the National Park, seasonal congestion, 
and a limited public bus network, can create barriers to accessibility. In recent 
years, there have bee n reductions in some less well -used public bus services 
which have added to the problem. The National Park Authority recognises the 
importance of maintaining an effective network of public transport and the added 
value that community transpor t initiatives can bring.  
 
9.20  Traffic congestion in Lyndhurst causes local pollution problems and affects 
local residents’ quality of life. It can also create accessibility issues for local 
people and reduce the quality of experience for visitors. A number of  traffic 
management measures have been trialled in order to reduce journey times for 
different flows of traffic. The Hampshire Local Transport Plan identifies that 
future Implementation Plans will set out the following measures for the National 
Park:  
 Closer partnerships with neighbouring counties to ensure a co -ordinated 
approach to transport ; 
 Managing  the  road  network  to  protect  and  enhance  the  area’s  rural 
character;  
 Reduction of ‘sign clutter’ ;  
 Supporting local sustainable tourism through  footpath, cycle, equestrian, 
public transport and rights of way improvements, and enhancing the 
network to allow increased leisure use . Policy SP55: Access  
 
The Authority will pro mote safer ac cess and more sustainable forms of 
transport  to and within t he National  Park for enjoyment, health and well- 
being, where appropr iate by supportin g: 
 
a) local tra nsport initiatives such as the New  Forest  Tour; 
 
b) community transport  initiati ves such as the Lymington to Brock enhurst 
Com munity  Rail Partnership;  
 
c) improvements to make existing  paths, tracks and roads safer and more 
user friendly; 
 
d) opportunities for the creation of a more joined-up network of routes for 
non-motorised tr ansport; 
 
e) appropriate improvements to public tran sport facilities; and 
 
f) the safeguarding of disus ed railway lines and ro ads from development 
that would compromise their future reuse as sustainable t ransport routes.  
 105 
 9.21 Objective 3.1 of the National Park Authority’s Landscape Action Plan (2013) 
aims to achieve traffic management and road  design solutions that reflect their 
rural context and feature a landscape -led approach.  
 
9.22 Although there are more than 325 kilometres of rights of way within the National 
Park, outside of the Crown Lands, the Hampshire Countryside Access Plan 
2015  - 2025  together with the Wiltshire Countrysid e Access Improvement Plan 
2015 - 2025 both highlight the need for improved connectivity of routes, with 
particular emphasis on encouraging suitable routes for less mobile people. This 
is important for the New Forest g iven the forecast ageing population, and 
reflects the objectives of national planning policy which promotes accessibility 
by public transport, walking and cycling. It also supports the aims established in 
the ‘Recreation Management Memorandum of Understand ing for the New 
Forest’ drawn up by the Nati onal Park Authority in partnership with Natural 
England, the Forestry Commission, the Verderers  of the New Forest , New 
Forest District Council and Hampshire County Council. This sets out the guiding 
principles fo r the management of recreation across the New Forest, and will be 
used by relevant statutory organisations.  
 
9.23 The Partnership Plan for the National Park (2015) sets out an action for the 
period 2015 to 2020 to explore the funding and feasibility for adjacent 
carriageway cycle routes on fenced roads between main settlements to improve 
safe access for commuting and leisure cycling, including a lin k between 
Lymington and Cadnam.  Policy SP55 supports the principle of such coordinated 
routes, especially be tween key settlements and public transport hubs.  
 
9.24 Under the Countryside and Rights of Way (CROW) Act 2000 the National Park 
Authority is the statutory access authority. However, responsibility for the 
maintenance of rights of way remains with Hampshire Cou nty Council and 
Wiltshire Council as the relevant highway authorities.  
 
9.25 The Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 introduced new powers to improve 
public access to and enjoyment of the coastline of England. Natural England is 
responsible for developing a suit able route in consultation with local 
communities and organisations, which will be subject to restrictions in certain 
areas for nature conservation or land management purposes.  The England 
Coast Path – including the stretch through the New Forest National Park – is 
due to be completed by 2020.   
  106 
 10.  Implementation and monitoring  
 
Monitoring   
 
10.1 The National Park Aut hority produces a  Monitoring Report  on an annual basis  
to assess the effectiveness of the Local Plan  policies and consider whether they 
are achieving the intended objectives and targets, or if trends indicate an early 
review of one or more policies is necessary. Reference is also made to the 
relevant organisations that influence the implementation of the se policies, 
particularly where these are taken forward in other plans and strategies.  
 
10.2 In addition the Authority is required to publish a State of the Park Report every 
five years, describing any changes to the condition of the National Park through 
the m onitoring of indicators relating to objectives in the New Forest National 
Park Management Plan.  This document provides data and background 
information to set the context for the implementation of the Local Plan policies.  
 
Implementation and Delivery  
 
10.3 There are numerous key organisations involved in the day -to-day administration 
and management of the National Park. Many are statutory agencies with 
responsibilities covering a wider geographical area (such as the county 
councils, Natural England, the Forestry  Commission and the Environment 
Agency), others are local land managers or service providers (including the 
district and borough councils). Parish and Town Councils also have an 
important role in many aspects of management at a local level and in reflectin g 
the wider views of their communities.  
 
10.4 Although the Local Plan  anticipates a limited level of development in the 
Natio nal Park up to 203 6 the detailed assessment of infrastructure needs are 
set out in the Authority’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan.  
 
Cross  boundary issues  
 
10.5 The importance of cross -boundary partnership work is critical to the functioning  
of the National Park . Close working relationships with neighbouring authorities 
have been developed, and fostered under the  ‘duty to co -operate ’ as introduced 
through the Localism Act 2011 . This  will continue to  facilitate a more integrated 
approach to a number of cross boundary issues such as the provision of green 
infrastructure, habitat protection, and  housing provision . 
 
10.6 In particular, Chapter  5 clarifies that the Authority will work with Natural England 
and other local authorities, as well as a range of relevant stakeholders to 
develop a strategic approach to prevent adverse effects on internationally 
designated nature conservation sites from recreational pressures. As part of 
any strategic approach, it will be important to monitor potential effects, such as 
air pollution and recreational disturbance, to ensure that any mitigation 
measures are effective.  
 
 107 
 Monitoring Indicators  
 
INDICATOR  TARGET  DATA SOURCE  
OBJECTIVE 1: Protect and enhance the natural environment of the National Park, 
including the natural beauty of the landscape and the range of habitats and species.  
Policies: SP4, SP5, SP6, SP7, DP8, SP9, DP13,  SP15  
Mitigation measures funded by 
developer contributions  - New Forest National 
Park Authority (NFNPA)  
Planning applications refused on 
landscape grounds  - NFNPA  
Planning permissions granted 
contrary to the Environment 
Agency advice on water quality  Zero applications  NFNPA, Environment 
Agency  
Condition of water courses  Percentage of river length 
achieving water quality rating 
of ‘good’ or above (chemical 
and biological grading)  Environment Agency  
Implementation of  optional water 
efficiency use  - NFNPA  
Planning applications refused on 
the basis of impacts on the coast  Not to allow development that 
would have adverse impacts 
on the Park’s coast  NFNPA  
Change in areas and populations 
of biodiversity importance, 
including:  
(i) change in BAP priority 
habitats and species; and  
(ii)  change in areas designated 
for their intrinsic 
environmental value including 
sites of international, national, 
regional or sub -regional 
significance.  Net increase in areas of 
biodiversity importance  Natural England;   
Hampshire Biodiversity 
Information Centre  
Monitor levels of windfall 
development within 400m of the 
New Forest Special Protection 
Area (SPA) and Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC)  To ensure potential urban 
edge impacts of windfall 
development within 400m are 
mitigated  NFNPA  
Provision of public open space   In line with the Authority’s 
Open Space Standards .  
No net loss of existing open 
space  NFNPA  
Work with neighbouring 
authorities to m onitor changes in 
air quality – including ammonia To establish the trend of 
movement in critical levels of 
pollutants for the New 
Forest’s Natura 2000 sites NFNPA, Natural 
England and 
neighbouring planning 
authorities  108 
 and acid deposition – on the 
New Forest’s Natura 2000 sites  
 and work with partner s on a 
strategic mitigation package if 
significant effects are likely to 
affect the integrity of sites .  
  
OBJECTIVE 2: Conserve and enhance the cultural heritage and historic environment 
of the National Park, especially the wealth of individual characteristics that contribute 
to its local distinctiveness.  
Policies: DP2, SP16, SP17,  DP18  
Planning applications refused on 
the basis of impacts on the 
historic environment  Not to allow development that 
would have adverse impacts 
on the Park’s historic 
environment  NFNPA  
Planning applications refused on 
design grounds  
 Not to allow development that 
would be incompatible with the 
character of the area  NFNPA  
OBJECTIVE 3: Plan for the likely impacts of climate change on the special qualities of 
the New Forest.  
Policies: SP11, DP12, DP13,  SP14  
Level and  type of renewable and 
low carbon energy schemes 
permitted  Increase in numbers of 
applications permitted  NFNPA   
Planning permissions granted 
contrary to the Environment 
Agency advice on flooding 
grounds  Zero applications  NFNPA ; Environment 
Agency  
Areas subject to Air Quality 
Management Action Plans 
(Lyndhurst)  Improvement in air quality 
levels in Lyndhurst – in line 
with Government’s Air Quality 
Strategy Objectives  New Forest District 
Council , Environment 
Agency  
OBJECTIVE 4: Strengthen the well -being, identity and sustainability of rural 
communities and the pride of local people in their area.  
Policies : DP10, DP34,  DP35, DP36, DP37, SP38, SP39, DP40,  DP41  
Proportion of new employment 
development, dwellings, retail 
uses and community facilities in 
the four defined villages  To ensure the four defined 
villages remain the focus for 
development  NFNPA;  Hampshire 
County Council  
Density of new dwellings 
completed  Not to allow development that 
would be incompatible with 
the character of the area  NFNPA;  Hampshire 
County Council  
No. and size of replacement 
dwellings permitted / completed  Not to allow development that 
would be in compatible with 
the character of the area  NFNPA  109 
 Planning applications refused on 
the basis of over -enlargement of 
a dwelling  Not to allow development that 
would be incompatible with 
the character of the area  NFNPA  
Levels of developer contributions 
received and spent  To ensure mitigation 
measures are implemented  NFNPA  
Location and type of community 
facilities permitted / completed   Net gain in facilities / improved 
facilities  NFNPA,  Hampshire 
Coun ty Council  
Location and type of retail 
development permitted  Retain retail uses in 50% of 
the shopping frontages in 
Lyndhurst and Brockenhurst, 
and 40% in Ashurst and Sway 
shopping frontages  NFNPA;  Hampshire 
Count y Council  
OBJECTIVE 5: Promote appropriate housing to meet local needs and maintain the 
vibrant communities of the National Park.  
Policies: SP19, SP20, SP21, SP22, SP23, SP24, SP25, SP26, SP27, SP28, SP29, SP30, 
DP31, DP32,  SP33  
Location and type of new housing 
permitt ed and completed   To meet the Local Plan 
requirement of 800 dwellings 
between 2016 and 203 6  NFNPA,  Hampshire 
Count y Council  
Location and type of affordable 
housing permitted and completed  50% on appropriate sites in 
defined villages; rural 
exception sites elsewhere  NFNPA  
Applications permitted for 
agricultural or forestry workers 
dwellings  -  NFNPA  
Net additional pitches permitted 
for gypsies, travellers and 
travelling  showpeople  1 gypsy and travellers pitch 
required  up to 2036.  
21 travelling showpeople 
plots required up to 2036  NFNPA  
OBJECTIVE 6: Develop a diverse and sustainable economy that contributes to the 
well-being of local communities throughout the Park.  
Policies: SP42, SP43, DP44,  DP45  
Type and location of new 
employment land available  
(business use classes B1 to B8)  No net loss of employment 
sites  NFNPA, Hampshire 
Count y Council  
Existing employment sites lost 
due to the implementation of 
permitted development rights, 
e.g.  change of use from office to 
residential  - NFNPA, Hampshire 
Count y Council  
OBJECTIVE 7: Encourage land management that sustains the special qualities of the 
National Park.  
Policies: SP48, DP49, DP50, DP51, DP52,  DP53  110 
 Applications permitted for 
agricultural and forestry buildings  - NFNPA  
Applications permitted for 
recreational horsekeeping and 
associated development  - NFNPA  
Numbers of practising 
commoners and stock  - Verderers of the New 
Forest  
OBJECTIVE 8: Support development which encourages sustainable tourism and 
recreation, and provides opportunities for enjoying the Park’s special qualities.  
Policies: SP46,  DP47    
Planning applications for new or 
improved  visitor facilities and 
accommodation  To ensure the four defined 
villages remain the focus for 
visitor facilities and 
accommodation  NFNPA  
OBJECTIVE 9: Reduce the impacts of traffic on the special qualities of the National 
Park and support a range of sustainable transport alternatives within the Park.  
Policies: SP54; SP55  
Level of road traffic in the Forest, 
especially on A31  - Department  for 
Transport daily flow 
statistics ; Hampshire 
County Council  
Animal accidents involving 
commoners’ stock within the 
National Park  - Verderers of the New 
Forest  
Enhancements to public rights of 
way  Increase / improve footpaths, 
cycleways  and bridleways  Hampshire County 
Council,  Wiltshire 
Council  
Numbers of people using the 
New Forest Tour Bus and Beach 
Bus Year on year increase  NFNPA  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  111 
 Annex 1: The special qualities of the New Forest National Park  
 
A1.1 The special qualities of the New Forest are those qualities that define it, make 
it unique and immediately recognisable and, when taken together, distinguish it 
from all other parts of the country.  
 
A1.2 These qualities are fundamental to the two purposes of the National Park a nd 
are the underlying reason for its designation.  Although particular features that 
we value about the New Forest today may alter over time, conserving the 
essence of the place, and ensuring its uniqueness can be experienced by future 
generations, is the central priority for the National Park and is at the heart of this 
Management Plan.  
 
A1.3 The special qualities of the New Forest, identified through public consultation in 
200755, are:  
 
 the New Forest’s outstanding natural beauty : the sights, sounds and 
smells of ancient woodland with large veteran trees, heathland, bog, 
autumn colour and an unspoilt coastline, with views of the Solent and Isle 
of Wight.  
 
The National Park encompasses a wide variety of different landscapes, 
from the woodlands and rolling heathland in the centre of the Forest, to 
the flat and wild coastline and the farmed landscape of small fields, 
hedgerows and narrow lanes.  Together these  form an extensive area of 
unspoilt and ancient countryside, with hidden villages and hamlets, which 
has largely been lost from other parts of lowland Britain.  
 
 an extraordinary diversity of plants and animals  and habitats of 
national and international imp ortance.  
 
 The mosaic of lowland heath, mire, ancient pasture woodland and Forest 
lawns that forms the Open Forest is unique in Britain and Europe. In 
addition the Solent coastline comprises extensive areas of mudflats, salt 
marsh and shingle, backed in pl aces by low cliffs, supporting large 
populations of wintering wildfowl and waders.  The inter -connectedness 
and scale of these habitats allows many rare or restricted species of 
plants, birds, animals and insects to thrive, as well as the commoner 
species that are in many cases declining elsewhere in the country.  In total 
56% of the National Park is designated for its national or international 
nature conservation value - a far higher proportion than any other English 
National Park.  
 
 a unique historic cultu ral and archaeological heritage , from royal 
hunting ground, to ship -building, salt making and 500 years of military 
coastal defence.  
 
                                            
55 New Forest National Park Authority paper 191/07: A Statement of Special Qualities for the New 
Forest National Park Authority (June 2007).  112 
 The cultural landscape of the New Forest has developed continuously 
from prehistoric times to the present.  A wealth of features have survived 
to indicate this long use by human society, including more than 340 
Bronze Age barrows, a number of fine Iron Age hill forts and many Roman 
pottery production sites.  Throughout the area there are numerous 
remnants of medieval and la ter buildings, enclosures and other 
earthworks associated with the royal forest.  The main rivers supported a 
boat and shipbuilding industry and the coastal salt workings were among 
the most important in the country during the 18th century.  The National 
Park has 214 Scheduled Ancient Monuments, constituting almost 10% of 
all scheduled monuments in the south east region, together with many 
important unscheduled sites.  
 
 an historic commoning system  that maintains so much of what people 
know and love as ‘the New Forest’ forming the heart of a working 
landscape based on farming and forestry.  
 
Although common rights were once widespread in Britain and Europe, 
they have been lost in many areas due to the enclosure of common land 
and the disafforestation of former  royal forests.  The New Forest remains 
one of the few extensive lowland commons where rights are still widely 
practised and a strong commoning culture continues.  Over the centuries 
commoning has largely been responsible for shaping the distinctive 
landsc apes and habitats of the Open Forest.  There were six traditional 
rights of common, several of which are still practised today: the right of 
mast allows the turning out of pigs to feed on the acorn crop, while 
common pasture allows the grazing of ponies, c attle and donkeys.  
 
 the iconic New Forest pony  together with donkeys, pigs and cattle 
roaming free.  
 
The grazing of ponies and cattle has always been central to the pastoral 
economy of the New Forest.  The animals are free to roam over the Open 
Forest, acr oss the unfenced roads and along many of the verges within 
the Perambulation.  In recent years between 6,000 and 7,400 ponies, 
cattle, donkeys, pigs and sheep have been depastured on the Forest as 
a whole.  They are one of the most obvious and distinctive features of the 
area, and for many visitors they are undoubtedly a very important part of 
their experience of the New Forest.  
 
 tranquillity  in the midst of the busy, built up south of England.  
 
The tranquillity and sense of remoteness that can still be fo und in many 
parts of the National Park is a quality of importance to many people.  The 
relative peace and naturalness, combined with the open and unfenced 
landscape of much of the area, gives a sense of space and freedom.  This 
contrasts with the increasin gly built up and intensively managed 
landscape of southern England and provides a means of release from the 
pressures of modern life.  
 113 
  wonderful opportunities for quiet recreation, learning and discovery  
in one of the last extensive gentle landscapes in th e south including 
unmatched open access on foot and horseback.  
 
The gently rolling countryside of much of the National Park represents a 
traditional English lowland landscape that feels familiar and safe, and is 
accessible to many people.  There is open access on foot or horseback to 
more than 30,000 hectares (116 squa re miles) in the centre of the National 
Park, and an extensive network of footpaths, bridleways and cycle paths 
across the rest of the area.  There are many opportunities for quiet 
recreation and the exploration of the landscape, while a range of visitor 
facilities and organised events make it easy for people to learn more about 
different aspects of the New Forest.  
 
 a healthy environment : fresh air, clean water, local produce and a sense 
of ‘wildness’.  
 
 Quality of life within the National Park is underpinned by the overall 
environmental quality of the area.  The coastal location and prevailing 
south westerly winds means that air pollution is generally low, and water 
quality in the New Forest rivers and st reams, and on the coastal beaches, 
is also good.  The variety of food and other products produced and sold 
locally continues to increase, giving the opportunity for people to live 
healthily and sustainably and at the same time support the local economy.  
 
 strong and distinctive local communities  with a real pride in and sense 
of identity with their local area.  
 
The New Forest communities have a strong cultural identity, with a wealth 
of local traditions and a thriving commoning community.  Many local 
people have a strong sense of New Forest history and are deeply 
committed to the protection of the area.  Local dialect, unique place 
names, rural skills and traditional events still continue, while new village 
events created by local people may become the tradit ions of the future.  
Community life is constantly evolving and adapting to modern ways of 
living and working.  Many communities are involved in work to help shape 
the future of their local area and in initiatives to make their villages or 
towns more social ly and economically sustainable.  Local businesses 
continue to thrive, often providing services or products for residents and 
visitors, or taking advantage of the recognised image and distinctiveness 
of the New Forest.  
 
  114 
 Annex 2:  Car Parking and Cycle Standards 
 
Residential 
 
Type Car Parking  
Standard Cycle Parking Standard 
Individual Commun al 
1 bedro om units 1 space p er unit 1 stand^ 1 stand 
2-3 bedroom units 2 spaces  per unit 2 stands^ 1 stand 
4 or more be droom units 3 spaces  per unit 2 stands^ 1 stand 
Active elderly with warden con trol 1 space p er unit 1 stand per 4 staff 
Nursing and  rest homes 1 space p er 4 
residents and 1 
space  per staff 1 stand per 4 staff 
 
^ Where a garage is provided for storing sufficient cycles individual cycle parking will 
not be re quired 
 
Commer cial development 
 
Type Car Parking  
Standard Cycle Parking Standard 
B1 (a) office 1 space p er 30 m2 1 stand per 150 m2 
B1 (b)(c) high tech/light industry 1 space p er 45 m2 1 stand per 250 m2 
B2 general industrial 1 space p er 45 m2 1 stand per 350 m2 
B8 wareho use 1 space p er 90 m2 1 stand per 500 m2 
 
 
Education e stablishments 
 
Type Car Parking  Standard Cycle Parking 
Standard Schools 1.5 spaces per classroom * 
16+ Colleges and 
further education 1 space p er 2 full time staff * 
Day nurseries / 
playgroups (pri vate) and 
creches 1.5 spac es per 2 full 
time st aff 1 stand per 6 full-
time st aff 
* Cycle provision to  be assess ed on an individual case-by-case  basis 
 
Health establishments 
 
Type Car Parking  Standard Cycle Parking Standard 
Health cen tres 5 spaces  per consulting 
room 1 stand per 2 consulting 
rooms or 
1 space p er 6 staff Doctor s, dentists or veterinary 
surgery 3 spaces  per consulting 
room 
 
 
Leisure facilities a nd places of  public ass embly 
 
Type Car Parking  Standard Cycle Parking 
Standard Hotels / motels / guest 
houses / b oarding houses 1 space p er bedroom 1 stand per 6 staff or 1 
per 40m2 
Eating and 
Drinking 
estab lishmen ts 1 space p er 5m2 dining 
area 
/ bar area / dance floor 1 stand per 6 staff or 1 
per 40m2 
Places of worship/church halls 1 space p er 5 fixed se ats 
and 1 space per 10m2 
open hall 1 stand per 6 staff or 1 
per 40m2 
 115 
 Annex 3: Local connections criteria  
 
A3.1 Policy SP20 (Specialist Housing for Older People) states that a  planning 
obligation will be secured to ensure that the occupancy of new specialist 
housing for older people is confined in perpetuity to a local person (and their 
dependents) . This is defined as someone  who has a minimum period of a total 
of 5 years perma nent residence within parishes in the National Park .  
 
A3.2 Similarly, new affordable housing provision on development sites in the 
National Park – either on allocated sites (Policies SP22 to SP26); windfall sites 
(Policy SP27); or rural exception sites (P olicy 28) – is provided for local people 
in housing need. The allocation of affordable housing is managed by the 
housing authorities in the National Park (New Forest District Council, Wiltshire 
Council and Test Valley Borough Council).  
 
A3.4 All of the ma in settlements in the National Park (including the defined villages 
of Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst and Sway) are designated as ‘ local 
connection areas ’ by the housing authority New Forest District Council. This 
means that only applicants with a local connection will normally be considered  
for the housing available. The allocation of housing for local people in need is 
administered by New Forest District Council via their Homesearch Allocation 
Scheme. The strength of a local connection with the rural pa rishes of the 
National Park will be defined according to the following bands.   
 
 Band A : Persons who live or have their work -base in the parish and have 
done so for longer than 10 years, or who have lived in the parish for longer 
than 10 years previously, or a designated key -worker performing an 
essential service for the village community where there is an established 
need for an applicant to be re -housed to maintain the service.  
 
 Band B :  Persons who live or have their work -base in the parish and have 
done so for longer than 5 years, or who have lived in the parish for longer 
than 5 years within the last 15 years, or whose parents, siblings or adult 
children live in the parish and have done so for 10 years or longer.  
 
 Band C : Persons who live or have thei r work -base in the parish and have 
done so for longer than 2 years, or who have lived in the parish for longer 
than 2 years within the last 15 years, or whose parents, siblings or adult 
children live in the parish and have done so for 5 years or longer.  
 
A3.5 Applicants who do not fall into any of these bands will not have a local 
connection.  
 
A3.6 Where there are no local people meeting the definition above and properties 
are vacant, a cascade approach will apply and the planning obligation will allow 
other local persons with a minimum period of 5 years permanent and 
continuous residence in an adjoining parish to qualify.  
 
A3.7 A planning obligation will be secured to ensure that occupancy of the 
dwelling(s) is confined to persons in l ocal housing need in  perpetuity.  116 
 Glossary  
 
Adjacent commons  
Commons in a variety of ownerships outside the Crown Lands, but included within the 
Perambulation by the New Forest Act, 1964.  
 
Affordable Housing  
Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to eligible 
households whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined with 
regard to local incomes and local house prices. Affordable housing should include 
provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible househol ds or for the 
subsidy to be recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.  
 
Ancient and Ornamental (A&O) Woodlands  
A local term applied to pasture woodlands within the Crown Lands that are grazed by 
deer and commoners stock. They are ancient in or igin (they have been woodlands 
continuously since 1600, and probably much earlier) and are of very high nature 
conservation and cultural heritage value.  
 
Ancient Woodland  
A general term used for woodlands which have had a continuous history since at leas t 
1600, and probably much earlier. They are of very high nature conservation and 
cultural heritage value.  
 
Article 4 Direction  
Issued by the National Park Authority, the effect of an Article 4 Direction is to remove 
certain permitted development rights, meaning that a planning application would be 
required for that form of development to take place. Article 4 Directions are  usually 
focused on a specific site or geographic al area.   
 
Back -up grazing / back -up land  
Enclosed pasture land which forms an integ ral part of the commoning economy. 
Generally it is located close to a commoner’s holding. Its uses include overwintering 
of stock, raising store cattle, making hay or silage, tending sick animals and young 
stock, finishing ponies for riding, and preparing stock for market.  
 
Commons  
Defined areas of land which are subject to rights of common. The present 
Perambulation of the New Forest (New Forest Act, 1964) includes both common land 
owned by the Crown and public bodies and privately owned commons and manorial 
wastes. There are also a  few registered commons outside the Perambulation (such as 
Whiteparish and Pennington Commons).  
 
Commoners of the New Forest  
Those people eligible to use rights of common. In the New Forest this is based on the 
occupation of specific land to which common  rights are attached. Practising 
commoners are those who exercise their rights and pay marking fees to the Verderers.  
 
 
 117 
 Common rights  
The New Forest Atlas of Common Rights was prepared under the 1949 New Forest 
Act, using the register of New Forest Claims published in 1858. The 1964 New Forest 
Act extended the Perambulation to include the adjacent commons. A further Atlas of 
Rights was p repared defining land to which rights are attached in added areas. There 
are six different rights of common in the New Forest. Common of pasture (the right to 
turn out ponies, horses, cattle and donkeys) and common of mast (the right to turn out 
pigs in th e pannage season in autumn to feed on acorns and beech nuts) are the most 
commonly used today.  
 
Comprehensive development  
The housing site allocations in the Local Plan should each be brought forward in a 
holistic manner. This will ensure consistency of de sign and will enable  consideration 
to be given to the phasing of development and the provision of supporting 
infrastructure. The Authority will not accept sites being artificially sub -divided into 
multiple applications to avoid  making contributions to nece ssary infrastructure.   
 
Conservation Areas  
Conservation Areas are established under Section 69 of the Planning (Listed Buildings 
and Conservation Areas) Act 1990, which imposes a duty on local planning authorities 
to designate as conservation areas, any “areas of architectural or historic interest the 
character or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve”.  
 
Crown Lands  
The land owned by the Crown vested in the Secretary of State for the Environment, 
Food and Rural Affairs. Crown Land in the New F orest is managed on behalf of the 
Secretary of State by Forest Enterprise (part of the Forestry Commission), overseen 
locally by the Deputy Surveyor.  
 
Defined Villages  
The four main villages within the National Park – Ashurst, Brockenhurst, Lyndhurst 
and Sway - which provide a range of facilities and services for their surrounding 
communities.  
 
Depastured stock  
Commoners’ stock which are turned out to graze on the Open  Forest.  
 
Ecosystem Services  
The benefits provided by ecosystems that contribute positively to society. Examples 
include products such as food and water, regulation of floods, soil erosion and disease 
outbreaks, and non -material benefits such as recreation.  
 
Enclosed land  
Fenced lan d from which the commoners’ stock are excluded, both in Crown and 
private ownership.  
 
Forest lawns  
Grassland which is relatively rich in nutrients (often due to winter flooding of streams). 
The lawns are important for the grazing of stock and frequently have a rich and 
distinctive flora.  118 
 Fragile  
Areas whose special qualities and features are easily damaged.  
 
Habitats Regulations  
The European Habitats Directive has been transposed into national law through The 
Conservation (Natural Habitats, &c.) Regul ations, 1994 (as amended), commonly 
known as the ‘Habitats Regulations’.  
 
Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA)  
In line with the requirements of the Habitats Regulations, the HRA procedure assesses 
whether a plan or project will have a likely significant impact on a Natura 2000 site, 
and if so, an ‘appropriate assessment’ is required. The HRA is undertaken by the 
‘competent authority’ which is normally the planning authority.  
 
Heritage Asset  
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified a s having a degree of 
significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because of its heritage 
interest. Heritage asset includes designated heritage assets and non -designated 
assets identified by the local planning authority (including local listi ng). 
 
Heritage at Risk Register  
The Register is an annual English Heritage publication that identifies the most 
important heritage assets at risk of damage or loss.  
 
Historic Environment Record (HER)  
A database of known historic sites and features across t he National Park.  
 
Inclosure woodland  
Those areas of the Crown Land enclosed under earlier statutes and retained by the 
New Forest Act 1877 for the purpose of growing timber and trees. Many of the 
Inclosures  are still fenced to prevent grazing of stock, but now have wider recreational, 
amenity and nature conservation uses.  
 
Intermediate Housing  
Intermediate housing are dwellings for sale and rent provided at a cost above social 
rent, but below market levels  subject to the criteria in the Affordable Housing definition 
above. These can include shared equity (shared ownership and equity loans), other 
low cost homes for sale and intermediate rent, but not affordable rented housing.  
 
Listed building  
A building r ecognised to be of national historic importance, designated and protected 
under Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act, 1990.  
 
Local community facilities  
Facilities of direct benefit to the immediate local community that provide a service , 
including village shops, pubs and village halls as well as small -scale health and 
educational services, sports and social facilities.  
 
 
 119 
 Main community facilities  
These include a wide range of facilities and services that benefit the local communities 
of the defined villages and surrounding smaller villages, encompassing small scale 
leisure, sports and social uses, such as community centres, local museums and 
libraries, as well as health and educational facilities and utility infrastructure services. 
New Forest villages will continue to look to the towns outside the National Park for 
larger scale community services and facilities of district, county and region -wide 
importance.  
 
Manege  
An area specifically designed or used for the training of horses and  riders.  
 
Market housing  
Houses for sale or rent on the open market.  
 
National Amenity Societies  
The Ancient Monuments Society; the Council for British Archaeology; the Georgian 
Group; the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings; the Victorian Society; and 
the Twentieth Century Society are identified as being the National Amenity Societies. 
This mean that they must be notified by the National Park Authority of any application 
to demolish all or part of a listed building:  
 
Nationally Significant Infrastructure Projects (NSIP)  
Large scale developments ( typically relating to energy, transport, water, or waste) 
which require a type of consent known as “development consent”. The Planning Act 
2008 introduced a new development consent process for NSIPs which was 
subsequently amended by the Localism Act 2011.  
 
National  Nature Reserves (NNRs)  
Nationally important sites for nature conservation, where conservation is the primary 
land use. Designated under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act, 
1949.  
 
National Parks & Access to the Countryside Act 1949  
The 1949 Act which established the statutory National Park purposes which continue 
to provide the legal framework for our National Parks today.  
 
National Park Management Plan  
The National Park Management Plan sets out the framework for everyone to work 
toget her to deliver the two statutory Park purposes. The Management Plan is not a 
Plan for the Authority alone, but a Plan for the National Park as a place.  
 
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)  
First published in 2012, the NPPF sets out the Government’s planning policies for 
England and how these are expected to be applied. The NPPF provides a framework 
within which local people and their local planning authorities can produce their own 
distinctive local and neighbourhood plans, which reflect the needs an d priorities of 
their communities.  
 
 120 
 National Planning Policy Guidance (NPPG)  
The online NPPG resource – first launched in 2014 – provides more detailed guidance 
on the Government’s national planning policies.  
 
Open Forest  
The unenclosed Crown Lands and adjacent commons which are subject to common 
rights.  
 
Perambulation  
The historic term for the boundary of the area governed by Forest law. It is now the 
area within the cattle grids over which commoners’ stock are able to r oam freely. It is 
defined in the New Forest Act 1964 and encompasses Crown Land, adjacent 
commons and certain areas of road verge and unenclosed land outside the Open 
Forest.  
 
Permitted development rights  
Planning permission is not required for certain m inor development. These are called 
‘permitted development rights’ and are more restrictive in certain areas such as 
National Parks.  
 
Ramsar site  
A wetland of international importance, especially for wildfowl, designated under the 
Ramsar  Convention on Wetland of International Importance.  
 
Registered Parks and Gardens  
A site included on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens in England.   
 
Robust  
Sensitive areas are defined as being those most at risk of damage by recreational 
activit y. They typically have nature conservation and cultural heritage designations 
and fragile habitats such as bogs or are  the most tranquil and remote. More robust 
areas are those that have greater physical resilience and capacity to absorb 
recreational activ ities.  
 
Scheduled Monument  
A designated archaeological site, building or structure of national importance that is 
protected from destruction or change under the provisions of the 1979 Ancient 
Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act.  
 
Section 106 agreemen t  
This refers to the benefits or safeguards, often for community benefit, secured by way 
of a legally binding agreement between the local planning authority and a developer 
as part of a planning approval. These are usually provided at the developer’s expe nse; 
for example, affordable housing, community facilities or mitigation measures.  
 
Semi -natural habitats  
Habitats such as ancient woodland, heathland and meadows, which are rich in wildlife 
and appear ‘natural’, but have been created to a greater or les ser extent by the 
influence of long -term human management. This applies to virtually all habitats in the 
UK.  121 
  
Sensitive sites  
Sensitive areas are defined as being those most at risk of damage by recreational 
activity. They typically have nature conservat ion and cultural heritage designations 
and fragile habitats such as bogs or are the most tranquil and remote.  
 
Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC)  
Non-statutory sites of local importance for nature conservation, identified by county 
council s and wildlife trusts and given some level of protection by local planning 
policies.  
 
Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
Nationally important sites for nature conservation designated under the Wildlife and 
Countryside Act 1981.  
 
Social Rented Affordable Housing  
Rented housing owned and managed by local authorities and registered social 
landlords, for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent 
regime. This may also include rented housing owned or managed  by other persons 
and provided under equivalent rental agreements to the above, as agreed with the 
local authority or with the Housing Corporation as a condition of grant  
 
South East Dorset  
The urban areas including Christchurch, Poole, Bournemouth and p arts of East 
Dorset.  
 
South Hampshire sub -region  
The urban areas encompassing the Waterside, southern Test Valley, Southampton, 
Eastleigh and other settlements west to Portsmouth, represented by the PUSH 
authorities (Partnership for Urban South Hampshire ).  
 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC)  
Areas designated under the EC Directive on the Conservation of Natural Habitats and 
of Wild Fauna and Flora (The Habitats Directive) 1992 as being of European 
importance for habitats and species.  
 
Special Protectio n Area (SPA)  
Areas of European importance for birds, designated under the EC Directive on the 
Conservation of Wild Birds 1979 (the Wild Birds Directive).  
 
Special Qualities  
These are the qualities that define the New Forest, make it unique and immediatel y 
recognisable and, when taken together, distinguish it from all other parts of the 
country. These qualities are fundamental to the two purposes of the National Park and 
are the underlying reason for its designation. A list of these can be found in a separ ate 
Annex of the Plan.   
 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)  
The Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive  provides high level of protection of 
the envir onment by integrating environmental considerations into the process of 122 
 preparing certain plans and programmes. In accordance with this Directive, an 
environmental assessment must be carried out of certain plans and programmes 
which are likely to have signi ficant effects on the environment, including Local Plans.  
 
Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANGs)  
The name given to new green space provision that is of a quality and type suitable to 
be used as mitigation for development likely to affect protecte d habitats.  
 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  
A sustainability appraisal is a systematic process that must be carried out during the 
preparation of a Local Plan. Its role is to promote sustainable development by 
assessing the extent to which the emerging pla n, when judged against reasonable 
alternatives, will help to achieve environmental, economic and social objectives.  
 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)  
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS ) are designed to mimic the natural drainage of 
surface water, typically managing rainfall close to where it falls.  
 
Tranquillity  
A state of peace, quiet and calmness – usually used in the context of artificial intrusions 
(such as noise and the presence of visual disturbance) into the relative ly natural 
environment of the National P ark.  
 
Verderers of the New Forest  
The Court of Verderers is a statutory body reconstituted under the New Forest Act 
1877. The jurisdiction of the Verderers extends over the a reas w ithin the 
Perambulation which are  subject to rights of common. They have duties and powers 
under the New Forest Acts for the protection and administration of the rights of 
common, the welfare of the commoners animals and the regulation of development  
which affects commonable land.  
 