Contents 
1 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................................ 2 
2 North Lincolnshire: Facts & Figures ............................................................................................................ 10 
3 A Spatial Vision & Objectives For North Lincolnshire ............................................................................ 29 
4 A Spatial Strategy For North Lincolnshire ................................................................................................. 38 
5 Meeting Our Housing Need ............................................................................................................................ 67 
6 Delivering Jobs & Supporting Our Economy .......................................................................................... 165 
7 Prosperous Town Centres ............................................................................................................................ 198 
8 Supporting Sustainable Development in North Lincolnshire’s Countryside .............................. 206 
9 Delivering a Quality Environment .............................................................................................................. 209 
10 Managing Our Historic Environment ....................................................................................................... 240 
11 Creating Sustainable Communities and Better Places ...................................................................... 252 
12 Planning for a Sustainable Supply of Minerals ..................................................................................... 281 
13 Sustainable Waste Management .............................................................................................................. 295 
14 Connecting North Lincolnshire ................................................................................................................... 309 
15 Development Management ........................................................................................................................ 323 
16 Delivering Infrastructure ............................................................................................................................... 336 
Appendix 1: Mineral Site Details ................................................................................................................ 339 
Appendix 2: Mineral Safeguarding Exceptions .................................................................................... 346 
Appendix 3: Mineral Resource Assessment Requirements .............................................................. 347 
Appendix 4: Mineral Extraction Sites - Restoration Plan Requirements ..................................... 348 
Appendix 5: North Lincolnshire Waste Sites ......................................................................................... 349 
Appendix 6: Monitoring Framework ......................................................................................................... 351 
Appendix 7: Housing Trajectory ................................................................................................................. 361 1 Introduction 
NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE – THE BEST PLACE FOR OUR RESIDENTS AND 
BUSINESSES – BEST COUNCIL WE CAN BE. 
1.1 This is our ambition for the future of the area. We want the area and its communities to 
be safe, well, prosperous and connected. 
1.2 We already have a growing and diverse economy. We are at the heart of the ‘Humber 
Energy Estuary’ and have a unique location as one of the United Kingdom’s main 
international trade gateways. North Lincolnshire is recognised as a leader in the 
following sectors: advanced engineering; chemicals and petro-chemicals; food and drink; 
metals; and ports, freight and logistics, renewable and tourism sectors are also growing. 
1.3 We are transforming our area. Over £5 billion of investment in our economy, communities 
and infrastructure has already taken place or is planned to take place, by 2020. This will 
transform the image and economy of North Lincolnshire, to ensure that it is an exciting 
place for our residents and businesses. It will also contribute towards creating a cleaner, 
greener and safer North Lincolnshire. 
1.4 North Lincolnshire is a place where the quality of life is high and the cost of living is low. 
We have a growing economy and are striving to make the most of our location and the 
ongoing transformation of our area, which is rich in culture, heritage, green spaces, 
leisure and recreation. These attributes makes it an attractive place for our residents and 
businesses alike. Our main priority is to make sure that growth and development in North 
Lincolnshire is sustainable and complements and enhances the area’s high quality 
natural and built environment. 
1.5 Preparing a new Local Plan provides an opportunity to ensure our growth ambitions are 
aligned to our Place Strategy. However, we must recognise that it will be difficult to 
achieve a balance between seeking growth to meet the needs of current and future 
generations whilst safeguarding the natural, built and historic environments that are so 
special. 
1.6 We want our economy to continue to grow and diversify [be prosperous], for there to be 
opportunities to support the wellbeing of our residents [be safe; be well] and to ensure 
that everyone is able to access the opportunities that the area provides [be connected]. 
We also want to be a place that is cleaner, greener and safer. 
1.7 We want to positively plan for our area’s future, through a Spatial Strategy that 
understands the need for sustainable and infrastructure led growth, while retaining the 
quality of our local environment. 
Page 2 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) WHAT IS A LOCAL PLAN? 
1.8 The Government requires all local councils to develop a long-term plan for their areas, to 
set out how and where land can be developed over the next 15 to 20 years in order to 
meet the growing needs of local people and businesses. The Plan sets out what and 
where development is acceptable and, once agreed and adopted, will govern how 
planning applications are assessed. The Plan can also reflect local features and 
circumstances which give places their very distinct identity. 
1.9 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) is the government policy on planning. It 
is this which places Local Plans at the heart of the planning system, so it is essential that 
they are in place and kept up to date. An up to date Local Plan enables the council to pro-
actively guide where, when and how new housing, employment and other development 
takes place. 
1.10 The Local Plan will set out a clear vision and objectives for the future development of the 
area, addressing needs and opportunities in relation to housing, the economy, 
community facilities and infrastructure. It will also be a basis for safeguarding the 
environment, adapting to climate change and securing good design. Its policies and 
proposals will be used to guide decisions and investment on development and 
regeneration up to 2038. 
1.11 The council’s ambition is that North Lincolnshire is the best place for our residents and 
businesses. Therefore, it is important that we get the Local Plan right so that it will help 
to deliver this ambition and ensure the council is the best it can be. 
1.12 A Local Plan should be aspirational but realistic and provide enough flexibility to adjust 
to rapid change. Therefore, it must be informed by a robust and sound evidence base. 
NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE LOCAL PLAN (2020 TO 2038) 
1.13 North Lincolnshire Council is preparing a new single Local Plan for North Lincolnshire. 
Once agreed (formally adopted) it will replace the current North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Adopted 2003, the Core Strategy and Housing and Employment Land Allocations 
Development Plan Documents (DPD), and the Lincolnshire Lakes Area Action Plan 
(AAP). 
1.14 Preparation of the new Plan gives you an opportunity to say what you want for North 
Lincolnshire. You know your local area and we want to work with you to prepare the new 
Plan, to reflect your views and those of your local community. In particular, we want to 
know what you like to see in your local community. 
LOCAL PLAN STAGES 
1.15 There are a number of stages involved in the Local Plan’s preparation. The timetable for 
preparing the Local Plan is set out in our Local Development Scheme (LDS) which can be 
viewed online. 
WHAT HAVE WE DONE SO FAR? 
1.16 We published an Initial (Regulation 18) Consultation document between late February 
and mid April 2017 in order to raise awareness about the Local Plan, an Issues & Options 
(Regulation 18) Consultation February and March 2018 and a Preferred Options 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 3 (Regulation 18) Consultation between February and March 2020. This, together with 
available evidence and national planning policy, has helped to inform this Publication 
stage (Regulation 19). We have published a summary of the comments received during 
the consultation stages as part of the evidence base for the Plan so it is clear how this 
document has been created. 
1.17 It is important to note that these earlier versions of the plan (Initial Consultation, Issues 
and Options and Preferred Options) had a plan period from 2017 to 2036. In this 
Publication Plan the plan period has been updated and changed from 2017 to 2036 to 
2020 to 2038 and all evidence base documents have been updated to support this plan 
period. This Plan period was updated as the NPPF requires strategic policies to look 
ahead over a minimum of 15 year period from adoption, to anticipate and respond to long 
term requirements and opportunities such as those arising from major improvements in 
infrastructure. As the plan is expected to be adopted 2021/22 depending on PINS 
timescales the plan period was updated to reflect the expected adoption dates of the 
plan to ensure when the plan is adopted the 15 year period can be met. 
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT? 
1.18 Following consideration of all relevant evidence and the comments received at the 
Publication stage, we will formally submit the comments received alongside the draft 
Local Plan and supporting evidence to the Government for an Examination in Public. An 
independent Planning Inspector will be appointed to examine the Local Plan through a 
series of public hearings. After these hearings the Inspector will consider all evidence and 
prepare a report setting out whether or not the Plan is ‘sound’. Once this report is received 
we can adopt the Plan, and bring it into force. 
NATIONAL CONTEXT 
1.19 The Local Plan must be prepared in line with relevant legislation¹ and be consistent with 
the national planning policies. These are set out in NPPF (Revised 2021) and the 
accompanying Planning Practice Guidance, as well as in other policy statements. 
1.20 The NPPF requires all councils to produce a Local Plan and keep it up to date. Without a 
Plan the council could have less influence over the location of new development and the 
provision of infrastructure. The Government has placed particular emphasis on the need 
for economic and housing growth across all areas of England and that this should be 
delivered by way of an up-to-date Local Plan. 
1.21 National planning policy sets clear expectations as to how a Local Plan must be 
positively prepared and developed in order to be justified, effective and consistent with 
national policy and to deliver sustainable development that meets local needs and 
national priorities. 
DUTY TO CO-OPERATE 
1.22 We must prepare the Local Plan with due regard to the Duty to Co-operate². This 
requires us to work closely with neighbouring authorities and certain other public bodies 
like Natural England or Historic England on cross-boundary strategic planning issues 
1 This includes the Planning & Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (as amended) and the Town & Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 
2 Localism Act 2011 – section 110 
Page 4 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) when preparing the Local Plan, as well as on matters that would have a significant 
impact on two or more local authority areas. 
1.23 North Lincolnshire is bordered by two county councils (Lincolnshire and 
Nottinghamshire), two district councils (Bassetlaw and West Lindsey) and four unitary 
councils (Doncaster, East Riding of Yorkshire, Hull and North East Lincolnshire). As part 
of this co-operation we will seek to identify the economic, social and environmental 
linkages with neighbouring areas and ensure particular issues are understood and 
resolved, wherever possible. Similarly, this process will allow North Lincolnshire to 
influence the Local Plans of our neighbours. 
EVIDENCE BASE 
1.24 A robust evidence base is required to inform and support the preparation and 
examination of the Local Plan. A large amount of evidence has already been prepared as 
part of the Local Development Framework. However, some of this evidence is being 
reviewed and updated and some additional evidence may be required on issues such as 
viability. 
NEIGHBOURHOOD PLANNING 
1.25 The Localism Act 2011 gave communities more control and influence over their area and 
how it should develop, with the main tool for doing this being the community-led 
Neighbourhood Plan. Neighbourhood planning allows residents, employees and 
businesses to come together through a Town or Parish Council or neighbourhood forum 
and say where, for example, they think new houses, businesses and shops should be 
located and what they should look like. 
1.26 It is not compulsory and should not be used as a way to stop development, and plans 
must be broadly in line with the Local Plan for the area. In North Lincolnshire Appleby has 
an adopted Neighbourhood Plan and a further fourteen communities have designated 
Neighbourhood Areas including Worlaby, whose Plan and supporting documents have 
been submitted to North Lincolnshire Council in accordance with Regulation 15 of the 
Neighbourhood Planning (General) Regulations 2012. Those communities with 
designated Neighbourhood Areas are: 
• Barrow upon Humber 
• Barton upon Humber 
• Bonby 
• Bottesford & Yaddlethorpe 
• Brigg 
• Elsham 
• Goxhill 
• Haxey 
• Kirton in Lindsey 
• Saxby all Saints 
• South Ferriby 
• Winteringham 
• Winterton 
• Worlaby 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 5 1.27 An up to date list of Neighbourhood Plans and their status can be found by clicking on 
the following link: https://www.northlincs.gov.uk/planning-and-environment/planning-
policy-neighbourhood-planning/ 
SUSTAINABILITY APPRAISAL (SA) 
1.28 The Local Plan must be informed and accompanied by a Sustainability Appraisal (SA). 
This is a statutory process that allows potential environmental, economic and social 
impacts of the Plan as well as its policies and proposals to be systematically assessed. 
The SA process also incorporates the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
legislation. 
1.29 The SA plays an important part in demonstrating that the Local Plan reflects 
sustainability objectives and has considered all reasonable alternatives. It also advises 
on ways in which any adverse effects arising from the Plan can be avoided, reduced or 
mitigated or how any positive effects could be maximised. This helps to shape the Plan 
and ensure that it is promoting sustainable development. An SA Report will be published 
at each stage of the Local Plan process. You can give us your views on the Sustainability 
Appraisal using the methods set out in the 'How do I get involved?' section. 
HABITAT REGULATIONS ASSESSMENT (HRA) 
1.30 The Local Plan should also be assessed in accordance with the EU Habitats Directive, to 
consider whether the policies or proposals are likely to have a significant effect on any 
European habitats or species³ located in or close to North Lincolnshire. Plans can only be 
adopted if no adverse impact on the integrity of a site or sites in question is proven. 
Assessments will be published at each stage in the Local Plan process. Again, you can 
give us your views on the HRA using the methods set out in 'How do I get involved?' 
section. 
MONITORING 
1.31 An important part of the Local Plan process is making sure that we monitor its success. 
This means getting an understanding of whether the Plan is being delivered and is 
effective. The Local Plan now includes a monitoring framework. This sets out a series of 
targets and indicators that will be used to test whether or not these policies and 
proposals are being delivered and are effective. It will also tell us whether or not they 
need to be reviewed in response to any changes in circumstance. An Authority 
Monitoring Report (AMR) based on the monitoring framework will be prepared and 
published to show how the Plan is performing. 
STRATEGIC POLICIES 
1.32 The NPPF (Revised 2021) states that it should be made clear in the Local Plans, which 
policies are “strategic policies”⁴. These should be limited to those necessary to address 
the strategic priorities of the area (and any relevant strategic cross-boundary issues), to 
3 These are also known as Natura 2000 sites. Natura 2000 sites are of exceptional importance in respect of rare, 
endangered or vulnerable natural habitats and species within Europe. These include Special Protection Areas (SPAs) designated under the EU 'Wild Birds' Directive, Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) designated under the EU 'Habitats Directive', and European Marine Sites (EMS). 
4 National Planning Policy Framework (February 2019) – paragraphs 20 to 23 
Page 6 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) provide a clear starting point for any local policies that may be needed. Those local 
policies may come forward either as part of a single local plan, or as part of a subsequent 
local plan or neighbourhood plan. North Lincolnshire Council consider the following 
policies in this Plan to be strategic: 
• SS1: Presumption in Favour  of Sustainable Development
• SS2: A  Spatial Strategy for North Lincolnshire
• SS3: Development Principles
• SS5: Overall Housing Provision
• SS6: Spatial Distribution of Housing Sites
• SS7: Strategic  Site Allocation -  Lincolnshire Lakes
• SS8: Employment Land  Requirements
• SS9: Strategic  Site Allocation – South  Humber Bank
• SS1 1: Development Limits
• H5: North Lincolnshire’s T ravelling Communities
• EC1: Employment Land Supply
• TC1:  Retail Hierarchy and Town Centre and District Centre  Development
• RD1: Supporting  Sustainable Development in the Countryside
• DQE1: Protection of Landscape, Townscape and  Views
• DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity
• DQE5: Managing  Flood Risk
• DQE6: Sustainable Drainage Systems
• DQE7: Climate Change and Low Carbon Living
• DQE8: Renewable Energy Proposals
• DQE11: Green Infrastructure Network
• DQE12: Protection of Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows
• HE1: Conserving and Enhancing  the Historic Environment
• CSC1: Health and Wellbeing
• CSC2: Health Care Provision
• CSC3: Protection and Provision of  Open Space, Sports  and Recreation Facilities
• CSC8: Education Facilities
• CSC10: Community Facilities and Services
• MIN1: Mineral Supply Requirements
• MIN3: Mineral  Extraction
• WAS1: Waste  Management Principles
• ID1: Delivering Infrastructure
GETTING INVOLVED 
1.33 Comments at this stage should be on whether the Local Plan has been prepared in 
accordance with the legal and procedural requirements and whether the Local Plan is 
‘sound’. You may wish to comment on the changes made. We will ask for your reasons 
why the plan is not legally compliant or sound and for the changes you feel would be 
needed to make it so. 
1.34 Regulation 19 requires that stakeholders and local people are given the opportunity to 
make representations about the Publication Draft of the Local Plan. A number of specific 
matters should be considered as these will assist the Secretary of State and the 
appointed Inspector to understand and deal with representations that have been made. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 7 1.35 The Planning Inspectorate (PINS) provide advice to Local Planning Authorities in their 
"Procedural Practice in the Examination of Local Plans" June 2016 (4th Edition v.1) 
regarding the invitation to make representations afforded by Regulation 19. In particular 
PINS establish a template form setting out a number of matters that respondents should 
be aware of as they make their formal representations. The Council has followed the 
advice in this guidance in establishing the Representation Forms and the on-line 
Consultation Portal. 
PLANNING INSPECTORATE GUIDANCE: PUBLICATION STAGE 
REPRESENTATION QUESTIONS 
1.36 Do you consider the North Lincolnshire Local Plan is: 
1. Legally Compliant? 
2. Sound? 
3. Complies with the Duty to Cooperate? 
1.37 The PINS guidance asks also that respondents: 
• give details of why the Local Plan is not legally compliant or is unsound or fails to comply 
with the duty to co-operate. Representations need to be as precise as possible in order 
to assist the Inspector. 
• set out what modifications you consider necessary to make the Local Plan legally 
compliant or sound, having regard to the matter that you have identified. 
• set out why you consider the modification you are seeking will make the Local Plan 
legally compliant or sound. 
• provide revised wording in policy for any policy or text. 
• You can find out more in the Planning Inspectorates: "Procedural Practice in the 
Examination of Local Plans" June 2016 (4th Edition v.1) also available through the 
Government's website at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/examining-
local-plans-procedural-practice 
1.38 To give you more information about the North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 to 2038) 
Publication stage consultation in particular, please visit our Local Plan website at: http:// 
localplan.northlincs.gov.uk/localplan/ 
1.39 There are several ways for you to send responses but we would like to encourage you to 
submit your views online via our interactive website http://localplan.northlincs.gov.uk/ 
localplan/. Doing so should save you time and will allow us to process and consider your 
comments more quickly. We hope that you will find the website quick and easy to use. 
Please get in touch with us if you have any questions or need assistance. 
1.40 Responses can also be sent by email to: localplan@northlincs.gov.uk 
1.41 A response form is also available on request from the Place Planning Team. If you do not 
have access to the internet, please respond in writing to: 
Local Plan – Publication Consultation 
Place Planning North Lincolnshire Council Church Square House 30-40 High Street Scunthorpe DN15 6NL 
Page 8 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) You can also call the Place Planning Team with any questions or to request further 
information on 01724 296694. 
All comments should be submitted by 5.00 pm on Friday 26 November. 
NEXT STEPS 
1.42 The timescales and stages for the Local Plan preparation are set out in the Local 
Development Scheme 2020. After the Publication Draft Local Plan consultation, the Local 
Plan will be submitted to the Secretary of State for independent examination. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 9 2 North Lincolnshire: Facts & Figures 
2.1 Our ambition is that North Lincolnshire is the best place for our residents and businesses. 
To achieve and sustain this ambition and outcomes we need to make sure we plan not 
only for the needs of existing communities but that we also ensure it remains a 
destination of choice, as well as an area that is cleaner, greener and safer. 
2.2 The North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 to 2038) and the strategy for meeting our 
ambitions must be based on a good understanding of where North Lincolnshire is today 
and its characteristics. It should also consider the issues and challenges it faces as well 
as the opportunities it offers. 
2.3 The information set out below is based on some of the early evidence gathered to 
support the Local Plan, as well as statistical information provided by the council’s 
Research and Intelligence Team. 
OUR TRANSFORMATION SO FAR 
2.4 The area is transforming, and we want to continue to build on this success creating the 
best place for our residents. Over £5 billion of investment in our economy, communities 
and infrastructure has either taken place or is due to take place in the short term. 
Amongst the transformational projects that are either completed, under construction, or 
have or shortly will go through the planning process are: 
• The Able Marine Energy Park on the South Humber Gateway is a strategic site that will 
develop as an energy cluster. This area has been designated as a Freeport in 2021 and 
allocated £75 million to develop the quay. 
• The North Lincolnshire Shopping Park, which opened in October 2014, is a £23 million 
investment that created 300 jobs. The development is anchored by Marks and Spencer . 
• The Engineering University Technical College (UTC) Northern Lincolnshire in Scunthorpe, 
which opened in 2015, is an £11 million investment offering 600 student places and 220 
jobs. The UTC provides a specialist engineering education for students from Years 9 to 
12. 
• The Maritime & Coastguard Agency’s new Search & Rescue base operated by Bristow 
Group opened in 2015 at Humberside Airport. This £12m investment created 60 jobs. 
• The BAE Systems Training Academy at Humberside Airport is a £5 million investment 
creating around 60 apprentice opportunities each year resulting in 150 jobs. It is a first of 
its kind for North Lincolnshire. 
• The 4-star 103-room Hampton by Hilton Hotel at Humberside Airport is a £7m 
investment creating 100 jobs. It was developed in conjunction with the council 
supporting the project with a Regional Growth Fund grant. It opened in July 2017. 
• £96.9m investment by Highways England to upgrade the A160 to a dual carriageway 
along with improvements to the A160/A180 Brocklesby Interchange and at the entrance 
to the South Humber Bank ports. This is a central element hub supporting development 
of one of our area’s key economic opportunities and has recently been completed. 
• £9.6m Northern Lincolnshire Superfast Broadband - 98% of Northern Lincolnshire has 
access to superfast broadband speeds. 
• Priority Schools Building Programme (PSBP) - £60 million of Government funding has 
been used to rebuild and refurbish eight schools in North Lincolnshire including 
Baysgarth School in Barton, The Vale Academy in Brigg, Burton-Upon-Stather Primary 
School, Crosby Primary School, Oasis Academy Henderson Avenue in Scunthorpe, 
Brumby Junior School, and Ashby's Grange Lane Primary School (replacing Grange Lane 
Infant and Grange Lane Junior Schools). 
Page 10 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) • £13.5 million is to be invested in a number of our schools to maintain and improve 
buildings and facilities. 
• 15 miles of North Lincolnshire’s coastline between the Humber Bridge at Barton upon 
Humber and South Killingholme will be part of the England Coastal Path. 
• £60 million will be invested in Scunthorpe town centre by 2024 as part of major 
programme to become a centre for learning, living, leisure and business. 
• £800,000 investment in new market in Ashby High Street, Scunthorpe (opened 
November 2017), and £4 million invested in the newly opened St John’s Market in 
Scunthorpe town centre. 
• Over £13 million has been invested to deliver 3.8 kilometres of hard flood defences along 
the River Trent between Keadby Bridge and M181 motorway bridge. This will facilitate 
the Lincolnshire Lakes development and provide protection to the existing village of 
Burringham, without increasing flood risk to the existing villages on the west bank. 
• Over £4 million has been invested to deliver to Northern Junction on the M181. 
• Over £20 million funding has been secured from the Towns Fund to invest in a number 
of projects within the urban area of Scunthorpe. 
• In March 2020, British Steel was bought by Jingye Group, a leading Chinese multi-
industrial company specialising in iron and steel manufacturing. 
2.5 The new Local Plan is an opportunity to look afresh at what sort of place we want North 
Lincolnshire to be over the life of the Plan (the next 18 years). 
NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE – THE LOCATION 
2.6 One of our main opportunities is the prime location of North Lincolnshire within the UK. 
Coupled with our high-quality environment and attractive communities this makes North 
Lincolnshire a great place for our existing and new residents and businesses. 
2.7 Located at the mid-point of the United Kingdom’s east coast on the south bank of the 
Humber Estuary (equidistant between London and Edinburgh), North Lincolnshire covers 
328 square miles (859 km2). This location is a national and international asset. We are 
one of the country’s key trade gateways to and from Europe and the wider world and 
over 50 million people are within a four-hour drive. Residents and businesses can take 
advantage of our less congested road and rail networks, our faster commuting journeys, 
and easy access to UK and continental markets. 
2.8 North Lincolnshire is a predominantly rural area made up of a number of historic market 
towns: Barton upon Humber; Brigg; Crowle; Epworth; Kirton in Lindsey; and Winterton. 
These are surrounded by many desirable larger and smaller villages and hamlets as well 
as an attractive countryside. At the centre of the area lies Scunthorpe our main focus for 
education, jobs, retail, services, and industry. 
2.9 Our neighbours are East Riding of Yorkshire, Hull, Lincolnshire (West Lindsey), 
Nottinghamshire (Bassetlaw), North East Lincolnshire and South Yorkshire (Doncaster). 
We are currently members of the Humber Local Enterprise Partnership¹ and Greater 
Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership². Their economic strategies are set out in the 
Humber Strategic Economic Plan (SEP) and the Greater Lincolnshire SEP and both LEPs 
are developing Local Industrial Strategies. Their visions, ambitions and priorities such be 
reflected in Local Plans. Going forward North Lincolnshire Council and North East 
Lincolnshire Council will only be full members of the Greater Lincolnshire LEP. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 11 FIGURE 2.1: NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE’S LOCATION 
2.10 North Lincolnshire also falls within the area covered by the Northern Powerhouse and 
Midlands Engine initiatives to rebalance the economy and drive growth across 
northern and central England. The council is a member of Transport for the North (TfN) 
(the country’s first Sub-National Transport Body)³, and supports the work of Midlands 
Connect⁴. TfN’s Strategic Transport Plan for the North⁵ sets out the case for strategic 
transport infrastructure investment through to 2050. It centres on transformational 
inter-city and pan-Northern connectivity improvements, ensuring that these are each 
in their own right drivers of economic growth in the North and the UK as a whole. This 
will also include improving pan-Northern access to the North’s major ports and 
international airports. 
2.11 Working with our neighbours and the bodies listed above is an essential requirement 
in developing and delivering our new Local Plan. 
KEY CHALLENGE – CROSS BOUNDARY WORKING 
To work with our neighbours and partners to deliver the Local Plan. 
1 The Humber Local Enterprise Partnership comprises public and private organisations including the four Unitary Authorities 
of Hull City Council, East Riding of Yorkshire Council, North Lincolnshire Council and North East Lincolnshire Council. 
2 The Greater Lincolnshire Local Enterprise Partnership comprises public and private organisations including the three upper-tier authorities of Lincolnshire County Council, North and North East Lincolnshire Councils and the seven district councils of Lincolnshire. 
3 Transport for the North brings together the North’s nineteen local transport authorities and business leaders along with Network Rail, Highways England, and HS2 Ltd and works with Central Government to provide a single voice on transport investment in the North (North East, North West and Yorkshire & Humber). 
4 Midlands Connect – Powering the Midlands Engine 
5 TfN – Draft Strategic Transport Plan (January 2018) 
Page 12 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) A GROWING POPULATION 
FIGURE 2.2: NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE'S POPULATION (1991 TO 2019) 
Source: ONS Mid-Year Population Estimates 2019 
2.12 North Lincolnshire is home to 172,300 people⁶ and our population is set to grow over the 
coming years. During the ten years between 2009 and 2019 it grew by 4% and over the 
lifetime of the new Local Plan and beyond trends predict that our population will increase 
by around a further 2.4% to reach 177,331 in 2038⁷. Our ambition is that our population 
will continue to grow, and different growth scenarios are considered later in the Plan. 
Whichever growth scenario is selected the Plan will need to ensure that the right level, 
choice, quality and type of housing, jobs, facilities, and services (including infrastructure) 
is provided to sustain it. 
FIGURE 2.3: NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE -PROJECTED POPULATION GROWTH 
Source: ONS Population Projections 2018 to 2043 
6 ONS Mid-Year Population Estimates 2019 
7 ONS Population Projections -Total (2018 to 2043) 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 13 2.13 Although our population is growing, trends show that its make-up is also changing. By 
far the biggest increase in population is projected to take place in people of pensionable 
age (65+), with a projected increase of 35%. Indeed, 28.3% of North Lincolnshire’s 
population is projected to be aged 65 and over by 2038⁸. Our future housing policy will, 
therefore, need to reflect and meet the requirements and aspirations of the aging 
population as part of ensuring the creation of balanced, sustainable communities. For 
example, by providing appropriate housing that would allow them to continue to live in 
their local area or retirement living. 
2.14 Trends show that the number of households in our area is expected to increase from 
73,775 in 2020 to around 79,845 in 2038⁹. This represents a total growth of 6,070 
households. However, their average size is set to decrease from 2.33 people in 2018 to 
2.19 in 2038¹⁰. Therefore, our future housing mix, density and design need to reflect this 
change. 
KEY CHALLENGE – POPULATION CHANGES 
To meet the housing requirements of our growing, and increasingly older population 
BEST PLACE FOR OUR RESIDENTS 
2.15 We have a range of housing spread across our towns and villages. Due to our attractive 
environment, good education and services, prosperous economy, and lower living costs 
North Lincolnshire has become a desirable place for many people to live. 
2.16 In 2019 there was a total of 76,401 dwellings in North Lincolnshire. There is a greater 
proportion of private sector properties in the area with lower levels of public sector (social 
housing) stock. 85.1% of all dwellings are either owner occupied or privately rented 
(65,004) compared to an England average of 82.6%. The remaining 14.9% (11,397) are 
8 ONS Population Projections – Broad Age Band (2018 to 2043) 
9 ONS 2018-Based Household Projections (mid-2001 to mid-2043) 
10 ONS 2018-Based Household Projections (mid-2001 to mid-2043) 
Page 14 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) rented out by housing associations, registered social landlords or other public sector 
bodies¹¹. 
2.17 The profile of the area’s housing stock is very different to the wider region (Yorkshire & the 
Humber). There are considerably more detached and semi-detached dwellings (73% in 
North Lincolnshire compared with 54% regionally) whereas the proportion of terraced 
houses and flats is substantially less (24% locally compared with 44% regionally)¹². 
2.18 Average house prices remain low compared to the national and regional averages, at 
£163,580 compared to £196,438 in the region and £300,054 nationally¹³, and there are 
‘hotspots’ in the local housing market with affordability issues, particularly in our rural 
areas. These factors together put the area at significant advantage to our neighbours 
and provide an opportunity for growth that our Local Plan must grasp. 
KEY CHALLENGE – HOUSING PROVISION 
Providing a sufficient supply of housing land and quality houses supported by infrastructure 
provision, in the right locations in North Lincolnshire to support economic growth, including 
meeting the needs for all our communities. 
2.19 Housing plays a fundamental role in supporting the health and wellbeing of its residents 
and it is vital to ensure more housing choice is available to support the needs of our 
communities. Over the last 10 years a total of 3,681 new dwellings have been delivered 
in North Lincolnshire with a net additional average of 368 homes per annum (North 
Lincolnshire Housing & Economic Needs Assessment 2020). The spatial distribution of 
housing supply in recent years has been concentrated in the Scunthorpe and Bottesford 
Urban Area and the market towns of Barton upon Humber, Brigg, Crowle, Kirton in 
Lindsey and Winterton. 
2.20 The North Lincolnshire HENA 2020 has determined that North Lincolnshire can be 
described as a self-contained housing market area in that the majority of households 
seeking to move; look for another house within the authority area. We should therefore 
plan for the needs of our existing and future communities without the requirement to look 
outside of North Lincolnshire. Discussion with our neighbouring authorities indicates 
there is no current requirement to take account of their housing needs. 
A PROSPEROUS ECONOMY 
2.21 North Lincolnshire’s economy is prosperous and has an ever-developing diversity. It 
supports 74,000 jobs¹⁴ and is home to over 5,500 businesses¹⁵ including major 
companies such as Associated British Ports (ABP), Able UK, British Steel, BAE Systems, 
C. Spencer, Eastern Airways, Nisa Today, Phillips 66, Singleton Birch, Wren and Prax 
Group. We are a recognised leader in advanced engineering; chemicals and petro-
chemicals; food and drink; metals; and ports, freight, and logistics, whilst the tourism 
sector is also growing. We sit in the heart of several economic corridors that offer 
opportunities for growth. 
11 Gov.UK Live tables on dwelling stock (2019) 
12 Valuation Office Agency Table CTSOP3.1 
13 Land Registry open data standard report (July 2020) 
14 NOMIS Labour Market Profile -North Lincolnshire from ONS Business Register and Employment Survey (2019) 
15 NOMIS Labour Market Profile -North Lincolnshire from Inter Departmental Business Register (ONS) (2020) 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 15 FIGURE 2.6: ECONOMIC CORRIDORS 
2.22 As part of expanding our economy we are looking to support new and emerging sectors. 
North Lincolnshire’s unique offer means that it is well placed to support growth in the 
advanced manufacturing and energy sectors within the area. We benefit from having a 
supply chain and the resources to enable the development of new software/hardware for 
this sector. Scunthorpe is home to a number of suppliers that offer bespoke and 
specialised products to the sector and who have the ability to develop new technologies 
through their Research and Development functions. The University Campus North 
Lincolnshire development is linked to the Universities of Lincoln and Hull. It provides an 
additional educational facility for further development within these sectors. In addition, 
we are home to one of Europe’s leading steel manufacturers in British Steel who 
produced around 3 million tonnes of quality steel, which is a key supplier to the rail 
industry. 
2.23 Another of our key sectors for growth is food. This will help to increase our brand image 
through the supply of high-quality food products. Greater Lincolnshire region grows 12% 
of the England’s total food and is home to an even greater proportion of the country’s 
food processing industry. Our advantageous location, easy access to the motorway and 
rail networks and proximity to the UK’s busiest port makes it ideal to support the growth 
of this sector. A specific Perishable Hub for the food industry is available at Humberside 
Airport. We also offer logistical support and a mature supply chain for the sector. We 
have a number of national and international haulage firms in the area that designed to 
meet the sector’s needs. Our supply chain ranges from bespoke training providers, 
recruitment specialists and packaging specialists to appropriate storage facilities 
2.24 The South Humber Gateway is a major strategic national, local, and regional 
employment site and together with existing port operations is one the UK’s major trade 
gateways to the north of England, the Midlands and beyond. The South Humber 
Gateway consists of facilities that are located both within and indeed beyond the North 
Lincolnshire boundary, and functions collaboratively between the local authorities and 
Page 16 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) marine operators. It offers the largest undeveloped area of land next to a deep-water 
estuary in the UK and is at the centre of the developing offshore renewables industry. 
2.25 It is also home to over a quarter of the UK’s petrochemical refining capacity provided by 
Lindsey Oil Refinery and Humber Refinery, operated by Total and Phillips 66 respectively. 
Much of this area includes the Able Marine Energy Park and Able Logistics Park and is 
part of the Humber Enterprise Zone (EZ), which is the country’s largest, and is also 
designated as part of the Humber Freeport. The EZ supports the growth of the ports, 
logistics and renewables sector and it is the region’s ambition to become a leading 
national and international centre for the renewables sector. Access to this key location 
has been improved by a £15.5m programme of gauge enhancement to South Humber 
main line between Doncaster, Immingham and Killingholme to accommodate larger 
freight trains. Humberside Airport is also included in the EZ. 
FIGURE 2.7: HUMBER ENTERPRISE ZONE (SOURCE: WWW.HUMBERLEP.ORG ) 
2.26 In the Scunthorpe area, Normanby Enterprise Park is one of the area’s major employment 
locations, being home to a wide range of businesses. 
KEY CHALLENGE – ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
Providing a sufficient supply of employment land, supported by infrastructure provision, in the 
right locations in North Lincolnshire to support economic growth, including meeting the 
requirement of our existing and emerging businesses and sectors. 
2.27 Of our working age population (those aged 16 to 64) there are 75,200¹⁷ (March 2020) 
people in employment in North Lincolnshire (65,000 employees and 10,000 self-
employed)¹⁶. Our employment rate stands at 72.9%¹⁶, which is lower than both the 
regional rate of 74.0%¹⁶ and the national rate of 76.2%¹⁶. The unemployment rate in 
North Lincolnshire stands at 5.1%¹⁶, higher than the regional (4.2%)¹⁶ and nationally 
(4.0%)¹⁶. The levels of those claiming Job Seekers Allowance has increased to 5,830 
(5.6%) in November 2020¹⁸ following the coronavirus pandemic, a significant increase 
from the March 2020 figure of 3,600 (3.5%). Youth unemployment (18-24)¹⁷ in November 
2020 was at a rate of 10.3% compared to 9.0% regionally and 9.1% nationally. 
However, the unemployed form a small percentage of the population, particularly when 
looking at specific age groups, the Annual Population Survey (APS) unemployed 
estimates within lower geographies are based on very small samples, so for many areas 
are unreliable. 
16 Humber-Enterprise-Zones-AH-Digital-Brochure-With-Links2.pdf (humberlep.org) 
17 Labour Market Briefing Pack (2020_07_30) 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 17 2.28 Key sectors for existing and emerging growth in North Lincolnshire have been identified 
as manufacturing, construction and transport and storage because of the existing impact 
they are making on the North Lincolnshire economy, or where it is believed future growth 
could be generated. 
2.29 The manufacturing sector is North Lincolnshire’s largest sector for employment (2019 
data). With an established history, manufacturing plays a significant role in the area and 
has therefore been identified as a key sector. The manufacturing sector employs 22.1% 
of all in employment in North Lincolnshire, more than double the regional and national 
rates of 11.0% and 7.8%. The health sector is the second largest sector for employment 
in North Lincolnshire with a rate 11.6%, lower than regionally (13.4%) and nationally 
(12.7%). 
2.30 North Lincolnshire’s economy is highly dependent upon effective transport and is well 
situated for logistics business due to direct access to the strategic road network and 
close proximity to the South Humber ports. The amount of people employed in the 
transport & storage sector at 7.8%¹⁸ of all people in employment is higher than regionally 
with 5.1% and nationally with 5.0%. 
2.31 Furthermore, a modern, competitive, and efficient construction industry is essential to 
economic prosperity locally, regionally and nationally. The number of people employed in 
the construction sector has risen significantly between 2018 and 2019 by 16.7%¹⁹ and 
now employs 7.8%, this remains higher than regionally with 5.4% and nationally with 
5.0%²⁰. 
KEY CHALLENGE – EMPLOYMENT 
To provide increased levels of employment within North Lincolnshire to support economic 
growth. 
2.32 Scunthorpe town centre is our main retail and service destination. £60m of investment is 
planned to regenerate the town centre by 2024. These transformational projects aim to 
increase the number of people and businesses in the town, in particular Scunthorpe’s 
High Street. The investment will create more than 200 jobs, and around 1,200 student 
places. These projects include: 
• Completed £11m Engineering University Technical College Northern Lincolnshire, 
catering for 12 to 19 year olds. 
• Completed £5.8m headquarters building for Ongo Homes -space for 250 employees. 
• Completed £5.7m Church Square House extension -space for 600 council workers. 
• Completed £4m relocation of Scunthorpe Market, and £1m Scunthorpe Central Library 
refurbishment; 
• Completed £1.15m Highways Infrastructure Improvements to future proof the town 
centre networks. 
• £10m University Campus North Lincolnshire, 1,200 students participating in full and part 
time programmes. 
• £1m Accelerated Towns Fund to increase the green infrastructure in Church Square. 
• £10.6m Future High Streets Fund bid to redevelop the former Scunthorpe Market Site into 
a mixed-use development. 
• Over £20 million funding has been secured from the Towns Fund to invest in a number 
of projects within the urban area of Scunthorpe. 
18 LIVE_VERSION_Skills_and_Employ ability_Plan_indicators (SEP7/8) 
19 LIVE_VERSION_Economic_Growth_Plan_Indicators (EGP-8.1) 
20 NOMIS, Business Register and Employment Survey: Open Access (2018) 
Page 18 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 2.33 Our distinct and diverse market town centres like Barton upon Humber, Brigg, Crowle, 
Epworth, Kirton in Lindsey and Winterton are key service centres for the local 
communities and their surrounding towns and villages. All are characterised by their 
historic centres and have a good range of shops, services and facilities along with 
thriving evening economies. Barton upon Humber is home to the Humber Bridge, the 
Water’s Edge Visitor Centre & County Park, Baysgarth Park and its historic churches, 
whilst Brigg is well known for its markets and fairs that attract visitors to our area. 
Epworth is well known for its connections with Methodism, and Crowle has undergone a 
programme of regeneration based around its historic market square. 
2.34 In Scunthorpe, the district centres of Ashby High Street and Frodingham Road also 
provide a wide range of services and facilities for their own areas and surrounding 
communities. One of our main challenges is to ensure the continued vitality and viability 
of our town centres, particularly Scunthorpe town centre, in a world where such areas 
are moving away from their traditional role towards a more multi-functional role. 
KEY CHALLENGE – TOWN CENTRES 
To protect and improve the vitality and viability of our town and district centres, in particular 
Scunthorpe town centre, in the light of changing shopping, leisure and working patterns, to 
ensure they remain key hubs for our communities and are more competitive against centres in 
neighbouring areas. 
2.35 Tourism in North Lincolnshire contributes over £186 million to the local economy and 
employs over 2,389 people. There are currently 2,273 accommodation bed spaces²¹ and 
over 40 visitor attractions. We enjoy a drier, sunnier climate than much of the UK due to 
our sheltered position in the East of England, making it ideal for enjoying outdoor 
activities and events. Day visits are the main income for tourism sector businesses. It is a 
sector that prior to the COVID-19pandemic was a growing sector and we have clear 
ambitions for further growth to make North Lincolnshire a destination of choice. 
2.36 The area’s natural landscapes and environment is a major asset. Due to our large rural 
areas, North Lincolnshire has been able to build its nature tourism offer through 
investment in projects such as the Ancholme Way, Alkborough Flats, Crowle Moors, 
Waters’ Edge Visitor Centre & Country Park and the Isle of Axholme Historic Landscape 
Partnership. Coupled with our arts, heritage, leisure, culture, and outdoor sports offer, it 
provides a strong selling point and a vital link to the regeneration and economic growth 
of the area. 
KEY CHALLENGE – VISITOR ECONOMY 
To maximise our current assets and develop new and existing offers to attract visitors to the 
area, alongside investment in infrastructure and ensuring we protect and enhance the natural 
environment and those assets that make North Lincolnshire an attractive place to visit. 
EDUCATION & SKILLS 
2.37 There are 78 schools in North Lincolnshire (14 secondary; 4 junior; 5 infant; 53 primary 
and 2 special schools). Twenty-six of the primary and infant schools have nursery 
provision, whilst three of the secondary schools have a sixth form offering a wide range 
of post-16 courses and quality provision. 
21 STEAM Final Trend Report North Lincolnshire (2018) 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 19 2.38 Children have access to an excellent foundation to education in North Lincolnshire with 
the vast majority of early years’ schools being judged to be ‘good’ or ‘Outstanding’ by 
Ofsted, and 98% of non-domestic childcare rated as ‘good’ or ‘outstanding’ as at August 
2020. A large majority of North Lincolnshire’s Early Years Foundation Stage children 
(71.7%) achieved a good level of development in 2019, placing the local authority in line 
with the national average. 
2.39 A very large majority of schools in North Lincolnshire were judged to be ‘good’ or 
‘Outstanding’ by Ofsted at their most recent inspection (90% as at August 2020). 
Children’s engagement with education is high, with the overall absence rate in North 
Lincolnshire being 4.7% in 2019, a result which places North Lincolnshire equal to the 
national average. 
2.40 In 2020, the majority of Key Stage 4²² pupils (71.3%) achieved a Grade 4 or above in 
English & Maths GCSEs. This result places North Lincolnshire above the national, regional 
& statistical neighbour averages. Also, the proportion of vulnerable children²³ achieving 
a strong pass (grade 5 or above) in both English & Maths was above the national 
average. 
2.41 Two Further Education colleges (John Leggott College and North Lindsey College) and a 
University Technical College (UTC) (Engineering UTC Northern Lincolnshire) can be found 
in Scunthorpe. John Leggott College and North Lindsey College provide 15,000 full time 
and part time students. 
2.42 Scunthorpe’s previous Civic Centre became a new University Campus in September 
2019 offering places to around 1,200 students. The UCNL works in partnership with the 
University Lincoln, University of Hull, University of Huddersfield and Sheffield Hallam 
University who validate their courses. 
KEY CHALLENGE – EDUCATION & SKILLS 
To protect, improve and increase the provision of education and skills in North Lincolnshire, 
considering changing demographics, and growth patterns, including increasing the number of 
people with a Level 4 Qualification. 
HEALTH AND WELLBEING 
2.43 The health and wellbeing of our residents varies across the area and is influenced by a 
wide range of factors including lifestyle as well as social, environmental, and economic 
conditions. People in North Lincolnshire are living longer than ever before. However, there 
are still health inequalities in the area. 
2.44 Although life expectancy has improved year on year in the area in line with national 
trends, there is still a 3-year gap between the life expectancy of men and women. 
Overall, people born in North Lincolnshire can expect to live to 79.0 years (males) and 
82.4 years (females)²⁴. However, life expectancy for people living in our most deprived 
areas is still lower than for those living in the least deprived. Similarly, they are more likely 
to experience the greater burden of poor health in older age than those living in the least 
disadvantaged areas. 
22 Key Stage 4 is one of the four stages in the National Curriculum covering the two years when most pupils work towards 
their General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSEs) or other approved qualification. 
23 Vulnerable Children are identified as either a) pupils eligible for free school meals or b) pupils with an Education Health & Care plan 
24 ONS Life Expectancy at birth by sex, UK, 2001 to 2003 to 2016 to 2018 (December 2019) 
Page 20 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 2.45 This provides both a key challenge and an opportunity for the Local Plan by ensuring that 
alongside homes, jobs and transport infrastructure all local people have ready access to 
those services and facilities, such as quality green space, they need for their everyday 
lives which will enable them to have healthier lives. This will, in turn, contribute positively 
to community health and wellbeing. Raising the quality of place will also have a key role 
to play. 
2.46 North Lincolnshire Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) is the NHS organisation 
responsible for designing, developing and buying local health services in the North 
Lincolnshire area. Responsibility for many public health functions has now passed to 
North Lincolnshire Council which now has a statutory duty to take steps to improve the 
health and well-being of residents of the area. Both the CCG and the council’s Public 
Health function will be key partners in developing the Local Plan. This includes 
commissioning services. 
2.47 Healthcare provision in North Lincolnshire includes Scunthorpe General Hospital (which 
includes Accident & Emergency services) and other NHS healthcare providers. There are 
19 GP surgeries, 17 dental practices, 32 pharmacies and 17 opticians in the area²⁵. 
2.48 Green open space can contribute to active healthy lifestyles. The incorporation into the 
pattern of development, good urban design, and safe places for active play and food 
growing, which are accessible by walking, cycling and public transport, is an important 
role for the Local Plan. 
KEY CHALLENGE – HEALTH & WELLBEING 
To improve the health outcomes for all of North Lincolnshire’s people by reducing levels of 
deprivation and ensuring everyone has access to green open space and opportunities for 
employment, services and to live healthier lives. 
DEPRIVATION 
2.49 Levels of deprivation in North Lincolnshire are worsening. The most recent Indices of 
Multiple Deprivation (IMD)²⁶ show that the number of our Lower Super Output Areas 
(LSOAs)²⁷ in the 10% most deprived areas in the country has increased and the number 
of LSOAs in the least deprived areas has decreased since 2015. North Lincolnshire is 
ranked as the 115th most deprived local authority area in England (of 326)²⁸ (compared 
to a ranking of 127th most deprived in 2015). Almost 11% of the area’s LSOAs are in the 
10% most deprived nationally, and the main pockets of deprivation in North Lincolnshire 
are concentrated in the Scunthorpe urban area. The main challenge and opportunity for 
the Local Plan is to ensure that its policies and proposals seek to reduce deprivation 
levels and reduce inequalities. 
KEY CHALLENGE – DEPRIVATION 
To reduce deprivation locally and enable communities to flourish. 
25 NHS – Services Near You 
26 The English Indices of Deprivation 2019 is the Government’s official measure of deprivation at a local level. The indices 
consist of scores and rankings for each of the 32,844 Lower Super Output areas (LSOAs) in England, as well as summary data for Local Authorities. LSOAs and Local Authorities are ranked with 1 being the most deprived. 
27 These are geographic areas used by the ONS and others for reporting small area statistics. They are designed to be of a similar population size, with an average of approximately 1,500 residents or 650 households. There are 32,844 Lower-layer Super Output Areas (LSOAs) in England. 
28 Index of Multiple Deprivation, 2015 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 21 ENVIRONMENT 
2.50 North Lincolnshire is home to a wealth of high quality natural, built, and historic 
environments that contribute to the quality of life enjoyed by local people and visitors as 
well as our sense of place. With over 80 miles of estuary and rivers the area is 
predominately rural with an attractive countryside, varied landscapes, and wildlife 
habitats as well as high quality, distinctive townscapes. It is essential that these assets 
are protected and enhanced whilst ensuring that necessary economic and housing 
growth are also allowed to take place. The importance that these habitats play in 
underpinning quality places to live and work, health and wellbeing, green tourism and 
provision of ecosystem services, should not be underestimated, helping to make the links 
between the natural environment and all other themes within the plan. 
2.51 These wildlife habitats range from the world class, internationally important areas of the 
Humber Estuary and Crowle Moors, through to nationally, regionally, and locally 
important wildlife and geological sites. These sites include five international designations 
(one Ramsar site, two Special Areas of Conservation and two Special Protection Areas), 
two National Nature Reserves (NNRs), 29 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI’s), 14 
Local Nature Reserves (LNR’s), 215 Local Wildlife Sites (LWS), and 37 Local Geological 
Sites (LGS). 
KEY CHALLENGE – NATURAL ENVIRONMENT 
Protect and enhance our biodiversity and geodiversity sites and wider ecological network that 
supports them addressing the need for Nature Recovery Networks which allow biodiversity to 
survive, thrive and move throughout the countryside, building in resilience to impacts from 
climate change or development and through mandatory biodiversity net gain. 
FIGURE 2.8 OUR ENVIRONMENTAL ASSETS 
Page 22 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 2.52 North Lincolnshire is also characterised by a variety of landscapes ranging from the clay 
pits of the Humber Estuary, the rolling chalk escarpment of the Lincolnshire Wolds, the 
Ancholme Valley, the Lincoln Edge, the Trent Valley, and the Isle of Axholme. The National 
Character Areas developed by Natural England recognises that the North Lincolnshire 
area consists of the following profiles: the Humberhead Levels, Humber Estuary, 
Lincolnshire Coast and Marshes, Lincolnshire Wolds, Central Lincolnshire Vale and 
Northern Lincolnshire Edge with Coversands. North Lincolnshire is actively seeking the 
extension of the Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) into the 
area to further protect our most valued landscapes. The southern Isle of Axholme has the 
most extensive surviving examples of a medieval landscape in England, notably the 
medieval open strip fields and turbaries, both of which are of considerable national 
importance. Our landscapes, particularly the wetland areas, have potential for 
archaeological remains dating back to pre-historic times. 
2.53 It is important that the full biodiversity crisis nationally is recognised locally. This involves 
protecting and enhancing not just our protected sites, which form the core reservoirs of 
our remaining biodiversity, but also the wider countryside. The 25 Year Environment Plan 
and the Environment Bill both recognise the need for Nature Recovery Networks which 
allow biodiversity to survive, thrive and move throughout the countryside, building in 
resilience to impacts from climate change or development and through mandatory 
biodiversity net gain. 
2.54 North Lincolnshire is also a place rich in heritage. We have 912 Listed Buildings (39 
Grade I; 36 Grade II*; 837 Grade II), 17 Conservation Areas and 46 Scheduled 
Monuments. We also have a number of buildings which, whilst not listed on the national 
heritage list, are considered important buildings of townscape merit. 
KEY CHALLENGE – HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
Protecting our historic environment and heritage assets for everyone to enjoy now and in the 
future. 
2.55 The majority of North Lincolnshire is rural and, as such, has large areas of agricultural 
land. Most of this is classified as agricultural Grades 2 and 3 (very good and good to 
moderate quality). However, there are areas of the highest quality Grade 1 (excellent) 
land, which are found mainly in the valley of the River Trent as well as in parts of the Isle 
of Axholme and some areas of the Lincolnshire Wolds²⁹. 
KEY CHALLENGE – AGRICULTURAL/RURAL ECONOMY 
Promote a prosperous rural economy through sustainable business growth, agricultural 
diversification and rural growth that respects the character of the countryside. 
2.56 Significant parts of North Lincolnshire are at risk of flooding (including tidal, fluvial surface 
and groundwater) from a number of sources: The River Trent; River Ancholme; the 
Humber Estuary; and a variety of smaller rivers and drains. There is a need to balance 
the development required to sustain North Lincolnshire’s economic growth and the 
constraints imposed by flood risk. A ‘sequential-approach’ has been taken to site 
selection so that development is, as far as reasonably possible, located where the risk of 
flooding (from all sources) is lowest, taking account of climate change and the 
vulnerability of future uses to flood risk. In addition, the need for schemes to actively 
reduce flood risk should be acknowledged. 
29 Agricultural Land Classification Map – Yorkshire & Humber (Natural England) 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 23 2.57 Air quality within our area is generally good as highlighted in air quality monitoring 
data³⁰. However, more challenging air quality issues are found in Scunthorpe associated 
with dust levels arising from local steel making and associated industries. The council is 
working with local industry via collaborative strategies to address this issue. 
2.58 North Lincolnshire has declared one Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs): the 
Scunthorpe Town AQMA. Air quality monitoring data is regularly reviewed and assessed 
to determine whether these areas are required or whether their extent can be reduced. 
The most recent assessment of the monitoring data has shown that air quality in these 
areas has improved significantly. As a result, the Scunthorpe Town AQMA was reduced. 
This is subject to consultation with stakeholders and the public. 
2.59 North Lincolnshire benefits from the presence of the River Trent and the Stainforth & 
Keadby canal, which are both capable of handling waterbourne freight. Both waterways 
provide a direct route to the Humber Ports (and marine sourced aggregate) and provide 
an alternative route for bulky freight materials without the need for HGV traffic. The use 
of waterways for the transportation of waterborne freight, especially bulk materials and 
of sustainable transport which can help in reducing greenhouse gas emissions and 
reduce congestion on the local highway network. Research by the Commercial Boat 
Operators Association (CBOA), using a case study of the transport of steel by water, 
highlights that carbon emissions of transport by water can be 45% lower than that of 
comparative transport by road. 
KEY CHALLENGE – AIR QUALITY 
To improve air quality in North Lincolnshire generated by heavy industry and traffic and ensure 
that development is directed away from areas with poor air quality. 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
TRANSPORT 
2.60 One of North Lincolnshire’s major strengths and opportunities is its high-quality transport 
network and international connections. We have easy access to the UK’s motorway and 
trunk road network. The M180, M181, A180 and A160 link the South Humber Gateway 
Ports and Scunthorpe as well as the rest of the area to the main north/south routes (the 
A1/M1) and trans-pennine routes (the M62 via the M18). Many of the North’s key centres 
like Doncaster, Sheffield, Manchester, Leeds, York, and Liverpool are accessible within 
two hours, whilst much of the rest of the country is within around a 4 hours’ drive. A £96.9 
million major upgrade to improve access of the A160 between the A180 and the 
entrance to the ports has recently been completed by Highways England. This provides 
enhanced access for freight traffic and will support their growth and development. 
2.61 The A15 is also an important transport corridor which is of strategic importance for both 
housing and employment growth. To the north it links North Lincolnshire with Hull and 
East Riding of Yorkshire, as well as providing an alternative route to York and the north 
east via the Humber Bridge. To the south, it provides an important route to Lincoln and 
the wider Lincolnshire area as well as an alternative link to the A1/M1 via the A46. This 
southern section has been identified as needing improvement. North Lincolnshire 
Council, and Lincolnshire County Council are engaging with the Midlands Connect Trans-
Midland Trade Corridor Study to investigate options to create safer roads, improve 
transport connections and increase journey times. 
30 Air quality monitoring data can be found at: www.nlincsair.info 
Page 24 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 2.62 Our rail network is essential for moving people and freight, and the area has 11 railway 
stations. Regular services link the area to Doncaster, Cleethorpes, Grimsby, Sheffield, and 
Manchester (including Manchester Airport) as well as Lincoln and Newark. London is 2½ 
hours by train (via Doncaster). A local service links Barton upon Humber with Grimsby, 
whilst there is also a limited service between Sheffield and Cleethorpes via Kirton in 
Lindsey, Brigg and Barnetby. 
2.63 About a quarter of the country’s rail freight passes through the area’s rail network. 
Around £15.5 million has been invested by the Humber Local Enterprise Partnership, 
Network Rail and the council on the completion of gauge enhancements that are 
allowing larger freight containers to travel on the rail network between the South Humber 
Gateways ports, Scunthorpe and Doncaster. 
2.64 The council will continue to work with our partners like Transport for the North, Network 
Rail and train operators to improve the rail network in our area. 
KEY CHALLENGE – STRATEGIC TRANSPORT 
Ensuring that our strategic transport network (road, rail and air) is improved to support our 
ambitions for growth and safer roads and to further develop our regional and national 
connectivity, working with our partners. 
FIGURE 2.9: OUR TRANSPORT CONNECTIONS 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 25 2.65 Most of our bus services operate to and from Scunthorpe Bus Station. The existing bus 
network is split into urban services operating within the Scunthorpe urban area³¹ and 
rural or inter-urban services that operate across North Lincolnshire³², linking the more 
rural settlements in the area as well as places outside the authority with urban locations. 
We also have the unique JustGo service. JustGo enables travel between the hamlets and 
hubs and into Scunthorpe, enabling access to essential services. The latest technology 
enables the best route scheduling, smooth booking, online payment, real-time text alerts 
and vehicle utilisation to deliver an economically viable solution. The transformation of 
booking and scheduling technology is designed to significantly improve performance, 
reduce wait times, increase vehicle efficiency and boost overall sustainability. 
Passenger’s requests can be made via the app or by phone. It is designed to improve 
transport opportunities in rural communities and some market towns where there is an 
infrequent conventional bus service. 
2.66 The Sustrans Route 1 and 169, which are part of the National Cycle Network, pass 
through North Lincolnshire. Route 1 runs north to south through the area from the 
Humber Bridge to the boundary with Lincolnshire near Barnetby-le-Wold, whilst Route 
169 'The Ridgeway' runs north to south along the ridge of Scunthorpe towards 
Normanby. We have also developed a network of 13 rural routes ranging from six miles 
to 50 miles in length specifically for recreational cyclists. 
2.67 North Lincolnshire boasts approximately 320 miles of public rights of way that give 
walkers, horse riders, cyclists, and off-road motorist’s access into the local countryside. 
Two long distance paths also pass through our area. The Nev Cole Way starts in North 
Lincolnshire at Burton upon Stather and travels eastwards along the south bank of the 
Humber before leaving the area at North Killingholme. The Viking Way enters North 
Lincolnshire at Barton upon Humber after crossing the Humber Bridge and runs 
southwards across the area before heading towards the city of Lincoln and its final 
destination at Oakham in Rutland. 
KEY CHALLENGE – LOCAL TRANSPORT 
Increasing opportunities for the use of sustainable modes of transport including public 
transport, cycling and walking, to access employment, services and for leisure and recreation, 
whilst reducing the need to use the private car. 
INTERNATIONAL LINKS 
2.68 North Lincolnshire has excellent international links. We are located at the eastern end of 
the main Trans Pennine corridor for freight and logistics between the Mersey and the 
Humber and into Europe. The South Humber Gateway Ports (Grimsby, Immingham & 
Killingholme) are the busiest in the country by tonnage (59 million tonnes in 2015³³). We 
also have four thriving inland ports (Flixborough Wharf; Grove Port; Gunness; and 
Keadby) on the River Trent that give ease of access to the European waterways and the 
open sea via the Humber Estuary. 
2.69 There are two international airports in and around North Lincolnshire that provide air 
links to Europe and beyond - Humberside Airport and Doncaster Sheffield Airport. 
Humberside serves over 230,000 passenger a year and enjoys three daily direct flights 
to/from Amsterdam’s Schiphol Airport – one of the globe’s major hub airports, which 
offers connections to over 800 destinations worldwide. It is also one of the largest 
heliports in the UK supporting the oil, gas and offshore wind sectors. It is the regional 
base for one of the UK’s search and rescue helicopters. Regular freight ferries operate 
31 Scunthorpe Town Bus Services Map 
32 North Lincolnshire Rural Bus & Rail Services Map 
33 UK Port Freight Statistics: 2015, Department for Transport 
Page 26 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) from the South Humber Gateway ports to destinations in mainland Europe whilst P&O 
Ferries operate daily overnight passenger services from the nearby Port of Hull to 
Rotterdam (Netherlands) and Zeebrugge (Belgium). 
KEY CHALLENGE – INTERNATIONAL CONNECTIONS 
Encourage and support our international connections by ensuring that transport access to our 
ports and airport is improved and maintained, in order to support increased growth. 
DIGITAL CONNECTIVITY 
2.70 North Lincolnshire has around 12% coverage for fibre to the premise (FTTP) gigabit 
capable infrastructure. It is key that we drive forward to achieve 100% coverage as soon 
as possible. 
KEY CHALLENGE – DIGITAL CONNECTIVITY 
Increase coverage for FTTP Broadband connectivity within North Lincolnshire and ensuring 
provision of digital infrastructure and telecommunications to support businesses and residents, 
taking advantage of new 5G networks and smart technologies. 
MINERALS 
2.71 North Lincolnshire’s geology ensures the presence of several different mineral resources 
in the area. These include sand and gravel, limestone, chalk, silica sand, clay, ironstone, 
and peat as well as hydrocarbon (oil and gas) deposits. 
2.72 There are five quarries extracting either chalk or limestone and four extracting either sand 
and gravel, or silica sand. Ironstone extraction ceased some time ago, as has peat 
extraction. There is one operational oil well at Crosby Warren, to the north east of 
Scunthorpe. North Lincolnshire has a number of Petroleum Exploration and Development 
Licences (PEDLs). 
2.73 National policy clearly sets out the importance of safeguarding mineral resources to 
prevent their sterilisation from non-minerals development. It is also important that North 
Lincolnshire makes its contribution to national and regional mineral supply. 
KEY CHALLENGE – MINERALS 
Ensure we meet the needs for aggregates and other minerals and protect existing resources 
from sterilisation, whilst managing the impacts of extraction on our landscape and 
communities. 
WASTE 
2.74 National Planning Policy for Waste is focused on moving waste up the waste hierarchy 
to reduce the reliance on waste disposal and to promote waste as a resource. North 
Lincolnshire is well served by waste infrastructure and is net self-sufficient in the 
management of waste. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 27 2.75 The area has significant waste management capacity which provides for the needs of 
North Lincolnshire and a number of authorities elsewhere. Several of North Lincolnshire’s 
existing landfill sites are due to close in the mid/late 2020’s, presenting a future challenge 
for the disposal of waste produced in the area as well as further afield. 
2.76 Existing sites for the management of waste should be safeguarded.. 
KEY CHALLENGE – WASTE 
To promote management of waste in line with the waste hierarchy and ensure the 
protection of existing sites from non-waste development. 
Page 28 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 3 A Spatial Vision & Objectives For
North Lincolnshire 
3.1 At the heart of the North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 to 2038) are the spatial vision and 
objectives. These provide the direction for the Local Plan and provide a framework for its 
policies. 
3.2 The vision is a clear statement of what North Lincolnshire will be like at the end of Local 
Plan period in 2038. Both the vision and objectives are distinct to North Lincolnshire and 
reflect the area’s circumstances alongside the key issues and challenges facing the area. 
They take account of residents aspirations whilst being realistic and deliverable.. 
3.3 The spatial vision and objectives have been identified by assessing a range of strategies 
produced by the council and other bodies, alongside the views of the community and key 
stakeholders during previous rounds of public consultation on the Plan. 
NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE COUNCIL VISION 
3.4 The Local Plan reflect’s the council’s wider ambitions for the future of North Lincolnshire 
and the outcomes it will seek to achieve. The Council’s Plan, alongside the Economic 
Growth Plan and Skills & Employability Plan are the most appropriate starting points to 
inform the spatial vision for the North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 to 2038). In addition, 
it will reflect and address the key economic, social and environmental challenges and 
issues that face the area, as well as national planning policy. 
THE COUNCIL PLAN (2018/19) 
3.5 The Council Plan sets out our offer to local residents and priorities for 2018/19. It is 
underpinned by a broad ambition for North Lincolnshire to be the best place for our 
residents. 
3.6 Alongside this ambition, the council seeks to keep the people and place of North 
Lincolnshire safe, well, prosperous and connected. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 29 3.7 The key priorities set out in the plan for 2018/19 are: 
Page 30 Page 30 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) ECONOMIC GROWTH PLAN 
3.8 The Economic Growth Plan focusses on the next five years and lays the foundations for 
continued growth from 2023 and beyond. If fully realised, the ideas in the plan could see 
14,000 new jobs created and £721m more pumped into North Lincolnshire’s economy. 
• Idea 1: Free trade zone and port development 
• Idea 2: Grow the Manufacturing and Engineering Supply Chain Hub 
• Idea 3: Supporting growth and diversification of the Humber chemical and energy cluster 
• Idea 4: Improved connectivity east to west 
• Idea 5: Transforming connectivity north to south 
• Idea 6: Overcoming barriers to growth 
• Idea 7: Lifelong integration of skills and development 
• Idea 8: University Campus North Lincolnshire – providing Higher Level Skills 
• Idea 9: Town centre and market town regeneration 
• Idea 10: Recognition for North Lincolnshire's area of outstanding natural beauty 
CONSULTATION 
3.9 We have already consulted on an initial spatial vision and objectives as part of the Issues 
& Options stage (January to March 2018), and a preferred spatial vision and objectives 
at Preferred Options stage (February to March 2020) and received a range of comments 
that need to be taken into account. 
SPATIAL VISION 
3.10 The Local Plan spatial vision (below) seeks to build on the council’s broader ambitions, 
emerging evidence and national policy. It has sought to bring through those elements of 
the initial and preferred draft visions that attracted support and consider them against 
the council’s ambition of North Lincolnshire being the best place for our residents, and 
outcomes that the area is safe, well, prosperous and connected. 
Page 32 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) SPATIAL VISION FOR NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE 
North Lincolnshire – The Best Place for our residents and businesses 
We are pleased to introduce the North Lincolnshire vision for our Local Plan to deliver increased 
prosperity for the areaIn 2038, North Lincolnshire is home to a growing population who live in 
safe, resilient and sustainable communities that are well connected to quality jobs and an 
accessible well-being offer. It will be the best place for our residents and businesses. 
Sustainable growth will be at the heart of all policies in the Local Plan. 
North Lincolnshire will have a competitive, diverse and high value economy with increased 
levels of prosperity and higher employment levels. We will have created 11,500 new and highly 
skilled jobs in sustainable, innovative and key sectors. Focus will be on sustainable economic 
growth and diversifying the area’s key economic sectors, as well as being welcoming to and 
supportive of new enterprises. Our economy will be strong and diverse; part of an energy corridor stretching east to west, 
(encompassing energy production and consumption, steel and process engineering, chemicals 
and associated logistics) and a food belt corridor from north to south (encompasses growing, 
logistics, processing and research and development). North Lincolnshire will be a location of choice for business, making the most of being part of the 
Humber Enterprise Zone, the largest in England, as well as capitalising on its strategic location 
adjacent to the Humber, excellent transport networks and international connections provided 
by the South Humber Gateway ports and Humberside Airport as well as Doncaster Sheffield 
Airport. The A15 corridor is of strategic importance for both housing and employment growth. The visitor economy will be an increasingly important part of our economy. We will be a location 
of choice for tourists and visitors alike, with four million day visitors and 800,000 overnight stays 
per year, taking advantage of the high quality open countryside, natural and built environment, 
cultural heritage and history. To support our growing economy, the area will be a location for sustainable housing growth, 
with, at least 8,380 new homes being delivered. The area will have an accessible, well-
designed range and choice of housing in sustainable locations, that delivers the housing 
requirements and meets the needs as well as the aspirations of local people. This will include 
the provision of affordable housing. New housing will be accompanied by a range of services, 
community facilities and infrastructure which complement the area’s thriving economy and 
meet the needs of all residents. Growth will take place in the most appropriate locations supporting and creating a network of 
attractive, thriving and vibrant sustainable communities, protecting the open countryside. 
Scunthorpe’s role as regional centre for housing, employment, leisure, services and connectivity, 
will be supported and strengthened, whilst we will ensure the sustainability of our Principal 
Towns, Large Service Centres and rural communities through appropriate levels of planned 
housing and economic growth. Growth and development will be supported by investment in 
North Lincolnshire’s infrastructure. We will have an excellent digital and physical infrastructure, 
alongside a sustainable transport network that connects business, people and places. 
All developments in North Lincolnshire will be planned and designed to the highest possible 
quality in a way that respects their surroundings. They will be expected to contribute positively 
to local distinctiveness and the quality of life for those living and working in the area, as well as 
towards the creation of safer places. Alongside improving the quality of place, people's quality of lives and their health and wellbeing 
will be improved. Local people will have good access to quality open spaces, play and sporting 
facilities, better access to the countryside, increased opportunities for cycling and walking, and 
good quality health facilities. Economic, social and environmental inequalities will be reduced. 
Aspirations will be raised and skill levels enhanced by providing access to training and 
educational opportunities. We will increase our NVQ Level 4 attainment and have full, or the 
highest possible levels of employment. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 33 Development will ensure that impacts and effects of climate change will be mitigated against. 
This will be achieved through requiring high energy efficiency within new and existing 
developments, addressing flood risk to existing and new communities, improving water 
efficiency, management of surface water through the use of SuDS, protecting soil resources, 
supporting low carbon modes of transport, reducing the levels of waste produced, increasing 
the re-use and recycling of materials, and building to high standards of sustainable design and 
construction. This will allow the area to become a cleaner and greener place. Suitable 
provision for the use of renewable and low carbon energy will be made, where appropriate, 
subject to impacts on the area’s landscapes, communities and wildlife. 
North Lincolnshire will continue to play its part in producing the steady and adequate supply 
of minerals to meet national and local needs, whilst seeking to ensure their efficient and 
sustainable use. The area’s waste will be viewed as a resource with a focus on sustainable 
waste management including moving waste up the Waste Hierarchy. North Lincolnshire’s high quality natural, built and historic environment will be protected and 
enhanced, making a significant contribution to the area’s economy, its sense of place and its 
identity as well as the quality of life experienced. Development will respect the internationally, 
nationally and locally recognised areas of nature conservation importance, particularly ones 
based around the Humber Estuary and our landscape character, whilst the countryside will be 
protected from inappropriate development. Biodiversity net gain and an enhancement of the 
area’s coherent ecological networks will be a requirement for all proposals where viability 
allows. Local people will have good access to quality open spaces (including greenspace), play 
and sporting facilities, better access to the countryside and the wider natural environment. Our new Local Plan provides an opportunity to develop a spatial strategy that will support our 
significant ambition for North Lincolnshire, whilst safeguarding the natural, built and historic 
environments for future generations. Our Plan is based on our organisation’s core values of 
self-responsibility, integrity, excellence and equality of opportunity and will support the 
delivery of our priorities, Growing the Economy, Keeping People Safe and Well and Enabling 
Communities to Flourish. 
SPATIAL OBJECTIVES 
3.11 The spatial objectives (SOs) are derived from the vision and focus on the key issues that 
the Local Plan needs to address. They provide the broad direction for the spatial strategy 
and the detailed policies that will be included in the Plan. In a similar vein to the vision, 
these objectives will be developed as work on the Local Plan progresses. 
Spatial Objective 1: Growing Our Economy 
To promote economic growth in North Lincolnshire that increases the area’s prosperity 
through supporting business growth and investment, enterprise and job creation. 
The area will make the most of its strategic location adjacent to the Humber Estuary, 
infrastructure and international connections to be a key location for businesses, whilst 
sufficient employment land will be delivered in sustainable locations that meets the 
needs of existing and future businesses. Employment levels will be increased, creating 
more and better job prospects. The vitality and viability of Scunthorpe, our Market Towns, 
district and local centres as places for shopping, leisure, cultural and community activities 
will be encouraged and supported. 
Spatial Objective 2: Enabling Sustainable Communities to Flourish 
To enable the creation and maintenance of sustainable communities in North 
Lincolnshire by situating new development in locations that offer the best and most 
appropriate opportunities for sustainable development. 
Page 34 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) We will ensure that new homes and jobs are supported by a high-quality environment, 
services and infrastructure and in turn, new development that supports the vitality, 
viability and economic performance of our towns and villages. Local communities will be 
encouraged to develop community-led Neighbourhood Plans, where appropriate. 
Spatial Objective 3: Meeting Our Housing Need (Best Place to Live) 
To increase the supply of quality housing to meet our future needs and support the 
growth of our economy. 
We will ensure the delivery of a wide choice of high quality, well designed housing 
schemes in North Lincolnshire, on a range of sites that are accessible to, and meets the 
needs and aspirations of, the area’s existing and future residents. This will include 
meeting the needs of the various groups that have differing housing requirements 
(including affordable [in its widest sense], families with children, older persons, specialist 
housing, and those who wish to build their own home (custom build or self-build)). 
Spatial Objective 4: Delivering Infrastructure for Growth (A Connected
North Lincolnshire) 
To identify and deliver the wide range of physical, social, digital and environmental 
infrastructure needed to support our ambitions for growth and development in a 
connected North Lincolnshire. We will aim to deliver a connected, accessible, well-maintained, efficient, safe and 
sustainable transport network including better and safer roads, better public transport 
and walking and cycling routes that supports economic growth and allows local 
residents to have high quality access to key services and facilities, without increasing the 
need to travel. This is essential in creating places that are cleaner, greener and safer. We will also seek to deliver the necessary community infrastructure/facilities and green 
infrastructure to support the creation of sustainable communities and cleaner and 
greener spaces. This will be done by working closely with a wide range of partner 
organisations and infrastructure providers. 
Spatial Objective 5: Supporting Our Rural Areas and Countryside 
To support strong and flourishing rural communities and countryside by encouraging 
diversification of the rural economy and retaining and enhancing key local facilities, 
infrastructure and services whilst promoting appropriate sustainable development in 
rural settlements which meets local needs and reflects the surrounding environment. 
Spatial Objective 6: Protecting and Enhancing Our Natural, Built and
Historic Environment 
To ensure that North Lincolnshire’s high quality natural, built and historic environments 
are safeguarded, conserved and enhanced to maintain their contribution to the area’s 
local distinctiveness and quality of life. Internationally, nationally and locally designated areas of habitat and nature 
conservation importance (particularly those in the Humber Estuary and at Crowle Moors) 
will be protected, whilst the area’s diverse landscapes such as the Lincolnshire Wolds, 
open spaces and green infrastructure network will be recognised for their importance 
and enhanced. Development will contribute to nature’s recovery throughout North 
Lincolnshire through provision of biodiversity net gain, and where opportunity allows, 
enhancement of the area’s coherent ecological networks. Designated and non-designated heritage assets, including their settings, along with the 
area’s townscapes will be protected and enhanced to maintain the local street scene and 
its distinctiveness. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 35 Spatial Objective 7: Promoting High Quality Design 
To ensure that all new development in North Lincolnshire exhibits a high standard of 
design and architectural quality and innovation that reflects the character of the area’s 
landscapes and townscapes and contributes to local distinctiveness. 
Development should be accessible to all sections of the community, contribute to an 
enhanced feeling of safety and security, and make the most of opportunities for efficient 
use of resources, contributing to cleaner, greener and safer places. 
Spatial Objective 8: Raising Aspirations 
To encourage greater economic prosperity, better paid jobs, improve skills and reduce 
inequalities by supporting opportunities for the provision of excellent education, training 
and research facilities that help to raise the aspirations and attainment of North 
Lincolnshire’s young people, support adults to re-engage with work and lifelong learning, 
and develop and upskill the area’s workforce to equip them to meet the needs of business 
and industry. 
Spatial Objective 9: Enabling Improved Quality of Life 
To support the health and well-being of North Lincolnshire’s communities by 
safeguarding, enhancing and providing a wide range of excellent educational, social, 
accessible childcare, sporting, health, recreational and cultural facilities that contribute to 
the quality of life and satisfaction of the residents of our area and those that visit the area, 
as well as by seeking to reduce deprivation and social, economic and environmental 
inequalities. The wider benefits of natural environment, capital, ecosystem services and green 
infrastructure will be recognised for positive health and wellbeing outcomes and 
improving people’s health and wellbeing. 
Spatial Objective 10: Developing Our Visitor Economy 
To develop North Lincolnshire’s visitor economy and make it a destination of choice for 
tourists and visitors alike by taking advantage of the opportunities provided by the area’s 
high quality natural and built environment, including its diverse landscapes, countryside 
and townscapes, as well as its rich cultural heritage. Attractions such as Normanby Hall, 
Waters’ Edge Country Park, Crowle Moors, our Market Towns, and the Humber Estuary, 
will play their part in developing North Lincolnshire as a tourist destination and create 
vibrant leisure and cultural facilities for visitors and residents alike. The visitor economy’s 
impact on the natural environment will be mitigated to reduce negative effects on 
biodiversity and natural resources. 
Spatial Objective 11: Planning for Climate Change 
To address and reduce the causes and impacts of climate change in North Lincolnshire, 
contributing to achieving safer environments and communities. This will be achieved by reducing flood risk to (existing and new) communities by 
identifying and supporting implementation of necessary flood risk infrastructure, locating 
new development, where possible, away from areas at risk of flooding, and ensuring that 
new development is safe from flooding/securing sustainable flood management in new 
development. We will also increase the use of low and zero carbon technologies and 
decarbonisation by encouraging appropriate building design, supporting businesses to 
adapt and decarbonise and promoting sustainable land management, including habitat 
protection and the creation of new habitats as natural solutions to climate change (i.e. 
Nature Recovery Networks and mandatory biodiversity net gain). We will also deliver an 
ambitious tree and hedge planting programme. 
Page 36 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Spatial Objective 12: Efficient Use of Our Resources 
To encourage the effective and prudent use of North Lincolnshire’s resources including 
energy, water, soils, minerals and waste, by supporting the efficient use of land and 
buildings, including sustainable construction techniques within new developments, 
reducing the level of waste produced and promoting the use of renewable and low 
carbon energy, subject to its impact on the area’s landscapes and communities. 
Measures to minimise pollution and improve air, soil and water quality will also be 
employed as part of creating a cleaner, greener and safer area. 
Spatial Objective 13: Ensuring Minerals Supply 
To ensure a steady and adequate supply of minerals, including aggregates, industrial 
minerals and energy minerals to meet national, regional and local needs in the most 
appropriate way, whilst taking account of impacts on the environment and local 
communities. We will ensure that economically important mineral resources will be safeguarded from 
incompatible development. 
Spatial Objective 14: Delivering Sustainable Waste Management 
To support the use and effective management of North Lincolnshire’s waste as a 
resource by reducing the amount that needs to be treated and disposed. There will be greater encouragement to reduce levels of waste being produced and 
increase re-use and recycling in order move waste up the ‘Waste Hierarchy’. A network 
of appropriately-located sustainable waste management facilities will be developed and 
existing facilities protected from incompatible development, whilst recognising the need 
to avoid negative impacts on local communities. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 37 4 A Spatial Strategy For North
Lincolnshire 
INTRODUCTION 
4.1 Creating and delivering sustainable development lies at the heart of the planning system. 
Therefore, the Local Plan is essential in ensuring the proper planning of North 
Lincolnshire. It sets out a clear and co-ordinated approach to the provision of new homes, 
jobs and supporting infrastructure alongside the need to protect the interests of our 
communities and the environment. 
4.2 This means that, when deciding how much growth will take place and where it should 
be located, the Local Plan must take the issue of sustainability into account, i.e. by looking 
at and assessing the economic, environmental and social impacts of growth and 
development on the area. 
4.3 The Local Plan identifies those locations that are most appropriate to accommodate 
future growth and development. This takes account of the need to minimise impacts on 
the environment and make the best use of existing or planned infrastructure. It will also 
identify areas/locations that could be serviced by new infrastructure or services. This is 
what is meant by sustainable development that will benefit both existing and future 
communities in North Lincolnshire. 
DELIVERING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
4.4 Government is clear that the role of the planning system, including Local Plans, is to 
contribute towards the achievement of sustainable development. This seeks to ensure a 
better quality of life for everyone, both now and in the future. The policies of the Local 
Plan all seek to contribute towards sustainable development in North Lincolnshire. 
POLICY SS1: PRESUMPTION IN FAVOUR OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
1. Creating and delivering sustainable growth; growth that is not for its own sake, but 
which brings benefits for all sectors of the community, for both existing and new 
residents; lies at the heart of the spatial strategy for North Lincolnshire, with all new 
development contributing towards sustainable development. When considering 
development proposals the council will take a positive approach that reflects the 
presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning 
Policy Framework. 
a. The council will work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean 
that proposals can be approved, wherever possible, and to secure development that 
improves the economic, social and environmental conditions in North Lincolnshire. 
b. Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Local Plan (and, where 
relevant, with policies in Neighbourhood Plans) will be approved without delay, unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise. 
Page 38 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) c. Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies are out of 
date at the time of making the decision, then the council will grant permission unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise taking into account whether: 
i. Any adverse impacts significantly and demonstrably outweigh the benefits, when 
assessed against the NPPF, taken as a whole; or 
ii. Specific policies in the NPPF or Local Plan indicate that development should be 
restricted. 
4.5 The presumption in favour of sustainable development is at the heart of the NPPF and is 
essentially about using land or resources in a way that meets the needs of our residents 
now, without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
4.6 This policy sets out how the presumption will be applied and how the Council will work 
proactively with applicants and developers to find solutions which mean that proposals 
can be approved wherever possible and to secure development that improves the 
economic, social and environmental conditions in North Lincolnshire. 
4.7 Planning law states that planning applications must be decided in line with the 
requirements of the Development Plan, unless there are very good reasons (known as 
“material considerations”) not to do so. In other words, the policies set out in the 
Development Plan represent the starting point in deciding planning applications. Policies 
are stated positively in the Plan setting out where in most cases the council will support 
development that contributes towards sustainable solutions and takes local 
circumstances into account. 
SPATIAL STRATEGY FOR NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE 
4.8 To meet North Lincolnshire’s future needs and achieve the spatial vision and objectives, 
the Local Plan must make provision for significant new growth in the most sustainable 
way. This means making sure that the new housing is matched by opportunities for new 
employment, accessible local services and a high-quality environment. The spatial 
strategy seeks to deliver a more balanced approach to the location of new development 
in North Lincolnshire that seeks to meet our Objectively Assessed Needs and maintain 
and enhance the vitality and viability of the area’s communities. 
POLICY SS2: SPATIAL STRATEGY FOR NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE 
1. The spatial vision, objectives and development needs for North Lincolnshire will be 
delivered through the spatial strategy outlined below, and on the key diagram. The 
spatial strategy will deliver growth in a sustainable and balanced manner that meet 
the area’s objectively assessed needs for new homes, jobs and infrastructure, whilst 
ensuring the natural and built environment is protected and enhanced. 
2. The spatial strategy for North Lincolnshire will: 
a. Deliver at least 7128 new homes (396 dwellings per annum) to meet the needs of the 
existing and future population in sustainable and balanced communities. 
b. Support the creation of 11,500 new jobs in our priority sectors and encouraging 
innovation. 
c. Develop at least 131.7ha of employment land in key locations that supports the 
delivery of housing growth, and provides opportunities for our priority sectors to grow, 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 39 and meets the requirements of the commercial property market. Amongst these areas 
are South Humber Gateway; Scunthorpe; Humberside Airport; and strategic locations 
on Transport Corridors. 
d. Deliver and support the regeneration, enhancement and diversification of the area’s 
town, district and local centres as key hubs for retail, leisure and services for our 
communities. 
e. Ensure the delivery of sufficient physical, social and environmental infrastructure to 
support the area’s ambitions for housing and economic growth and meet identified 
needs. 
f. Support thriving rural communities and a vibrant countryside through the protection 
and enhancement of local services, creating opportunities for rural economic 
diversification and the promotion of tourism. 
g. Support the protection and enhancement of the area’s world-class natural and built 
environment to ensure its continued attractiveness, securing nature’s recovery and 
enabling safe environments and communities. 
h. Support and develop North Lincolnshire’s visitor economy and make it a destination of 
choice. 
3. Decisions on investment in services and facilities, and on the location and scale of 
new development will be guided by the settlement hierarchy set out below: 
Major Sub-Regional Centre -Scunthorpe & Bottesford Urban Area 
a. To maintain and strengthen its role as a key sub-regional centre, the Scunthorpe and 
Bottesford urban area will be the priority focus for growth in North Lincolnshire. 
b. It will be the focus for the large-scale residential development through the provision of 
allocations in this plan, including sustainable urban extensions. Non-allocated sites 
within the defined development limit will also contribute accordingly. Appropriate use 
will be made of previously developed land and greenfield sites. Major opportunities for 
employment will be provided in key locations within the urban area, whilst it will be the 
main centre for higher order services and facilities, retail, cultural activities, leisure, and 
commercial development. Opportunities for regeneration will be supported where they 
contribute to the spatial vision and objectives. 
Principal Towns -Barton upon Humber & Brigg 
c. To maintain and enhance their roles as key service centres for North Lincolnshire, 
Barton upon Humber and Brigg will be a focus for growth including new housing, 
employment, retail, cultural facilities, leisure and service provision. Most of this growth 
will be through site allocations in this plan. Non-allocated sites within the defined 
development limit will also contribute accordingly where it meets the policies of this 
plan. All development should reflect the historic nature of each town, alongside 
existing environmental constraints such as flood risk. 
Large Service Centres -Barnetby-le-Wold; Barrow upon Humber; Belton (including 
Westgate & Woodhouse); Broughton; Crowle; Epworth; Goxhill; Haxey; Hibaldstow; 
Kirton in Lindsey; Messingham; Ulceby; & Winterton 
d. To maintain and enhance their role as large service centres, that provide local 
employment opportunities, and key services and facilities for their surrounding areas, 
these settlements will be the focus for an appropriate level of growth. This will be 
through the provision of allocated sites within this plan, and through non-allocated 
sites within their defined development limits. Any development should reflect the 
character and nature of each settlement, together with infrastructure capacity. 
Page 40 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Larger Rural Settlements -Burton upon Stather; Ealand; East Halton; Gunness; 
Keadby; New Holland; Owston Ferry; Scawby; South Ferriby; South Killingholme; West 
Butterwick; Westwoodside; Winteringham; Wrawby; & Wroot 
e. Larger rural settlements will accommodate an appropriate level of development that 
supports their function. Sites of an appropriate scale and nature will be allocated in the 
plan. Non-allocated sites within the defined settlement development limit will also be 
supported. All development should take into account the nature and character of these 
settlements. 
Smaller Rural Settlements – Alkborough; Althorpe; Appleby; Bonby; Burringham; East 
Butterwick; Eastoft; Elsham; Flixborough; Garthorpe & Fockerby; Howsham; 
Kirmington; Luddington; North Killingholme; Redbourne; West Halton; Wootton & 
Worlaby 
f. These settlements will accommodate small-scale development of a limited nature, 
within their defined settlement developments, that supports their vitality and viability. 
Small sites will have a role to play. All development should reflect the character and 
nature of these villages and give due consideration to the availability and capacity of 
infrastructure to support its growth. All proposals will be considered on their merits. 
Rural Hamlets & Villages – Amcotts; Barrow Haven; Beltoft; Cadney; Carrhouse; 
Cleatham*; Castlethorpe; Coleby; Croxton*; Derrythorpe; Dragonby; East Lound; 
Eastoft Carr*; Goxhill South End; Graizelound; Greetwell; Gunthorpe; Haxey Carrs*; 
Holme*; Horkstow; Kelfield*; Low Burnham; Manton; Melton Ross; Messingham Ings*; 
New Barnetby; Normanby; Roxby cum Risby; Sandtoft; Santon; Saxby all Saints; 
Thealby; Thornton Curtis; Ulceby Skitter; Walcott; Whitton & Wressle. (* no 
development limit) 
g. Development will be limited to infill in those rural hamlets and villages that have 
defined development limits, provided that it is line with all relevant policies of the plan. 
KEY DIAGRAM 
Keadby and Stainforth Canal
North LincolnshireMajorSubRegionalCentre
PrincipalTown
LargeServiceCentre
LargerRuralSettlement
SmallerRuralSettlement
StrategicEmploymentSite
4358Scunthorpe1089
1006Bartonupon
Humber
Brigg
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 41 4.9 Policy SS2 sets out the level of new development that is needed in North Lincolnshire up 
to 2038, together with how, and where, it will take place. The spatial strategy is driven 
by the overall vision and objectives, coupled with the council’s ambitions for growth. 
4.10 The preferred approach has an area-wide focus, spreading development across the 
area’s towns and villages beyond Scunthorpe, the Principal Towns and Larger Service 
Centres. This approach is supported by the community and key stakeholders. The exact 
distribution of housing and employment land is set out in policies SS5 and SS8. 
4.11 The level of growth in each of the area’s towns and villages is dependent upon their 
sustainability and ability to accommodate it. Consideration will be given to the availability 
of infrastructure and services and takes into account access to transport, employment 
and any environmental constraints. This does not necessarily mean that growth will 
happen everywhere. Development in areas within Flood Zone 2/3a should be minimised. 
Where development is necessary, the development should be made safe for its lifetime 
without increasing flood risk elsewhere through the application of the sequential and 
exceptions test. 
4.12 Larger development will take place in Scunthorpe and the Principal Towns, whilst there 
will be opportunities for growth in the Large Service Centres, Larger Rural Settlements 
and Smaller Rural Settlements through the provision of appropriately-sized allocations or 
though infill opportunities within their defined settlement development limit. This will 
support their prosperity as well as maintain their local services and facilities. 
4.13 The settlement hierarchy set out reflects the role and function of the settlements in North 
Lincolnshire and is based on factual information. 
4.14 The implementation of the strategy will be dependent on working in partnership with a 
wide range of national and local stakeholders. 
DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPLES 
4.15 All new development in North Lincolnshire should contribute towards the creation of 
sustainable communities and a sense of place. In certain types of development (such as 
infrastructure schemes, or mineral extraction) it may not be practical for the application 
to consider all of the principles. Each application will be considered on its merit. 
POLICY SS3: DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPLES 
1. It is essential for new development, irrespective of its location, to make a positive 
contribution to North Lincolnshire and support the delivery of sustainable 
communities and places, where residents are safe, well, prosperous and connected. 
All proposals for development in North Lincolnshire should reflect the following key 
principles (unless in practical terms they are not considered relevant by the case 
officer): 
a. Be of a high standard of design that is sympathetic and appropriate to the area’s 
character, significance and setting in respect of its scale, massing, layout, function and 
materials. Development should create and reinforce locally distinctive and sustainable 
communities. 
b. Create safe, secure and inclusive environments for local people and visitors alike by 
including design and security measures that reduce actual and perceived 
opportunities for crime and anti-social behaviour. 
Page 42 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) c. Promote and encourage the effective use of previously developed (brownfield) land 
(providing, it is remediated where necessary and not of high environmental value, and 
contamination is not allowed to migrate into the water system), whilst demonstrating 
the efficient use of land and resources by ensuring development is built at appropriate 
densities. 
d. Minimise the use of non-renewable and unsustainable finite resources, including 
energy, water and materials, during both construction and use. Waste reduction will 
be encouraged and appropriate reuse and recycling of materials, including 
appropriate storage space and segregation facilities for recyclable and non-recyclable 
waste and prioritising the use of local materials. 
e. Minimise the impacts arising from climate change and mitigate against its effect, 
including, reducing flood risk. 
f. Provide high standards of amenity and privacy, by ensuring the impacts of 
development on adjacent and nearby properties are minimised. These impacts include 
noise, odour, fumes, dust or other nuisance, or the effects of overlooking or 
overshadowing. 
g. Aim to achieve the high standards of sustainable construction and design in 
accordance with current Building Regulations and integrated water management. 
This could include renewable and low carbon technologies, measures to reduce the 
consumption of resources including water use and separate surface water and foul 
drainage, even where an existing combined system exists in accordance with the 
principles of the Non Statutory Technical Standards for Sustainable Drainage. 
h. Plan positively and enhance local landscape characteristics, natural capital, geological 
conservation interests and soils, and avoid, remedy or mitigate any impacts on natural 
capital features and open spaces. 
i. Plan positively to enhance the natural environment through the design of the 
development and through the provision of measurable net gains to biodiversity. 
j. Consider built heritage and heritage assets from the earliest stages in the design 
process, in particular in terms of scale, density, layout and access. 
k. Ensure that development makes provision for good quality, accessible open spaces 
and green infrastructure, with existing spaces being retained and enhanced. 
l. Take account of existing and/or planned infrastructure, and contribute towards the 
provision of additional infrastructure to ensure that development is well served by 
physical, social and environmental infrastructure. 
m. Reduce the need to travel and minimise car use, and wherever possible, improve 
opportunities for walking, cycling and public transport. 
n. Contribute towards healthy communities and places, and consider the health impacts 
of development and the needs of existing and future users. 
o. New developments should consider the amenity value of existing walking and cycling 
routes and green infrastructure networks, to ensure that the usability and 
attractiveness of these assets for active travel and leisure is preserved or enhanced. 
4.16 Policy SS3 provides a framework against which all proposals for new development in 
North Lincolnshire will be considered. It is noted that not all criteria will be relevant to 
every proposal, however applicants should still consider them, unless the case officer 
indicates that specific principles may not be relevant (such minerals or infrastructure 
proposals). This policy should be read alongside the complementary advice and 
guidance set out in national policy – National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) (July 
2021) and Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 43 4.17 The design of development is an essential part of creating sustainable communities and 
successful places. It also has a key role in projecting the image of the area, which is vital 
in attracting people, businesses and visitors, together with creating a sense of place. 
4.18 All new development in North Lincolnshire should be of a high quality design and make 
a positive contribution to its locality and the area as a whole. It should respect and 
respond to its surroundings, not harm local amenity, and protect local distinctiveness and 
character. Design and layout should be based on a clear understanding of the 
characteristics of the site and its context. This includes existing built form, heights, scale, 
massing, topography etc. Density is closely aligned with design/layout. These should 
make efficient use of land and resources using appropriate density levels. This could 
include the use of imaginative designs. 
4.19 The development of previously developed (brownfield) land is considered a priority in 
North Lincolnshire. NPPF states this should be actively encouraged through local 
planning policy. Any proposals will need to demonstrate remediation measures where 
necessary and that the site has no high environmental value. 
4.20 Retention and provision of accessible natural green spaces, trees, planting and habitats 
using native species of local provenance can play a role in visually enhancing a 
development, promoting health and well-being, mitigate and adapt to climate change, as 
well as creating a relationship with the wider landscape. It can also offer the chance to 
improve biodiversity. 
4.21 In designing new buildings and spaces, climate change and the wider global 
environment needs to be taken into account. The use of sustainable design and 
construction techniques will be encouraged to reduce energy consumption, promote 
energy efficiency, reduce carbon emissions and discourage the wasteful use of finite 
natural resources in accordance with current Building Regulations. Examples could 
include incorporating opportunities for energy minimisation and solar optimisation, or the 
use of renewable and low carbon energy. 
4.22 Developments will also be designed to mitigate against and withstand the effects of 
climate change, including flooding. Sustainable design also includes the sustainable use 
of resources which play an important part in conserving materials and natural resources, 
which over time are likely to become scarcer. 
4.23 A high quality built environment should consider the amenity of both existing and future 
residents and consideration should be given to matters of privacy, outlook, natural 
lighting, ventilation, as well as local climatic conditions. 
4.24 Creating safe places and preventing crime are also important in realising sustainable 
communities. Including measures as part of the design process to reduce opportunities 
for crime and enhance security will be supported. Where appropriate, developers should 
consult Humberside Police for advice. 
4.25 New developments should address how it meets sustainability criteria. This includes 
access to services, access to employment opportunities and impact upon the natural 
environment. Existing and proposed infrastructure, including access to public transport, 
should also be a key consideration in order to reduce the need to travel and minimise car 
use. 
4.26 National policy highlights the important role for the planning system in improving the 
health and well-being of communities. This can be through the provision of accessible 
green spaces or opportunities for safe and attractive corridors for walking and cycling 
utilising protected and enhanced green corridors between communities, instead of using 
the private car, or ensuring access to jobs and services. All development must be 
accessible to all sections of the community, therefore their needs should be considered 
Page 44 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) when designing new buildings and spaces, now and in the future. Like many areas 
North Lincolnshire’s population is getting older. 
NEIGHBOURHOOD PLANNING 
4.27 The Localism Act 2011 gave communities more control and influence over their area and 
how it should develop, with the main tool for doing this being the community-led 
Neighbourhood Plan. Neighbourhood planning allows residents, employees and 
businesses to come together through a local town or parish council or neighbourhood 
forum and say where, for example, they think new houses, businesses and shops should 
be located and what they should look like, and what infrastructure should be provided. 
Neighbourhood planning provides a powerful set of tools for local people to ensure that 
they get the right types of development for their community where the ambition of the 
neighbourhood is aligned with the strategic needs and priorities of the wider local area. 
4.28 In general terms, any area can have a Neighbourhood Plan. They can cross local 
authority boundaries but they cannot overlap with adjoining neighbourhoods who also 
wish to prepare a plan for their area. The boundaries of the area will need to be agreed 
with and approved by the council. 
4.29 In rural areas, it is expected that Neighbourhood Plans will relate to town or parish 
council areas. In some cases, plans could cover more than one town/parish area if there 
is agreement. For urban areas or areas without town or parish councils, neighbourhood 
areas will vary. For example, a neighbourhood area could cover a town centre or 
Business Park, a cluster of streets, or possibly an electoral ward. 
4.30 Neighbourhood Plan policies cannot block development that is already part of the Local 
Plan. They can, however, shape where development will go and what it will look like. As 
well as Neighbourhood Development Plans, the Localism Act also enabled communities 
to shape development in their area through the production of Neighbourhood 
Development Orders and Community Right to Build Orders. Neighbourhood 
Development Orders and Community Right to Build Orders allow communities to grant 
planning permission either in full or in outline for the types of development they want to 
see in their areas. 
4.31 In North Lincolnshire, Appleby has an adopted Neighbourhood Plan and a further 
fourteen communities have designated Neighbourhood Areas including Worlaby whose 
Plan and supporting documents have been submitted to North Lincolnshire Council in 
accordance with Regulation 15 of the Neighbourhood Planning (General) Regulations 
2012. Those communities with designated Neighbourhood Areas are: Barrow-upon-
Humber; Barton upon Humber; Bonby; Bottesford & Yaddlethorpe; Brigg; Elsham; Goxhill; 
Haxey; Kirton in Lindsey; Saxby all Saints; South Ferriby; Winteringham; Winterton; and 
Worlaby. The neighbourhood planning section of the council’s website outlines current 
progress being made at the community level in North Lincolnshire: https:// 
www.northlincs.gov.uk/planning-and-environment/planning-policy-neighbourhood-
planning/ 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 45 POLICY SS4: NEIGHBOURHOOD PLANNING IN NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE 
1. North Lincolnshire Council will: 
a. actively encourage local communities to develop a Neighbourhood Plan, where 
appropriate; 
b. be proactive in providing appropriate information to communities about 
neighbourhood planning; 
c. constructively engage with local communities throughout the process including when 
considering the recommendations of the independent examiner of a Neighbourhood 
Development Plan or Order proposal; 
d. fulfil its duties and take decisions as soon as possible within statutory time periods 
where these apply; 
e. set out a clear and transparent decision-making timetable and share this with those 
wishing to prepare a Neighbourhood Plan or an Order; and 
f. following a positive referendum result in the neighbourhood area, ‘make’ the 
Neighbourhood Plan part of the North Lincolnshire Development Plan. 
2. When developing a Neighbourhood Plan local communities will: 
a. ensure the membership of the neighbourhood forum reflects the character and 
diversity of the local population 
b. decide on the timeframe for plan production; 
c. establish a dialogue with a range of organisations, partners and stakeholders; 
d. establish a robust programme of community engagement and a proportionate 
evidence base; and 
e. ensure it meets the specified ‘basic conditions’ set out in paragraph 8(2) of Schedule 
4B to the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 as applied to neighbourhood plans by 
section 38A of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. 
4.32 Neighbourhood planning enables communities to play a much stronger role in shaping 
the areas in which they live and in supporting new development proposals. This is 
because unlike the parish, village or town plans that communities may have prepared, a 
Neighbourhood Plan forms part of the development plan and sits alongside the Local 
Plan prepared by the local planning authority. Decisions on planning applications will be 
made using both the Local Plan and the Neighbourhood Plan, and any other material 
consideration. 
OVERALL HOUSING PROVISION 
4.33 The North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 is an 
evidence-based study that assists the council to assess what the local housing need is 
for North Lincolnshire for the period from 2020 to 2038. NPPF requires a council’s Local 
Plan to meet the local housing need for market and affordable housing in their housing 
market area and using the Standard Method in National Planning Guidance, unless 
exceptional circumstances justify an alternative approach. 
4.34 The North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 has 
determined that North Lincolnshire can be described as a self-contained housing market 
Page 46 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) area, in that the majority of households seeking to move; look for another house within 
the authority area. We should therefore plan for the needs of our existing and future 
communities without needing to look outside of North Lincolnshire. Discussions with our 
neighbouring authorities indicate there is no current requirement to take account of their 
housing needs. 
4.35 The North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 used 
the standard method set out in the National Planning Guidance to determine the local 
housing needs for the area. The standard method identifies an overall local housing need 
of 7,128 net additional dwellings over the plan period, the equivalent of 396 dwellings 
per annum. 
4.36 To maintain the supply of housing the Government will publish annually in November the 
Housing Delivery Test results for each local authority. This Test will measure the number 
of net homes delivered against the number of homes required as set out in the strategic 
policies of each local authority’s local plan over a three year period. 
4.37 The Government published the Housing Delivery Test 2020 results in February 2021. 
The table below identifies that North Lincolnshire is required to produce an Action Plan 
to increase housing delivery over the next five years. Table 1 identifies that North 
Lincolnshire delivered 94% of its housing requirement within this period. 
TABLE 4.1: NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE HOUSING DELIVERY TEST 2020 RESULTS 
Area 
Name Number of homes 
required Total number Number of homes 
delivered Total number 
of homes 
delivered Housing Delivery Test: 
2020 measurement Housing Delivery Test: 
2020 consequence 
2017 
-18 2018 -19 2019 -20 of homes 
required 2017-18 2018-19 2019-20 
North Lincolnshire 399 412 369 1,180 386 327 400 1,114 94% Action Plan 
4.38 To provide additional flexibility and to assist in ensuring the council maintain a five year 
land supply of deliverable sites, the council will allocate an additional 10% of the total 
housing requirement within the first five years of the plan period. This equates to 198 
additional homes and will provide choice and competition in the market for land. This is 
in accordance with the National Planning Practice Guidance and the Housing Delivery 
Test requirements. 
HOUSING TRAJECTORY 
4.39 The North Lincolnshire housing trajectory illustrates the expected rate of delivery of new 
dwellings. It demonstrates how the objectively assessed need for an additional 7,128 
new homes up to 2038 could be achieved. To meet objectively assessed needs, an 
average of 396 additional dwellings a year are required between 2020 and 2038. The 
housing trajectory is set out in Appendix 7. 
4.40 The SHELAA will be regularly updated and the Authority's Monitoring Report (AMR) will 
annually update the housing trajectory helping to ensure a five year supply is maintained 
throughout the plan period and signalling any need for intervention and/or Plan review. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 47 POLICY SS5: OVERALL HOUSING PROVISION 
1. Between 2020 and 2038, North Lincolnshire’s housing requirement is for 7,128 new 
dwellings to be provided (396 new dwellings per year): 
2. Of these new dwellings, around 2,379 will be provided from sites that already have 
planning permission or are under construction. 
3. It is anticipated that the sites will be delivered in accordance with the housing delivery 
trajectory in Appendix 7. 
4. A rolling five year supply of deliverable housing sites will be maintained. To provide 
flexibility in the delivery of housing the council will allocate an additional 198 
dwellings within the first five years of the plan period. This equates to 7,326 dwellings 
over the plan period. 
4.41 The purpose of this policy is to set out the overall level of housing provision that will be 
required to meet North Lincolnshire’s needs between 2020-2038. The policy will be 
mainly delivered through the allocation of sites in Policy H3. This Policy will be annually 
monitored using Government Housing Delivery Test to ensure the council maintain a five 
year housing land supply of deliverable sites. If it becomes apparent that a five year 
deliverable supply cannot be evidenced, or delivery is consistently below the housing 
requirement, the council will work with landowners and the development industry and 
take appropriate action in seeking to address any shortfall. 
4.42 The revised National Planning Policy Framework, published in July 2018, introduces a 
new requirement that development plans and brownfield registers must identify ‘land to 
accommodate at least 10% of their housing requirement on sites no larger than one 
hectare,’ unless there are strong reasons this cannot be achieved. For North Lincolnshire, 
this means that 713 homes need to be identified through the development plan and 
brownfield register on sites below 1 hectare over the plan period. The Council will 
annually update the brownfield registers to ensure that this requirement is met. 
HOUSING DISTRIBUTION 
4.43 New housing will be distributed in relation to the following spatial strategy. This reflects 
Policy SS2 Spatial Strategy for North Lincolnshire locations of existing employment 
clusters, development constraints, accessibility and service provision. It specifically sets 
out that residential development will be commensurate with the scale of individual 
settlements and their position in the settlement hierarchy. 
Page 48 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY SS6: SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING SITES 
1. The delivery of new dwellings will be distributed as follows: 
TABLE 4.2 SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION OF HOUSING SITES 
Settlement Housing Growth Total Dwellings 
Major Sub-Regional Centre Scunthorpe & Bottesford Urban Area
(including Lincolnshire Lakes) 51.3% 3758 
Principal Towns Barton upon Humber 8% 583 
Brigg 14.3% 1045 
Large service centres Barnetby le Wold 1.0% 75 
Barrow upon Humber 2.4% 178 
Broughton 1.4% 100 
Crowle 2.3% 169 
Epworth 0.8% 57 
Goxhill 1.6% 115 
Haxey 1.0% 75 
Hibaldstow 1.1% 77 
Kirton in Lindsey 5.1% 371 
Messingham 0.4% 32 
Ulceby 1.8% 131 
Winterton 4.0% 290 
Larger rural settlements Belton 0.7% 49 
Ealand 0.6% 46 
East Halton 0.4% 26 
Keadby 0.3% 23 
Scawby 0.4% 30 
South Killingholme 0.3% 21 
Westwoodside 0.4% 26 
Wrawby 0.5% 36 
Wroot 0.2% 13 
Total 100% 7326 
2. Residential development in Smaller Rural Settlements, Rural Hamlets & Villages and 
in the open countryside outside the development limits, will be strictly limited. 
Consideration will be given to development, which relates to agriculture, forestry or to 
meet a special need associated with the countryside. All development should not 
have an adverse impact on the environment or landscape. 
4.44 The purpose of this policy is to set out the spatial distribution of housing for North 
Lincolnshire in the most sustainable locations. The majority of new housing will be 
located within the Scunthorpe urban area, reflecting its sub-regional role. This will be 
followed in preference by the area’s Principal Towns, Large Service Centres and then the 
Larger Rural Settlements. 
4.45 Larger development will take place in Scunthorpe and the Principal Towns, whilst there 
will be opportunities for growth in the Large Service Centres, Larger Rural Settlements 
and Smaller Rural Settlements through the provision of appropriately-sized allocations or 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 49 through infill opportunities within their defined settlement development limit. This will 
support their prosperity as well as maintain their local services and facilities. 
4.46 The level of growth in each of the area’s towns and villages is dependent upon their 
sustainability including level of flood risk and ability to accommodate it. Consideration will 
be given to the availability of infrastructure and services and takes into account access 
to transport, employment and any environmental constraints. This does not necessarily 
mean that growth will happen everywhere. 
STRATEGIC ALLOCATION -LINCOLNSHIRE LAKES 
4.47 The Lincolnshire Lakes scheme was originally established in the LDF Core Strategy and 
Lincolnshire Lakes Area Action Plan (AAP) as a high quality residential, business and 
leisure location centred around a unique and breath-taking network of lakes, natural 
water bodies and green infrastructure. The council still recognises the importance of the 
Lincolnshire Lakes in re-positioning North Lincolnshire as a location for growth and 
investment. 
4.48 The Lincolnshire Lakes AAP, adopted in May 2016, was supported by a significant 
evidence base that justified the approach to bring forward the site. Much of the evidence 
base is considered to be relevant to the policy below; however, there has been some 
change in the Council approach to deliver the critical infrastructure ahead of village 
development to ensure the site is safe in terms of flood risk and connected to the strategic 
highway network. This issue has affected the timescales proposed by the AAP for 
delivery of the Lincolnshire Lakes and has resulted in the policy requirement for 2,000 
dwellings to be delivered over the plan period to 2038. However, the Council ambition to 
deliver Lincolnshire Lakes and create sustainable village communities within a waterside 
setting remains unchanged. 
4.49 The Council also adopted the Lincolnshire Lakes Strategic Design Guide to set out a site 
wide masterplan and design code to guide development in the area. It is the intention of 
the Council to review this document following adoption of this plan to inform the 
production of Lincolnshire Lakes Supplementary Planning Document (SPD). This 
document will set out a site wide masterplan and design code to guide development at 
Lincolnshire Lakes. 
4.50 The vision for Lincolnshire Lakes is to create an environment that will attract and retain 
skilled residents and investors in the sub-region and place North Lincolnshire on a new 
economic trajectory. The vision will create a major new sustainable waterside setting, 
with a strong network of linked blue and green spaces, high quality new social 
infrastructure and a strategic mixed use area and district centre, forming an urban fringe 
of national importance, providing a gateway entrance to the town and a focus for 
sustainable development. 
4.51 Lincolnshire Lakes builds on the rural heritage and Garden City traditions of North 
Lincolnshire through the creation of new village settlements, each with a unique sense of 
place development through the use of landmarks, gateways, key buildings, framing and 
enhancing views integrated with lakes and water areas. New and existing residents 
should benefit from a range of social infrastructure, community facilities and increased 
flood resilience creating a much sought-after village life. 
4.52 By 2038, the first phase of the Lincolnshire Lakes development will be delivered. This will 
comprise of a series of villages within a waterside setting, including 2150 new homes, 
local centres, strategic mixed use areas, blue and green infrastructure creating 
sustainable communities. Additional phases will come forward post 2038 in the future 
growth areas identified within inset 87. 
Page 50 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 4.53 Three new sustainable villages are proposed for allocation in the new Local Plan to 
deliver the required 2,150 dwellings. However, these villages are more than just housing 
areas. NPPF makes it clear that in order to promote healthy communities there should be 
an opportunity for all sections of the community to interact. This requires positive 
planning of shared spaces, community facilities (such as shops, meeting places, hotels, 
health and community centres etc.) and other services to help to deliver sustainable 
communities. The Strategic Mixed Use Area, District Centre and Local Service Centres at 
the Lincolnshire Lakes will accommodate many of these functions, and will effectively 
provide the range of day to day retail and employment uses, alongside community uses 
which will be at a scale to help serve the people who live and work in this area. . Two of 
the villages, each with local centre, will be delivered through the Northern Strategic 
Allocation (SS7-1) with the further third village and local centre through the Southern 
Strategic Allocation (SS7-2). 
4.54 The advanced manufacturing uses will be delivered as part of the strategic mixed use 
area. Advanced manufacturing involves the use of innovative technologies and 
methodologies for improved competitiveness in the manufacturing sectors. 
4.55 The development a new 25.15ha advanced manufacturing park will facilitate new and 
evolving industry, building on our strengths, facilitate and accelerate the process of new 
technologies to get graduates into small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and 
develop economic growth within our hardest to reach communities. Underpinning this 
will be the transformation of Scunthorpe’s housing market. The aim of advanced 
manufacturing is to: 
• Enhance output 
• Increase: 
• added value 
• quality 
• responsiveness to market 
• flexibility 
4.56 The advanced manufacturing uses within the strategic mixed use area will combine 
manufacturing facilities alongside an innovation centre, which will bring together the 
public, private and education sector to collaborate on research and development 
projects, to explore decarbonisation, renewable energies and productivity improvements 
within existing and new markets. The Advanced Manufacturing Park at Lincolnshire 
Lakes could be the first carbon neutral advanced manufacturing park in the UK, 
supported by world class Research and Development to translational to prototype to 
assembly / manufacture we will aim to climb up this continuum of Manufacturing in the 
UK. 
4.57 Blue and green infrastructure will be delivered as part of the strategic allocation, 
including a number of strategic green linkages between the villages and the existing 
urban area. These linkages will perform a multi-functional role for recreation, movement, 
biodiversity and flood mitigation. The flood mitigation solution must also include a fully 
considered geotechnical assessment demonstrating that the proposed flood mitigation 
solution is deliverable. 
4.58 To deliver Lincolnshire Lakes, significant infrastructure improvements will be required. 
The Lincolnshire Lakes Flood Defence scheme, comprising of 3.8km of continuous steel 
sheet piling, is now completed (although some minor associated work to prevent 
increased risk to third parties in future is ongoing). This development forms part of the 
overall flood mitigation solution for Lincolnshire Lakes to ensure future residents are safe. 
4.59 Lincolnshire Lakes will also provide greater connectivity between Scunthorpe, and the 
surrounding villages, with the strategic highway network through the provision of two 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 51 new junctions, following the de-trunking and de-classification of the M181 motorway. 
Work has commenced to construct the northern junction with an estimated completion 
date of Spring 2021. The southern terminating junction was granted consent by the local 
planning authority in January 2019. Alongside these strategic infrastructure 
interventions, green and blue infrastructure will be required to interlink these 
communities providing for recreational and leisure opportunities, biodiversity 
enhancement and surface water attenuation. 
POLICY SS7: STRATEGIC SITE ALLOCATION – LINCOLNSHIRE LAKES 
Vision 
1. By 2038, the first phase of Lincolnshire Lakes will deliver 2150 dwellings by creating 
three sustainable villages in a waterside setting, to transform the western gateway to 
Scunthorpe and bring regeneration, in addition to providing much needed homes for 
North Lincolnshire. 25ha of new employment, leisure and community land within the 
strategic mixed use area and district centre will be developed to provide jobs and 
promote thriving, sustainable communities at Lincolnshire Lakes. 
Masterplanning and Design 
2. Development will be required to be comprehensively masterplanned and phased 
appropriately to ensure the necessary infrastructure is provided, alongside residential 
development, to enable the new communities to flourish. Each allocation will deliver 
attractive, high quality design incorporating sustainable development principles, 
adopting sustainable construction methods, and using appropriate densities within 
the Lincolnshire Lakes area. Any application will be required to provide a 
comprehensive masterplan, including linkages to adjacent sites, and supply design 
codes in accordance with Policy DM1 Design codes, will be utilised to ensure 
distinctive, high quality design outcomes for the development. This will be provided 
through the Lincolnshire Lakes Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) that will 
update the existing Lincolnshire Lakes Strategic Design Guide. 
Flood Risk and Drainage 
3. All proposals will be required to submit a Flood Risk and Drainage Assessment in 
accordance with the site-wide Lincolnshire Lakes Flood Risk Assessment and 
Lincolnshire Lakes Drainage Strategy. In order to meet the minimum acceptable flood 
risk standard, the minimum floor level of proposed new development should be no 
lower than the 0.5% AEP plus Climate change flood level, plus 300mm freeboard 
allowance. Minimum floor levels for proposed new development should be checked 
against updated flood levels for the 0.1% AEP plus climate change event. An 
Integrated Flood Evacuation Plan will be prepared and implemented by the council, for 
the Lincolnshire Lakes development and the existing surrounding villages, through 
negotiations with individual developers and emergency planners. The plan will require 
a safe access route to be provided between the villages and Burringham and 
Gunness and the Lincolnshire Lakes development. The drainage of new development 
shall be designed to reduce surface water run-off rates to include the implementation 
of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SUDS), unless it can be demonstrated that it is not 
technically feasible. Surface Water should be managed in accordance with the 
Drainage Hierarchy, with methods to re-use and recycle water at source, employed 
where feasible to achieve high water efficiency in accordance with Policy DQE5: 
Managing Flood Risk and Policy DQE6: Sustainable Drainage Systems in this Plan. 
Blue and Green Infrastructure 
4. The Lincolnshire Lakes area will incorporate an interconnected network of good-
quality, multi-functional green infrastructure, including an adequate supply of different 
Page 52 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 7 types of open space, in accordance with Policy DQE11: Green Infrastructure Network, 
Policy CSC3: Protection and Provision of Open Space, Sports and Recreation Facilities 
and Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity in this Plan. 
5. Planning applications should also assess the specific impact of development 
proposals on biodiversity and associated opportunities for ecological protection and 
enhancement within each strategic allocation and surrounding area to provide 
biodiversity net gain. Planning applications should include proposals for biodiversity 
mitigation and enhancement should take into account Biodiversity Opportunity 
Mapping and demonstrate how linkages will be made within the strategic allocation 
and into the greater wildlife network. 
6. Existing trees, hedgerows (where practicable), drains and ditches should be retained 
and be integrated into the new development and landscape structure to provide for 
ecological protection and enhancement. Adjacent areas of biodiversity interest and 
amenity importance must be protected, enhanced, and integrated into the new 
development. 
Transport 
The council will support the de-trunking of the M181 and the creation of the M181 
Southern and Northern junctions to provide connectivity to Scunthorpe and the M180. 
The existing B1450 ,Burringham Road, will be upgraded to increase capacity. This will 
include widening, improvement works to the Scotter Road junction and new 
connection to the southern terminating junction. A new east/west link road will be 
required to provide connectivity between the existing urban area, new villages and 
strategic highway network at the northern junction. A new Primary Route linking the 
northern and southern allocation is required. Off-site highway works will be required 
to improve the junctions of Scotter Road with Brumby Wood Lane, South Park 
Industrial Estate and Moorwell Road. All new development will be required to provide 
footways and cycleways to promote sustainable transport that connect into the wider 
sustainable transport network. 
Housing 
8. The Lincolnshire Lakes will deliver an appropriate mix of house types and tenures to 
reflect the housing need in accordance with Policy H2. Development will comprise of: 
a. 1,275 dwellings in Northern Strategic Allocation 
b. 875 dwellings in Southern Strategic Allocation 
c. 25.15ha of employment, and supporting community and leisure land in the Strategic 
Mixed Used Area 
9. All development at Lincolnshire Lakes will be required to accord with the principles of 
this policy and all other relevant policies in this Plan, including Policy DQE3: 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity. 
POLICY SS7-1: NORTHERN STRATEGIC ALLOCATION 
10. The Northern Strategic Allocation should be designed in a way to create an attractive 
and landscaped transition between the urban area and new villages. To achieve this, 
proposals are required to meet the following development requirements: 
a. A minimum of 1,275 high quality sustainable dwellings in accordance with policy 
DM1. 
b. Two local centres which will act as the focus for community activity including a 
minimum of one small convenience store each (up to 700sqm) and allowances for 
other commercial, business, service and community uses to facilitate vibrant and 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 53 viable communities. These uses shall comprise of restaurants or cafes, professional 
services, a creche and public house. The local centre must also include a building 
suitable to be used as a health centre and community hall. 
c. A new three form entry primary school and associated playing pitches will be provided 
of a scale which will meet the expected requirement for school places generated by 
the new housing development. The primary school should be readily accessible to 
public transport, walking and cycling routes. 
d. A minimum of 40ha of land for blue/green infrastructure as allocated in inset map 87. 
e. Lakes, ponds and wetlands providing a minimum of 35,150 cubic metres of surface 
water attenuation in addition to habitat creation, biodiversity enhancement and 
recreational opportunities. The creation of small ponds and wetlands to provide for 
biodiversity enhancement through new habitat creation will be encouraged. Areas of 
new habitat creation should include specific provision for water vole. 
f. New areas of woodland, acid grassland, neutral grassland, ditches, swales, wetland 
and ponds should be established to provide for biodiversity enhancement through 
new habitat creation. 
g. Strategic Green linkages will need to be integrated within the strategic allocation 
including Warping drain and the eastern stretch of Brumby Common Lane. 
h. Small scale opportunities to deliver ecological enhancements within the built 
environment should be provided. New habitat creation may take the form of, but not 
be limited to; green and brown walls and roofs, bird and bat habitat boxes, bird and 
bat bricks, bat lofts, hibernacula, stone and log piles. These should be concentrated 
near areas of woodland and wetland. 
11. Development in northern strategic allocation should conform to the following 
masterplanning principles: 
a. Access should be delivered from the De-Trunked M181 Northern Junction with 
secondary access and Scotter Road South following upgrades to its junction with 
Brumby Common Lane with linkages through the East-West link road. Access to the 
southern portion should be delivered from the De-Trunked M181 Southern Junction 
and the B1450 Burringham Road with links through the allocation on the primary 
route. 
b. A non-motorised user route should be created utilising the former Brumby Common 
Lane running east/west through the site and utilize the former M181 overbridge to 
allow access to the Strategic Mixed Use Area. 
c. Dwellings adjacent to the lakes and other areas of the public realm (including, ponds, 
swales and parks) should be designed so they front the waterside or green space to 
maximise opportunities for natural surveillance in addition to promoting the scenic 
value and providing a high quality housing environment for North Lincolnshire. 
d. Higher density housing should be located in the centre of the village and within the 
surroundings of the Local Centre, with lower densities allowed towards the village 
fringe. 
e. Buildings and plots should be suitably spaced so that fingers of green infrastructure 
and SuDs features can permeate the built form. 
f. Strategic Green Infrastructure is required to maintain clear separation distances 
between the new villages and existing development. 
g. Landscaping buffers should be created to the northern, eastern and western fringe of 
the allocation. 
Page 54 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) h. Existing woodland (Brumby Grove and Brumby Common), mature trees and 
hedgerows should be retained within the new development, sensitively arranged to 
create a parkland character. 
i. Biodiversity enhancement, such as bat lofts, in the built environment should be 
concentrated near areas of woodland and wetland. 
j. Local Centres must be designed to function as Focal Points with appropriate 
establishments included to fulfil this role. 
k. Design features should be incorporated the Primary Route road network to create a 
sense of arrival at Lincolnshire Lakes at key gateways. 
POLICY SS7-2: SOUTHERN STRATEGIC ALLOCATION 
12. The Southern Strategic Allocation should be designed in a way to create an attractive 
and seamless transition between the urban area and new villages. To achieve this, 
proposals are required to meet the following development requirements: 
a. A minimum of 875 high quality sustainable dwellings in accordance with policy DM1. 
b. A local centre which will act as the focus for community activity including a minimum 
of one small convenience store (retail up to 500sqm) and allowances for other 
commercial, business, service and community uses to facilitate vibrant and viable 
communities. These uses shall comprise of restaurants or cafes), professional services, 
a creche and public house. The local centre must also include a building suitable to be 
used as a health centre and community hall. 
c. A minimum of 70ha of land for blue/green infrastructure as allocated in inset map 87. 
d. Lakes, ponds and wetlands providing a minimum of 95,050 cubic metres of surface 
water attenuation in addition to habitat creation, biodiversity enhancement and 
recreational opportunities. The creation of small ponds and wetlands to provide for 
biodiversity enhancement through new habitat creation is encouraged. 
e. New areas of woodland, acid grassland, neutral grassland, ditches, swales, wetland 
and ponds should be established to provide for biodiversity enhancement through 
new habitat creation. 
f. Strategic Green linkages will need to be integrated within the strategic allocation. 
g. Small scale opportunities to deliver ecological enhancements within the built 
environment should be provided. New habitat creation may take the form of, but not 
be limited to, green and brown walls and roofs, bird and bat habitat boxes, bird and 
bat bricks, bat lofts, hibernacula, stone and log piles. These should be concentrated 
near areas of woodland and wetland. 
13. Development in northern strategic allocation should conform to the following 
masterplanning principles: 
a. Access should be delivered from the De-Trunked M181 Southern Junction and the 
B1450 Burringham Road with secondary access and links through to Scotter Road 
South along the primary route. 
b. A non-motorised user route should be created utilising the former B1450 Burringham 
Road M181 overbridge to allow non-motorised traffic to travel from the Southern 
Strategic Allocation to the future development area to the west. 
c. Dwellings adjacent to the lakes and other areas of the public realm (including, ponds, 
swales and parks) should be designed so they front the waterside or green space to 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 55 maximise opportunities for natural surveillance in addition to promoting the scenic 
value and providing a high quality housing environment for North Lincolnshire. 
d. Higher density housing should be located in the centre of the village and within the 
surroundings of the Local Centre, with lower densities allowed towards the village 
fringe. 
e. Buildings and plots should be suitably spaced so that fingers of green infrastructure 
and SuDs features can permeate the built form. 
f. Strategic Green Infrastructure is required to maintain clear separation distances 
between the new villages and existing development. 
g. Landscaping buffers should be created to the southern, eastern and western fringe of 
the allocation. 
h. Biodiversity enhancement, such as bat lofts, in the built environment should be 
concentrated near areas of woodland and wetland. 
i. Local Centres must be designed to function as Focal Points with appropriate 
establishments included to fulfil this role. 
j. Design features should be incorporated the Primary Route road network to create a 
sense of arrival at Lincolnshire Lakes at key gateways. 
POLICY SS7-3: STRATEGIC MIXED USE ALLOCATION 
14. The Strategic Mixed Use Area and District Centre will accommodate up to 25.15ha of 
employment land, with supporting community and leisure uses. The following mixture 
of uses will be supported within this allocation: 
Strategic Mixed Use Area Land Uses 
a. Business 
b. Advanced Manufacturing 
c. Hotel and Public House 
District Centre Land Uses 
d. Restaurant or Café 
e. Financial and Professional Services 
f. Hot Food Takeaway 
g. Gymnasium 
h. Health Centre 
i. Creche 
j. Retail (E(a)) of which no more than shall exceed 1,800sqm of retail floorspace for the 
sale of convenience goods and 1,900sqm retail floorspace for the sale of comparison 
goods. 
k. A minimum of 7ha of land for blue/green infrastructure as allocated on inset map 87. 
l. New areas of woodland, acid grassland, neutral grassland, ditches, swales, wetland 
and ponds should be established to provide for biodiversity enhancement through 
new habitat creation. 
Page 56 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) m. The creation of small ponds and wetlands to provide for biodiversity enhancement 
through new habitat creation is encouraged. 
n. Areas of new habitat creation should include specific provision for water vole. 
o. Strategic Green linkages will need to be integrated within the strategic allocation. 
p. Small scale opportunities to deliver ecological enhancements within the built 
environment should be provided. New habitat creation may take the form of, but not 
be limited to; green and brown walls and roofs, bird and bat habitat boxes, bird and 
bat bricks, bat lofts, hibernacula, stone and log piles and ponds. These should be 
concentrated near areas of woodland and wetland. 
15. The flood mitigation solution must also include a fully considered geotechnical 
assessment demonstrating that the proposed flood mitigation solution is deliverable 
within the allocation boundary. 
16. Access should be delivered from the De-trunked M181 Northern Junction. 
EMPLOYMENT LAND REQUIREMENT 
4.60 Oxford Economics was appointed by the Council during mid 2020 to prepare an 
economic forecast that evaluated the extent of anticipated job growth over the plan 
period up to 2038. 
4.61 The Oxford Economics forecasting was run during August 2020 and considered a range 
of factors alongside economic activity trends and population growth. The latest 
application of the model forecasts approximately 10,300 jobs being generated over the 
plan period which equates to an increase of 12.7% for the period 2017 - 2038. It is 
specifically noted that the inputs into the model had been updated to mid 2020, to reflect 
recent economic recovery, the latest population projections and the extent of known 
projects. 
4.62 5000 new jobs are forecast to be created up to 2038 under the traditional Use Class E 
(former use B1a, B1b and B1c only), B2 and B8 categories which relates to 48% of the 
total jobs growth for North Lincolnshire. Non-industrial uses (i.e. non Use Class E(g), B2 
and B8 uses) have shown an increase in job growth with the service sector showing 
particular improvement. It is noted that a number of other sectors are showing signs of 
decline within North Lincolnshire including the recovering steel products sector classified 
under metal products . Over 52% of job creation is forecast to be generated from the 
Public Services sector such as Education and Health and other non E(g), B2 and B8 uses. 
4.63 The 2020 Oxford Economics forecasts took into account the economic thrust of the Local 
Enterprise Partnerships in addition to business enquiries to establish the potential for 
growth going forward. 
CALCULATION OF THE LAND REQUIREMENT 
4.64 The Local Plan’s employment land requirement has been calculated by using the 
forecasted E(g), B2, B8 job figure which have been translated to the floorspace required 
by using a density allowance and an assessment of site coverage of built form. See 
Table 4.3. 
4.65 The E(g), B2, B8 job forecast has then been applied to standard employment densities, 
as used within the Employment Land Review which are consistent with the HCA’s 
Employment Density Guide. Floorspace requirements were converted to land take 
requirements based on the built site coverage. It is noted that the identified employment 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 57 land figure should be considered as a minimum requirement subject to review as more 
evidence becomes available. 
4.66 In order to ensure appropriate flexibility and choice, the Employment Land Review report 
recommended the use of an additional buffer of 50% of the total requirement, to ensure 
appropriate flexibility and choice is available for operators. This results in a minimum land 
requirement, as identified in the Publication Draft Local Plan of 131.7ha. 
TABLE 4.3 EMPLOYMENT LAND REQUIREMENT CALCULATION 
Total Land Requirement E(g)(i) and 
E(g)(ii) E(g)(iii) /B2 B8 Total 
Jobs Total 2017 -2038 900 0 5,000 
NLC Job Density (job/sq. m) 19 50 80 
Total Floorspace (sq. m) 15.200 0 336,000 353,100 
Site Coverage 40% 40% 40% 
Land Requirement (Ha) 3.8 0 84 87.8 
50% Buffer (Ha) 1.9 0 42 43.9 
Total land Requirement (ha) 2017-2038) 5.7 0 126 131.7 
POLICY SS8: EMPLOYMENT LAND REQUIREMENT (INCLUDING STRATEGIC
EMPLOYMENT SITES) 
1. Over the period 2020 to 2038 provision will be made to deliver around 131.7 hectares 
of employment land. 
2. The employment land requirement will be provided for in line with the overall 
Development Strategy identified in Policy SS2 and will be delivered by the sites 
allocated under Policy EC1 Employment Land Supply. 
3. In addition to the Employment Sites listed under EC1 the following Strategic 
Employment sites have also been identified: -
STRATEGIC ALLOCATIONS 
Location Site 
Reference Policy Name Land-use Strategic Allocation site areas 
ha 
South Humber Bank SS10 South Humber Bank E(g), B2, B8 Estuary Related
including energy generation 900 
North Killingholme SS9 North Killingholme
Airfield E(g), B2, B8 138 
Where the proposal is for business development under E(g) Use Class (i.e. offices, research and 
development, or other industrial processes), the local planning authority may seek to apply 
conditions limiting the ability to change use to other uses within Use Class E without the need 
for planning permission. 
Proposals for the removal or the variation of condition where the LPA has restricted the use to 
E (G) Use Class (i.e. offices, research and development, or other industrial processes) to permit 
other uses under E (g) Classes beyond E(g) will only be acceptable where the sequential test 
against the network and hierarchy of town centres as defined in Policy TC1 is passed or where 
the proposed use can be shown to be clearly ancillary to existing uses on the site. 
Page 58 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) NORTH KILLINGHOLME AIRFIELD 
4.67 North Killingholme Airfield is located to the west of North and South Killingholme villages 
and to the north of the A160. Further to the east is the South Humber Bank employment 
allocation which is of regional and national significance and offers major development 
opportunities. 
4.68 The site is previously developed land and forms part of a former World War II airfield 
including buildings and former runways/access strips, although there are large tracts of 
undeveloped agricultural land that surrounds the former runways. The site is surrounded 
by agricultural land to the north, south and west. There are a significant number of 
existing businesses that have developed along Lancaster Approach and along former 
runways/service strips. 
4.69 The site is accessed from C131 Top Road, which joins the A160 at South Killingholme. 
Weight limits are in place along the southern section of Top Road, where residential 
properties adjoin the highway. The site is approximately 3km from Ulceby railway station 
and is generally poorly served by public transport. 
Proposed Development 
4.70 Development of this site would broaden North Lincolnshire’s portfolio of future 
employment sites and promote economic diversity. Its location, close to the South 
Humber Bank employment allocation, would provide scope to displace some land-
intensive uses (for example car storage) and free up the South Humber Bank area for 
estuary-related uses. 
4.71 North Killingholme Airfield is therefore suitable for estuary related E (Offices/Light 
Industrial) and B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses, subject to improvements to the 
currently outdated infrastructure. 
4.72 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. As the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood Risk 
Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall level of 
flood risk. 
4.73 Until the A160/A180 Port of Immingham Improvement scheme has been completed, 
alternative routes to the site, avoiding C131 Top Road should be investigated, to address 
the numerous concerns made by adjacent residents. All access arrangements will need 
to be agreed with the Highway Authority. 
4.74 This allocation falls close to the Humber Estuary SAC, SPA and Ramsar site. 
4.75 There are a number of important designated heritage assets in the vicinity of this 
allocation, including a line of Scheduled Monuments in East Halton and North 
Killingholme parishes and a Grade I Listed Church at East Halton. An assessment of the 
impact of proposals upon these assets will be required and the scheme will need to 
demonstrate how those elements which contribute to their significance will be 
conserved. 
4.76 The Council is currently looking at possible alternative access arrangements for the North 
Killingholme Airfield site and will support the development of an alternative access in 
addition to the existing Lancaster Way roadway. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 59 POLICY SS9: LAND AT NORTH KILLINGHOLME AIRFIELD 
1. Land at North Killingholme Airfield (138.21ha) is allocated for employment use. The 
site will be developed in accordance to the following site specific criteria: 
Employment Mix 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g), and B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses. 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access points and improvements to Lancaster Approach will need to be 
agreed with the Highways Authority. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required for all large developments. 
The Interim Planning Guidance will be applied to all developments in the area and 
financial contributions sought from developers who exceed the threshold for the 
number of vehicular trips. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
d. An Ecological Survey is required. 
e. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement, is 
required that shows how the site can be screened. 
Heritage 
f. An assessment will need to be undertaken of the impact of any proposals upon those 
elements which contribute to the significance of designated assets within the vicinity, 
especially the Scheduled Monuments to the east of this allocation and the Grade I 
Listed Church at East Halton. Development proposals should ensure that those 
elements which contribute to their significance are conserved. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
g. Infrastructure upgrades may be required to South Killingholme sewage treatment 
works. 
h. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
i. Significant improvements to existing internal infrastructure is required. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
4.77 Development of Policy SS9 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery of the 
site is expected throughout the plan period and to be completed by 2038. 
4.78 Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
Page 60 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) STRATEGIC ALLOCATION – EMPLOYMENT 
4.79 Land at the South Humber Bank is the area’s main strategic employment site. It is of 
regional and national significance being the last undeveloped employment land fronting 
a deep-water estuary in the UK. North Lincolnshire Council seeks to develop the South 
Humber Bank as a Global Gateway for the north of England by designating 900ha for 
employment uses. The South Humber Bank employment area is currently occupied by a 
range of estuary-related industrial operators, such as large oil, gas and electricity 
companies, riverside terminal facilities and associated activities including storage, 
processing and distribution. The area is already home to a number of chemical 
companies which provide 27% of the UK’s oil refinery capacity. It is currently safeguarded 
and the current vision is to ensure that opportunities are maximised around the ports for 
chemical industries and power generation, including renewable energy and off-shore 
wind manufacturing. 
4.80 Recent proposals have seen the approval of the Able Logistic Park, a major port related 
development on land covering an area of around 939 acres (380ha). It includes plans for 
the creation of transport depots, warehousing and external storage areas, offices, a 
business park and motel. North Lincolnshire is also a major energy capital in terms of 
energy generation. This includes the emerging renewable energy and off-shore wind 
sectors. In essence, an “Energy Corridor” within the South Humber Bank has been formed 
which is expected to play a formative role in driving North Lincolnshire’s economic 
growth and prosperity. The “Energy Corridor” also extends into North East Lincolnshire 
and is pivotal in the economic success and prosperity for both authorities. 
4.81 A key component of the “Energy Corridor” is Able UK’s Marine Energy Park (AMEP) that 
comprises the construction of a new quay approximately 1,279m long together with 
associated onshore facilities. This has the potential to accommodate wind turbine 
manufacture, assembly and commissioning covering a site of approximately 245ha of 
existing terrestrial land and 55ha of the existing estuary which has been approved by the 
Secretary of State. The two Able sites also form part of the Humber Enterprise Zone (EZ), 
the largest in the UK with the EZ supporting growth in ports, logistics and renewables 
and the region’s ambition to become a leading national and international centre for the 
renewables sector. 
4.82 North Lincolnshire is fast becoming a major energy capital in terms of energy generation 
which includes the emerging renewable energy and off-shore wind sectors. Land at the 
South Humber Bank is therefore allocated as a Strategic Employment Site for E (former 
use B1a, B1b and B1c only), B2, and B8 Estuary Related uses including energy 
generation to support these sectors. The development of North Killingholme Airfield is 
seen as an essential and integral part of the nearby South Humber Bank proposal and is, 
therefore, also identified as a Strategic Employment Site in order to assist in the 
deliverability of the South Humber Bank. North Killingholme Airfield is to be utilised, but 
not solely, for land intensive storage and distribution uses that would effectively sterilise 
prime industrial land set adjacent to the Humber Estuary. Other suitable uses for North 
Killingholme Airfield include energy generation (such as energy from waste) related 
depending on the scale and impact of the proposal. 
SOUTH HUMBER BANK 
4.83 The South Humber Bank (SHB) site is an expansive area of flat land located on the 
southern bank of the Humber Estuary. The site, although largely greenfield and isolated 
from a main built-up urban area, is located within an existing industrial port landscape. 
The two existing large ports at Immingham and Grimsby (collectively one port) and the 
Humber Sea Terminal are the busiest ports in the UK by tonnage. The principle of 
developing the South Humber Bank for employment uses was identified in planning 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 61 terms in 1955 and in the early 1960’s. This led to the development of large scale industry, 
including oil refineries. Now there are two large oil refineries, three energy plants and 
various other port related developments. The undeveloped area has large areas of 
agricultural use and some previously developed land. 
PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT 
4.84 The policy identifies a need for 900 hectares (gross area) of E(g), B2 (General Industry) 
and B8 (Storage and Distribution) port related activities to take special advantage of its 
location within an existing port environment, flat topography and being adjacent to a 
deep water channel of the Humber Estuary. The land is allocated between and around 
the two existing ports of Grimsby and Immingham and the Humber Sea Terminal and 
includes preferred sites for waterbird mitigation. 
4.85 The site is uniquely located and offers special advantages with major port extension land 
adjacent to Grimsby and Immingham Port, which collectively with Grimsby Port forms 
the busiest port in the UK by tonnage handled. The deep water channel of the Humber 
Estuary offers the opportunity to create a new port along the frontage of the site 
between Immingham Port and the Humber Sea Terminal, provided such a proposal can 
pass the tests of the Habitats Regulations. 
4.86 The South Humber Bank employment site is North Lincolnshire Council’s premier 
employment site and is a large part of the South Humber Gateway, taking up a four mile 
area fronting the Humber Estuary. The SHB employment allocation is one of the last 
undeveloped deep-water estuaries in Europe and provides a unique opportunity for the 
economy of North Lincolnshire and the Humber to create high value and substantial 
employment opportunities on a transformational scale. It is therefore vital that this 
natural asset is developed so as to maximise the transformational economic potential of 
the site and must be safeguarded from piecemeal proposals and any investments that 
do not meet this maxim. It is therefore essential that the site is developed to maximise 
employment opportunities equivalent to the site’s strategic offer by creating major 
employment, high job densities and inward investment. 
4.87 It will be important to respect the international, national and local nature conservation 
sites designated within and adjacent to the site. On a case by case basis each individual 
development will be assessed to test whether its own EIA and Appropriate Assessment 
needs to be undertaken. A screening exercise will be carried out by the competent 
authority. 
4.88 Land in the SHB is used by significant numbers of waterbirds related to the Humber 
Estuary SPA and Ramsar site. The loss of this land (as proposed by the allocation) means 
that it’s not possible to rule out an adverse effect on the integrity of these international 
sites. In order to mitigate against this adverse effect a Strategic Mitigation Plan for North 
Lincolnshire has been prepared. The Council has in recent years formed a collaborative 
framework of partners to help identify this mitigation and provide advice on how it might 
be delivered. The Mitigation Strategy for North Lincolnshire covers the SHB employment 
area. Equivalent documents have been produced by North East Lincolnshire Council. 
Taken together, the two independent Strategy documents form the Strategic Mitigation 
Strategy for the whole of the SHB. 
4.89 The original SHB Mitigation Strategy was prepared during the same period as two major 
project proposals for port related development on Halton Marsh and Killingholme Marsh. 
Both projects have been through ‘appropriate assessment’. Natural England has agreed 
that waterbird mitigation for these proposals are acceptable as part of the Strategic 
Mitigation Plan. These mitigation areas within the SHB employment allocation (in relation 
to the Able UK Marine Energy Park (AMEP) at Killingholme Marshes and Able Logistics 
Page 62 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Park (ALP) at Halton Marshes) are in compliance with the Mitigation Strategy Plan for 
North Lincolnshire. 
4.90 Able UK have since brought forward an agreed alternative mitigation proposal on one 
site at Halton Marshes of at least equivalent area to that agreed under the ALP and 
AMEP projects. This approach has been agreed by the conservation groups and is 
endorsed by this plan. 
4.91 This approach will keep Policy SS10 flexible and give the policy longevity, without future 
cause to involve formal amendments to the Local Plan or possible Local Plan departure 
procedures. In effect the Mitigation Strategy for North Lincolnshire is a ‘living document’ 
that will provide continual updated robust evidence towards delivering and maintaining 
mitigation sites. There are options for waterbird mitigation/compensation to be provided 
beyond the boundaries of the SHB employment allocation as long as this does not affect 
the ability of the designated site to meet its conservation objectives. Other proposals 
which may come forward on the remainder of the SHB employment allocation (other 
than the proposed AMEP and ALP projects) will have to pass the tests of the Habitats 
Regulations and provide additional mitigation if required and not already functionally linked to 
that identified within the Mitigation Strategy.” 
4.92 The main transport documents that are relevant to the site are: North Lincolnshire’s Local 
Transport Plan 3 (2011 – 2026), the South Humber Bank Transport Strategy 2008 
(updated 2010) and the Interim Planning Guidance for the South Humber Gateway 
(2011). The Transport Strategy proposes a package of transport infrastructure 
improvements that could be implemented to improve access to the South Humber 
Gateway and facilitate development. The Interim Planning Guidance is a document 
approved by the council to be used as a financial tool towards calculating contributions, 
as a basis for negotiation with potential developers of the site. A Transport Assessment 
will be required for each development in the area and it is recommended that developers 
contact the Transport Planning Team to discuss the scope prior to starting work. 
Applications should be supported by robust Travel Plans, where appropriate, which 
should demonstrate how the use of sustainable transport modes will be promoted and 
encouraged. The council is looking to produce an International Gateways: Area Wide 
Travel Plan, including the South Humber Gateway. All new and existing businesses/ 
developers will be expected to sign up to it. 
4.93 The South Humber Gateway is accessed via the local road network of Rosper Road, 
Eastfield Road and Top Road, via the A160/A180. The A160/A180 has seen significant 
highway improvements with the £96.6M Highways England’s A160 Port of Immingham 
Improvement Scheme completed in 2017. 
4.94 Existing railway lines require some improvements to line speeds and signalling to offer a 
more sustainable method of transporting freight and additional capacity. Network Rail is 
committed to some of these improvements. At present there are rail sidings serving 
Conoco Phillips and Lindsey Oil refineries and serving the Humber Sea Terminal. Line 
speed and signalling improvements have recently been completed along the Immingham 
to Doncaster rail line to encourage faster average speeds and move train paths more 
efficiently. The council is working with Network Rail on securing Gauge Enhancements 
from the Ports out to the East Coast Main Line in Doncaster. By heightening bridges and 
widening platforms it achieves a standard of W10 and W12 which enables the transport 
of bigger containers and European containers out of the ports, increasing economic 
competitiveness as a leading UK port. These improvements are in Network Rail’s 
Northern Route Utilisation Strategy. 
4.95 The expected port related activities on the site will in the main be heavy industrial users 
meaning pollution and waste control measures will be crucial to the success of the site in 
sustainability terms. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 63 4.96 The South Humber Bank is a sensitive site in terms of the nearness of existing 
communities and major international, national and local nature conservation 
designations and the use of materials on site in construction and design should be 
managed in a way that recognises its sensitive position. The protection of residential 
amenity and construction timing so as not to disturb the nature conservation of the area 
(for example wintering birds) is crucial to the successful development of the site. 
4.97 The South Humber Bank Landscaping Initiative (SHBLI) has been in place for many 
years. The SHBLI area’s boundary is as far west as the Skitter Beck (on the western edge 
of North Killingholme Airfield) and as far north as East Halton Skitter. The SHBLI 
deliberately covers a large area because distant wood and copse planting discretely 
located can have a better landscape effect than a large woodland area close to the edge 
of the industry. On site and off site landscaping schemes shall be considered within the 
framework of the South Humber Bank Landscaping Initiative in relation to development 
proposals. 
4.98 The site is for port activities and is therefore necessarily located adjacent to a river. A 
large percentage of the area is within SFRA Flood Risk Zone 2/3a. Some 25% of the site, 
situated approximately west of the Humber Sea Terminal, is located in Flood Zone 1. 
Flood Risk Assessments (FRAs) will therefore be required for individual developments 
across the majority of the site and will be guided by the SFRA for North and North East 
Lincolnshire and the NPPF and its associated guidance on flood risk and development. 
4.99 The Humber Flood Risk Management Strategy March 2008 identifies the flood defences 
between the Humber Sea Terminal and East Halton Skitter as offering very little 
protection to the land behind. Negotiations are progressing with the Environment 
Agency, Natural England and the SHBGDG towards an amicable resolution. It is likely 
that some developer contribution to flood defences will be necessary. The land within the 
site behind these defences is some 130 hectares and a collaborative solution will be 
reached to benefit all parties involved. The HFRMS is currently being updated through 
Humber2100+. The new Strategy will be a key strategy for North Lincolnshire and the 
wider Humber. In producing this submission draft of the new Local Plan the Council is 
reviewing the relationship with the developing Humber2100+ Strategy. 
4.100 There are a number of important designated heritage assets in the vicinity of this 
allocation including a line of Scheduled Monuments in East Halton and North 
Killingholme parishes. An assessment of the impact of proposals upon these assets will 
be required and the scheme will need to demonstrate how those elements which 
contribute to their significance will be conserved. 
POLICY SS10: STRATEGIC SITE ALLOCATION -SOUTH HUMBER BANK 
1. The South Humber Bank employment site (900 ha- gross area) is allocated as a 
strategic site for port activities to take special advantage of its location, flat 
topography and being adjacent to a deep water channel of the River Humber as an 
extension to Immingham Port and Humber Sea Terminal. The site has a unique 
employment offer. This employment site is a major part of the South Humber 
Gateway which forms a four mile area fronting the Humber estuary. It is one of the last 
undeveloped deep-water estuaries in Europe and provides a unique opportunity for 
the economy of North Lincolnshire and the Humber to create high value and 
substantial employment opportunities on a transformational scale. It is therefore vital 
that this asset is developed so as to maximise the transformational economic 
potential of the site and must be safeguarded from piecemeal proposals and any 
investments that do not meet this maxim. 
Page 64 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 2. The site will be developed with the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should provide only E(g), B2 and B8 industrial land uses and ancillary 
development that are associated with port activities and energy generation proposals, 
including land based development allowing for the potential future development of a 
port that meet the tests of the Habitats Regulations. 
b. The land within the site along the deep-water frontage of the Humber Estuary 
between the Port of Immingham and the Humber Sea Terminal has special locational 
characteristics and is unique, being one of the last undeveloped deep-water estuaries 
in Europe. New development is therefore required to maximise the potential for high 
value jobs and high job densities and this part of the site will be safeguarded against 
piecemeal development proposals that do not meet these employment maxims. 
c. Development of the site shall only take place if there has been appropriate 
consideration given to the international, national and local protected sites for nature 
conservation. This includes complying with the tests of the Birds and Habitats 
Regulations. 
d. All development proposals within the site will have to comply with the Waterbird 
Mitigation identified in the SHB Mitigation Strategy. The preferred site for an on-site 
waterbird mitigation area at Halton Marsh is indicated on the Proposal Map. Off-site 
mitigation may be required depending on what on-site options are chosen. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required for all large developments. 
f. An ecological assessment will be required which addresses the avoidance, mitigation 
or compensation needed in relation to international, national and locally designated 
sites and protected and priority species. 
g. Pollution and waste control measures must be implemented wherever relevant to the 
proposed development. 
h. Use of materials and development works shall be sensitive to the location. 
i. A structural landscape scheme is required as a buffer to limit the visual impact of 
development and improve the amenity of nearby communities between the western 
edge of the employment site and the villages of South Killingholme, North Killingholme 
and East Halton. 
j. On site and off site landscaping schemes and measurable biodiversity net gains shall 
be considered within the framework of the South Humber Bank Landscaping Initiative 
current Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping and Local Nature Recovery Strategies in 
relation to development proposals. Any landscaping provided should be appropriate 
to the location and sensitivities of nearby habitats and species. 
k. Landscape buffering of at least 15 metres width around the Local Wildlife Sites will be 
required. 
l. A surface water and foul sewage management solution is required to accommodate 
development on the employment site to the satisfaction of the North East Lindsey 
Water Management Board, the Anglian Water Authority and the Environment 
Agency. 
m. A Flood Risk Assessment will be required for individual developments on the majority 
of the site in compliance with National and Local flood risk guidance and Policy DQE5. 
n. Land to the north of the Humber Sea Terminal will require a flood defence 
enhancement scheme to be agreed with the Environment Agency, Natural England 
and landowners in relation to the existing flood defences and proposed development 
behind these flood defences. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 65 o. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. Particular regard will need to be 
undertaken of the impact of any proposals upon those elements which contribute to 
the significance of the Scheduled Monuments to the west of this allocation. 
Development proposals should ensure that those elements which contribute to their 
significance are conserved. 
DEVELOPMENT LIMITS 
4.101 Development limits for each settlement were set out in the existing North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan and the LDF Housing & Employment Land Allocations DPD and are strongly 
supported as a key tool in ensuring that future development occurs in sustainable 
locations. They also ensure that the countryside is protected from inappropriate 
development and no uncontrolled expansion of settlements will take place. 
4.102 The exact extent of development limits will be defined in the Policies Map and insets. 
Development limits will not be applied to those settlements classed as rural settlements 
in the countryside. Development in these locations will only be permitted where it is 
appropriate to the functioning of the countryside. 
POLICY SS11: DEVELOPMENT LIMITS 
1. Development limits will be applied to the Scunthorpe & Bottesford urban area, 
Principal Towns, Large Service Centres, Larger Rural Settlements and Smaller Rural 
Settlements. Development limits will be applied to some Rural Hamlets and Villages 
dependent on their size and character. 
2. In applying development limits the following considerations will be taken into account 
a. Existing development patterns -the development limit will be drawn around the main 
built up area of the settlement. Scattered, sporadic or dispersed development or 
buildings separated from the main body of the settlement by areas of undeveloped 
land, roads or industrial areas will not be included. Where possible, limits should follow 
clearly defined features or constraints such as roads. 
b. Capacity -the ability of the settlement to accommodate future development based on 
existing and proposed infrastructure, on its access to facilities and services and levels 
of public transport. This also includes the availability of previously developed land. 
c. Existing planning consents/development - land with planning consent for residential 
development or community facilities where development has been implemented. 
d. Character - the limit will be drawn to reflect the need to protect and enhance 
settlement character. This means protecting areas of open space or land with the 
characteristics of open countryside within and adjacent to settlements by not 
including them within development limits. Large rear gardens or paddocks stretching 
well out of the villages built form will also be excluded. 
3. Development outside these defined limits will be restricted to that which is essential 
to the functioning of, or to meet a special need associated with the countryside. This 
will include uses such as that related to agriculture, forestry, minerals extraction, 
water, water recycling or wastewater infrastructure or other uses which require a 
countryside location, or that which will contribute to the sustainable development of 
the tourist industry. 
4. The extent of the development limits will be defined on the Policies Map and 
settlement insets. 
Page 66 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5 Meeting Our Housing Need 
INTRODUCTION 
5.1 A key role of the Local Plan, as emphasised by National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF), is to meet, where possible, all identified housing needs and to deliver a wide 
choice of high quality homes, widen opportunities for home ownership and to create 
sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities. This includes meeting the needs of the 
various groups that have differing housing requirements. To significantly boost the 
supply of housing, local planning authorities should use their evidence base to ensure 
that their Local Plan meets fully the objectively assessed needs (OAN) for market and 
affordable housing in their housing market area. This needs to be consistent with the 
policies of the NPPF, including identifying key sites that are critical to the delivery of the 
housing strategy over the plan period. 
5.2 The Local Plan needs to provide sufficient homes in order to meet our local needs and to 
help support the creation of sustainable communities. North Lincolnshire needs more 
homes because: 
• North Lincolnshire’s population is growing 
• People are living longer, with increasing life expectancy 
• It helps to maintain a local labour supply and support economic growth; and 
• We aim to meet the housing need for everyone within North Lincolnshire. 
5.3 Planning Practice Guidance sets out the actions required to identify the need for certain 
types of housing and the needs of different groups which will be addressed through the 
Local Plan. 
5.4 These groups are: 
• Private rented sector 
• Self-build and custom housebuilding 
• Family housing 
• Households with specific needs 
• Student housing 
• Travelling Communities 
• Housing for older people 
HOUSING LAND ALLOCATIONS 
5.5 The housing allocations provide a wide range of different types of sites across North 
Lincolnshire, to ensure choice and variety in the type of new housing that will become 
available over the Plan period, in accordance with the Spatial Distribution Policy SS6. 
5.6 NPPF Paragraph 68 requires local planning authorities to prepare a Strategic Housing 
Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) to establish realistic assumptions about the 
availability, suitability and likely economic viability of land to meet the identified need for 
housing over the plan period. The Planning Practice Guidance requires local planning 
authorities to undertake assessments of land available for economic development at the 
same time as, or combined with, the housing SHLAA. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 67 5.7 The North Lincolnshire Strategic Housing and Economic Land Availability Assessment 
(SHELAA) 2020 is a combined assessment which assesses the amount of land available 
within North Lincolnshire that is potentially available to meet the identified need and 
demand for new employment and housing development. The SHELAA identifies that 
over the plan period there is sufficient ‘developable’ land to provide approximately 
11,000 new dwellings on a range of sites. 
5.8 The housing allocations are set out in Policy H1. It is projected that 7,937 dwellings will 
be delivered on the Housing Allocations and committed sites during the Plan period. 
TABLE 5.1: HOUSING DELIVERY 
Source Number of dwellings 
(net) 
Housing Completions 2020/2021 - 2037/2038 447 
Committed Housing Sites (Deliverable/developable extant planning permissions above
5 dwellings or more 2021 – 2038 2,189 
Proposed Housing Sites 2021-2038 5,301 
Total 7,932 
POLICY H1: SITE ALLOCATIONS 
1. The following sites are allocated for housing development. The anticipated number of 
housing units and the amount of development expected to come forward on each site 
within the plan period are indicative using the minimum density threshold identified in 
Policy H2 and not intended as a cap on development. 
Page 68 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 69 Page 70 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 71 Page 72 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) SCUNTHORPE 
LAND AT PHOENIX PARKWAY PHASE 1 
5.9 The land at Phoenix Parkway is vacant grassland, surrounded by existing residential and 
employment uses and is situated off Phoenix Parkway. Atkinson’s Warren Local Nature 
Reserve is located to the south and west. The site lies within the development limit of 
Scunthorpe. The site is located close to local services and within walking distance of 
Scunthorpe town centre. Within the northern extent of the site a 132kw overhead power 
line runs parallel with Phoenix Parkway. 
Proposed Development 
5.10 This site is currently available for development. The surrounding residential uses, close 
proximity to the town centre and local services makes this a suitable site for residential 
development. The density of development within this locality indicates that 158 
dwellings can be delivered on this site. Affordable housing provision will be expected on 
site. A mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future 
updates. 
5.11 Highway access to the site is off Phoenix Avenue and the location of the vehicle access 
points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. Improved and attractive 
pedestrian and cycle links to the town centre need to be provided. 
5.12 The site is situated across the road from Foxhills Industrial Estate and therefore the 
impact of noise, odour and dust on the site should be assessed. It also lies in close 
proximity to a former steel works and consequently potential land contamination will 
need to be addressed. 
5.13 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 73 Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
5.14 This allocation is 2km from the Humber Estuary SPA, SAC and Ramsar. 
5.15 Land falling under the 132kv overhead power line and running northwards to Phoenix 
Parkway is to be retained as open space. This area has not been included when 
calculating the site density. 
5.16 Landscaping and habitat creation to buffer the Local Nature Reserve would be required. 
POLICY H1P-1: LAND AT PHOENIX PARKWAY PHASE 1 
1. Land at Phoenix Parkway Phase 1 (7.96ha) is allocated for housing (158 dwellings). 
The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact, odour and light pollution associated with the neighbouring industrial site 
together with potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning 
application for residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments 
Page 74 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) for noise, odour, light, and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and 
mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation 
m. Development of Policy H1P-1 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-11 of the plan period. 
LAND AT PHOENIX PARKWAY PHASE 2 
5.17 The land at Phoenix Parkway is vacant grassland, surrounded by existing residential and 
employment uses and is situated off Park Farm Road. This site lies within the 
development limit of Scunthorpe. The site is located close to local services and within 
walking distance of Scunthorpe town centre. 
Proposed Development 
5.18 This site is currently available for development. The surrounding residential uses and 
close proximity to the town centre and local services makes this a suitable site for 
residential development. The density of development within this locality indicates that 40 
dwellings can be delivered on this site. Affordable housing provision will be expected on 
site. A mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future 
updates. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 75 5.19 Highways access to the site is via Park Farm Road/Hanover Walk and the location of the 
vehicle access points will need to be agreed by the Highways Authority. The site is 
located close to local services and within walking distance of Scunthorpe town centre. 
5.20 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
5.21 The site is within close proximity of Foxhills Industrial Estate and therefore, the impact of 
noise, odour and dust on the site should be assessed. It also lies in close proximity to a 
former steel works and consequently potential land contamination will need to be 
addressed. 
5.22 Land falling under the 132kv overhead power line and running northwards to Phoenix 
Parkway is to be retained as open space. This area has not been included when 
calculating the site density. 
5.23 This allocation is 2.2km from the Humber Estuary SPA, SAC and Ramsar. 
POLICY H1P-2: LAND AT PHOENIX PARKWAY PHASE 2 
1. Land at Phoenix Parkway Phase 2 (1.88ha) is allocated for housing (40 dwellings). 
The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
i. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Page 76 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Contamination, noise, and odour 
j. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact, odour and light pollution associated with the neighbouring industrial site, 
together with potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning 
application for residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments 
for noise, odour, light, and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and 
mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
k. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation 
l. Development of Policy H1P-2 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
LAND AT BURRINGHAM ROAD 
5.24 The land at Burringham Road is agricultural land, surrounded by existing residential 
development and a pond lies to the east, to the south lies Ashby Decoy Golf Club and 
employment uses. This site lies within the development limit of Scunthorpe. 
Proposed Development 
5.25 This site is currently available for development. The surrounding residential uses and 
close proximity to the local services, makes this a suitable site for residential 
development. The density of development within this locality indicates that 144 
dwellings can be delivered on this site. Affordable housing provision will be expected on 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 77 site. A mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future 
updates. 
5.26 Highways access could be achieved via the adjacent land to the west of the site that is 
allocated within the Lincolnshire Lakes Strategic Allocation or the B1450 (Burringham 
Road) and the location of the vehicle access points will need to be agreed by the Local 
Highways Authority. 
5.27 This area of Scunthorpe lies within SFRA Flood Zone 2/3a and an Exception Test will be 
required to demonstrate that development provides a wider sustainable benefit to the 
community that outweighs flood risk. It should also show that development will be safe 
without increasing flood risk elsewhere by integrating water management methods into 
development. 
POLICY H1P-3: LAND AT BURRINGHAM ROAD 
1. Land at Burringham Road (5.24) is allocated for housing (144 dwellings). The site will 
be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Heritage 
f. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
g. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
h. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
i. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. The flood risk 
assessment should take into account the Lincolnshire Lakes Overarching Flood risk 
strategy. 
Page 78 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact and odour associated with the neighbouring industrial site together with 
potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning application for 
residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments for noise, odour, 
and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures 
can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation 
m. Development of Policy H1P-3 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-11 of the plan period. 
LAND AT FORMER SOUTH LEYS SCHOOL ENDERBY ROAD PHASE 1 
5.28 The land at Former South Leys School Phase 1 comprises of a vacant building, car park, 
open space and playing fields and is situated within an existing residential area. The site 
is surrounded by residential properties to the north and open space and playing fields to 
the south and west. Riddings Swimming Pool is situated to the east of the site. 
Proposed Development 
5.29 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
120 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 79 housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire 
Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.30 Highway access to the site can be gained from Sunningdale Road or Enderby Road. 
Vehicle access points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. This site 
has good access to local services and facilities and is well connected to existing 
pedestrian, cycle, and public transport routes. 
5.31 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
POLICY H1P-4: LAND AT FORMER SOUTH LEYS SCHOOL ENDERBY ROAD 
PHASE 1 
1. Land at Former South Leys School (4.95ha) is allocated for housing (120 dwellings). 
The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Page 80 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact, odour and light pollution associated with the neighbouring industrial site 
together with potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning 
application for residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments 
for noise, odour, light, and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and 
mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Other Requirements 
m. The site is currently occupied by vacant sporting facilities/pitches. Prior to the 
determination of any planning application for residential development, it will be 
necessary to assess the sporting facilities/pitches provision situation and if there is a 
shortfall identified because of the proposed development, replacement sporting 
facilities/pitches will be provided of an equivalent or better quality and quantity in at a 
suitable and accessible alternative site. 
Implementation 
n. Development of Policy H1P-4 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-11 of the plan period. 
LAND AT FORMER SOUTH LEYS SCHOOL ENDERBY ROAD PHASE 2 
5.32 The land at Former South Leys School Phase 2 comprises of open space and playing 
fields and is situated within an existing residential area. The site is surrounded by 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 81 residential properties to the north and open space and playing fields to the south and 
west. Riddings is situated to the east of the site. 
Proposed Development 
5.33 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
70 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.34 Highway access to the site can be gained from Sunningdale Road or Enderby Road. 
Vehicle access points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. This site 
has good access to local services and facilities and is well connected to existing 
pedestrian, cycle, and public transport routes. 
5.35 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
POLICY H1P-5: LAND AT FORMER SOUTH LEYS SCHOOL ENDERBY ROAD 
PHASE 2 
1. Land at Former South Leys School Phase 2 (4.2ha) is allocated for housing (70 
dwellings). The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific 
criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Page 82 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact, odour and light pollution associated with the neighbouring industrial site 
together with potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning 
application for residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments 
for noise, odour, light, and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and 
mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Other Requirements 
m. The site is currently occupied by vacant sporting facilities/pitches. Prior to the 
determination of any planning application for residential development, it will be 
necessary to assess the sporting facilities/pitches provision situation and if there is a 
shortfall identified because of the proposed development, replacement sporting 
facilities/pitches will be provided of an equivalent or better quality and quantity in at a 
suitable and accessible alternative site. 
Implementation n. Development of Policy H1P-5 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-11 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 83 LAND AT MOORWELL ROAD 
5.36 The land at Moorwell Road is agricultural land. The site is surrounded by residential 
properties to the north, employment land and agricultural land lie to the south. 
Proposed Development 
5.37 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
200 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of 
housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire 
Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.38 Highway access to the site can be gained from Moorwell Road or Scotter Road. Vehicle 
access points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
5.39 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
POLICY H1P-6: LAND AT MOORWELL ROAD 
1. Land at Moorwell Road (8.36ha) is allocated for housing (200 dwellings). The site will 
be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
Page 84 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact, odour and light pollution associated with the neighbouring industrial site, 
together with potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning 
application for residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments 
for noise, odour, light, and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and 
mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation m. Development of Policy H1P-6 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-18 of the plan period 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 85 FORMER ASHBY MARKET 
5.40 The Former Ashby Market site is previously developed land located on Ashby High 
Street. The site lies within the Ashby District Centre and within walking distance of local 
services. 
Proposed Development 
5.41 This site is currently available for development and is suitable for residential 
development. The density of development within this locality indicates that 40 dwellings 
can be delivered on this site. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A 
mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future 
updates. 
5.42 Highway access to the site is off School Road and the location of the vehicle access 
points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
POLICY H1P-7: FORMER ASHBY MARKET 
1. Land at Former Ashby Market (0.47ha) is allocated for housing (40 dwellings). The 
site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 45-50 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Page 86 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the Ashby District Centre and local services. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
h. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land 
contamination. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development it will be necessary to carry out a land contamination assessment so 
that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
i. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation j. Development of Policy H1P-7 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-5 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 87 LAND AT LAKESIDE PARKWAY 
5.43 The land at Lakeside Parkway is currently vacant land situated within an existing 
residential area. The land to the north of the site is currently part of the housing 
commitment H1C-6. 
Proposed Development 
5.44 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
34 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.45 Highway access to the site can be gained from Dunlin Drive or Wisteria Way. Vehicle 
access points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. This site has good 
access to local services and facilities and is well connected to existing pedestrian, cycle, 
and public transport routes. 
5.46 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 88 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-8: LAND AT LAKESIDE PARKWAY 
1. Land at Lakeside Parkway (1.55ha) is allocated for housing (34 dwellings). The site 
will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
Heritage 
h. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
i. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
j. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation k. Development of Policy H1P-8 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-11 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 89 FORMER SANDFIELD HOUSE 
5.47 The Former Sandfield House site is previously developed land located on Ashby High 
Street. The site lies within the Ashby District Centre and within walking distance of local 
services. 
Proposed Development 
5.48 This site is currently available for development and is suitable for residential 
development. The density of development within this locality indicates that 25 dwellings 
can be delivered on this site. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A 
mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future 
updates. 
5.49 Highway access to the site is off Ashby High Street and the location of the vehicle access 
points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
POLICY H1P-9: FORMER SANDFIELD HOUSE 
1. Land at Former Sandfield House (0.64ha) is allocated for housing (25 dwellings). The 
site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 45-50 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
Page 90 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the Ashby District Centre and local services. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. The existing trees on the site will need to be 
retained. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
h. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land 
contamination. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development it will be necessary to carry out a land contamination assessment so 
that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
i. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation 
j. Development of Policy H1P-9 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-5 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 91 FORMER RUSTY CAR GARAGE 
5.50 The Former Rusty Car Garage site is previously developed land located on Collum Lane. 
The site lies within the Ashby District Centre and within walking distance of local 
services. 
Proposed Development 
5.51 This site is currently available for development and is suitable for residential 
development. The density of development within this locality indicates that 10 dwellings 
can be delivered on this site. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A 
mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future 
updates. 
5.52 Highway access to the site is off School Road and the location of the vehicle access 
points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
POLICY H1P-10: FORMER RUSTY CAR GARAGE 
1. Land at Former Rusty Car Garage Site (0.08ha) is allocated for housing (10 dwellings). 
The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 45-50 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
Page 92 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the Ashby District Centre and local services. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
h. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land 
contamination. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development it will be necessary to carry out a land contamination assessment so 
that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
i. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation j. Development of Policy H1P-10 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-11 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 93 BRUMBY RESOURCE CENTRE, EAST COMMON LANE 
5.53 Brumby Resource Centre is located on East Common Lane is vacant land and is situated 
within an existing residential area. 
Proposed Development 
5.54 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
40 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.55 Highway access to the site can be gained from East Common Lane. Vehicle access 
points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. This site has good access 
to local services and facilities and is well connected to existing pedestrian, cycle, and 
public transport routes. 
5.56 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 94 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-11: BRUMBY RESOURCE CENTRE, EAST COMMON LANE 
1. Land at Brumby Resource Centre, East Common Lane (1.04ha) is allocated for 
housing (70dwellings). The site will be developed in accordance with the following 
site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact, odour and light pollution associated with the neighbouring industrial site 
together with potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning 
application for residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments 
for noise, odour, light, and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and 
mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and Service Provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 95 Other Requirements 
m. The site is currently occupied by vacant sporting facilities/pitches. Prior to the 
determination of any planning application for residential development, it will be 
necessary to assess the sporting facilities/pitches provision situation and if there is a 
shortfall identified because of the proposed development, replacement sporting 
facilities/pitches will be provided of an equivalent or better quality and quantity in at a 
suitable and accessible alternative site. 
Implementation 
n. Development of Policy H1P-11 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-11 of the plan period. 
Page 96 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) BARTON UPON HUMBER 
LAND AT PASTURE ROAD SOUTH 
5.57 The land at Pasture Road South Phases 3,4 and 5 is greenfield land and is located on the 
eastern side of Barton upon Humber. This site consists of two agricultural fields and 
development for residential development has commenced on part of the site. The site is 
surrounded by residential properties with employment units to the north and east. 
Proposed Development 
5.58 This site is currently available for development. The surrounding residential uses and 
close proximity to the district centre of Barton upon Humber and local services makes this 
a suitable site for residential development that could accommodate approximately 350 
dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any updates. 
5.59 Highway access to the site is off Falkland Way. Improvement and contributions will be 
required to improve the existing Barrow Road/ Falkland Way junction. The site is within 
walking distance of the town centre, local services, and employment opportunities. 
5.60 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and 2/3a, therefore an Exception Test will be 
required to demonstrate that the development provides a wider sustainable benefit to 
the community that outweighs flood risk. It should also show that development will be 
safe, without increasing flood risk elsewhere, by integrating water management 
methods into development. 
5.61 Anglian Water has stated that the sewage treatment works has limited capacity and 
infrastructure improvements are required to cater for this development. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 97 POLICY H1P-12: LAND AT PASTURE ROAD 
1. Land at Pasture Road South Phases 3,4 and 5 (21.40 ha) is allocated for housing (319 
dwellings). The site will be developed in accordance with the following site specific 
criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular, pedestrian and cycle access point/s are to be taken from Falkland Way and 
will need to be agreed with the Local Highways Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
f. Financial contributions will be required for improvements to the Barrow Road/Falkland 
Way junction and other junctions on the A1077. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
g. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
h. Existing boundary features should be retained to protect existing habitats, including 
hedgerows and mature trees. At the southern, western, and northern boundaries new 
landscaping should be provided to strengthen the existing retained vegetation and 
soften the edges of the site. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
k. Possible drainage issues on the site need to be addressed through the submission of 
a detailed Drainage Strategy. 
l. Potential ground drainage issues which could lead to an increased run off of pollutants 
into water courses must be addressed. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
m. Significant landscape and noise buffering will be required to the northern and western 
boundaries. 
Page 98 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) n. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land contamination 
and potential adverse noise impact associated with the neighbouring industrial site 
and road traffic. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development, it will be necessary to carry out an assessment of land contamination. 
Utility and service provision 
o. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation 
p. Development of Policy H1P-12 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected 1-18 years of the plan period. 
LAND OFF BARROW ROAD 
5.62 The land off Barrow Road is greenfield land and is located on the eastern side of Barton 
upon Humber. This site consists of two agricultural fields and the site is surrounded by 
residential properties north and west and agricultural land to the south and east. 
Proposed Development 
5.63 This site is currently available for development. The surrounding residential uses and 
close proximity to the district centre of Barton upon Humber and local services makes this 
a suitable site for residential development that could accommodate approximately 225 
dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any updates. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 99 5.64 At present vehicles travelling through Barton upon Humber can suffer from congestion 
at peak times. To reduce this impact, a new link road will be constructed as part of this 
allocation to provide the first phase of the link road between A1077 and Caistor Road. 
As part any planning application a Transport Assessment will need to be undertaken 
which includes a traffic management scheme that considers the existing road network to 
ensure the development does not have an adverse effect on the local highway network. 
Highway access to the site is off A1077 and will need to be agreed by the Local 
Highways Authority. Improvement and contributions will be required to improve the 
existing Barrow Road/ Falkland Way junction. 
5.65 The site is within walking distance of the town centre, local services, and employment 
opportunities. 
5.66 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
5.67 Anglian Water has stated that the sewage treatment works has limited capacity and 
infrastructure improvements are required to cater for this development. 
POLICY H1P-13: LAND OFF BARROW ROAD 
1. Land off Barrow Road (6.1 ha) is allocated for housing (225 dwellings). The site will 
be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular, pedestrian and cycle access point/s are to be taken from A1077 and will 
need to be agreed with the Local Highways Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
f. A new link road is to be constructed between A1077 and Caistor Road including a 
new roundabout. Developers will be required to enter into a legal agreement to 
implement this proposal or make an appropriate financial contribution towards its 
completion. 
g. Financial contributions will be required for improvements to the Barrow Road/Falkland 
Way junction and other junctions on the A1077. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
h. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. Bird surveys are likely to be required in order to 
determine whether there would be a Likely Significant Effect on the Humber Estuary 
SPA or Ramsar site. 
Page 100 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) i. Existing boundary features should be retained to protect existing habitats, including 
hedgerows and mature trees. At the western, eastern, and northern boundaries new 
landscaping should be provided to strengthen the existing retained vegetation and 
soften the edges of the site. 
Heritage 
j. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
k. A site-specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
l. Possible drainage issues on the site need to be addressed. 
m. Potential ground drainage issues which could lead to an increased run-off of 
pollutants into water courses must be addressed. 
Utility and service provision 
n. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation o. Development of Policy H1P-13 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in 6-18 years of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 101 BRIGG 
LAND NORTH OF ATHERTON WAY 
5.68 The land north of Atherton Way is currently overgrown scrubland and former allotments 
and lies to the north of Brigg Primary School. The M180 motorway runs adjacent to the 
north of the site and garden land lies to the east, with the Ancholme Business Park to the 
west. 
Proposed Development 
5.69 The site is currently available for development and is within walking distance to local 
schools, district centre and employment opportunities. The accessibility of the site makes 
it a good location for residential development. The site could accommodate 
approximately 149 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site and 
a mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any 
updates. 
5.70 At present vehicles travelling through Brigg can suffer from congestion at peak times. To 
reduce this impact, a new link road will be constructed as part of the requirement to serve 
the allocated sites to the north of Brigg. Land North of Atherton Way can be delivered 
independently by providing the new link road through the site including the associated 
junctions onto Grammar School Road and Atherton Way. The other allocation (H1P-15, 
H1P-16, and H1P-17) will need to be considered jointly and development of these sites 
phased appropriately through a master plan approach to provide the new link road and 
associated junctions to enable connectivity to Wrawby Road and Grammar School Road. 
An associated traffic management scheme on the existing roads will ensure that the 
scheme is effective. Atherton Way is currently not adopted, and this would need to be 
addressed as part of the development. 
Page 102 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5.71 This area of Brigg lies within SFRA Flood Zone 2/3a and an Exception Test will be 
required to demonstrate that development provides a wider sustainable benefit to the 
community that outweighs flood risk. It should also show that development will be safe 
without increasing flood risk elsewhere by integrating water management methods into 
development. 
5.72 Significant landscaping and noise mitigation will be required to the western and northern 
boundaries of the site to reduce the noise impacts from the M180 motorway. This area 
has not been included when calculating the site density. 
POLICY H1P-14: LAND NORTH OF ATHERTON WAY 
1. Land to the north of Atherton Way (4.4ha) is allocated for housing (149 dwellings). 
The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular, pedestrian and cycle access point/s are to be taken from Atherton Way and 
Grammar School Road and will need to be agreed with the Local Highways Authority. 
d. A new link road to be constructed between Atherton Way and Grammar School Road 
including new roundabouts and associated junctions connecting to the existing local 
highway network. Developers will be required to enter into a legal agreement to 
implement this proposal or make an appropriate financial contribution towards its 
completion. 
e. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
f. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
g. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
h. Existing boundary features should be retained to protect existing habitats, including 
hedgerows and mature trees. At the southern, western, and northern boundaries new 
landscaping should be provided to strengthen the existing retained vegetation and 
soften the edges of the site. 
i. The opportunity to enable improvements to the habitat links along the water course 
should be taken and should be incorporated into the landscape scheme for the site. 
Heritage 
j. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 103 Flood, drainage, and water management 
k. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
l. Significant landscape and noise buffering will be required to the northern and western 
boundaries. 
m. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land contamination 
and potential adverse noise impact associated with the neighbouring industrial site 
and road traffic. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development, it will be necessary to carry out assessment of land contamination and 
noise so that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
n. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation 
o. Development of Policy H1P-14 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-18 of the plan period. 
LAND AT WESTERN AVENUE 
5.73 Land at Western Avenue is flat, open agricultural land currently used for arable farming 
on the northern boundary of Brigg. The site is bounded by residential properties to the 
south and the M180 motorway to the north, while agricultural land extends to the east. 
Page 104 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) A narrow strip of trees runs along the northern and eastern boundary that partly screens 
the adjacent M180 motorway. 
Proposed Development 
5.74 The site is currently available for development and is within walking distance to local 
schools, district centre and employment opportunities. The accessibility of the site makes 
it a good location for residential development. The site could accommodate 
approximately 186 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site and 
a mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any 
updates. 
5.75 At present vehicles travelling through Brigg can suffer from congestion at peak times. To 
reduce this impact, a new link road will be constructed as part of the requirement to serve 
the allocated sites to the north of Brigg. Land at Western Avenue and the other 
allocations (H1P-16 and H1P-17) will need to be considered jointly and development of 
these sites phased appropriately through a master plan approach to provide the new link 
road and associated junctions to enable connectivity to Wrawby Road and Grammar 
School Road. An associated traffic management scheme on the existing roads will 
ensure that the scheme is effective. 
5.76 The site mainly lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1 with a small area in the southwestern 
corner located in SFRA Flood Zone 2/3a. As the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood 
Risk Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall level of 
flood risk. 
5.77 Significant landscaping and noise buffering will be required to the western and northern 
boundaries of the site to reduce the noise impacts from the M180 motorway. This area 
has not been included when calculating the site density. 
POLICY H1P-15: LAND AT WESTERN AVENUE 
1. Land at Western Avenue (5.54ha) is allocated for housing (186 dwellings). The site 
will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular, pedestrian and cycle access point/s are to be taken from Grammar School 
Road and will need to be agreed with the Local Highways Authority. 
d. A new link road to be constructed between Atherton Way, Grammar School Road and 
Wrawby Road including new roundabouts and associated junctions connecting to the 
existing local highway network. A master plan will be required to demonstrate the 
phasing and delivery of the new link road and dwellings through the allocated sites 
H1P-15, H1P-16 and H1P-17. Developers will be required to enter into a legal 
agreement to implement this proposal or make an appropriate financial contribution 
towards its completion. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 105 e. A route is protected within the design of the site that maintains and safeguards an 
alignment for the creation of a single access link road to a suitable standard to connect 
Atherton Way and Wrawby Road. The design should accord with Manual for Streets 
and enable suitable vehicular and pedestrian access. Land will need to be 
safeguarded to provide suitable access points into Policy H1P-14 and Grammar 
School Road to ensure the link road can be delivered and will be agreed with 
Highways Authority at the planning application stage. 
f. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
g. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
h. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
i. Existing boundary features should be retained to protect existing habitats, including 
hedgerows and mature trees. At the southern, western, and northern boundaries new 
landscaping should be provided to strengthen the existing retained vegetation and 
soften the edges of the site. 
j. Biodiversity enhancements should be incorporated into site design. 
Heritage 
k. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
l. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
m. Significant landscape and noise buffering will be required to the northern and western 
boundaries. 
n. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact associated with road traffic. Prior to submission of a planning application for 
residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessment of land 
contamination and noise, so that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures 
can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
o. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation p. Development of Policy H1P-15 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected years 1-18 of the plan period. 
Page 106 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) LAND AT WRAWBY ROAD PHASE 2 
5.78 The land at Wrawby Road comprises of two flat large agricultural fields currently in use 
for arable farming and is surrounded by agricultural land. 
Proposed Development 
5.79 The site is currently available for development and is within walking distance to local 
schools, district centre and employment opportunities. The accessibility of the site makes 
it a good location for residential development. The site could accommodate 
approximately 333 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site and 
a mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any 
updates. 
5.80 At present vehicles travelling through Brigg can suffer from congestion at peak times. To 
reduce this impact, a new link road will be constructed as part of the requirement to serve 
the allocated sites to the north of Brigg. Land at Wrawby Road Phase 2 and the other 
allocations (H1P-15 and H1P-17) will need to be considered jointly and development of 
these sites phased appropriately through a master plan approach to provide the new link 
road and associated junctions to enable connectivity to Wrawby Road and Grammar 
School Road. An associated traffic management scheme on the existing roads will 
ensure that the scheme is effective. 
5.81 A new vehicular access will be constructed to serve the development via Wrawby Road. 
This should be designed to the Highways Authority’s standards. 
5.82 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. As the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood Risk 
Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall level of 
flood risk. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 107 POLICY H1P-16: LAND AT WRAWBY ROAD PHASE 2 
1. Land at Wrawby Road Phase 2 (11.97ha) is allocated for housing (333 dwellings). 
The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular, pedestrian and cycle access point/s are to be taken from Wrawby Road and 
will need to be agreed with the Local Highways Authority. 
d. A new link road to be constructed between Atherton Way, Grammar School Road and 
Wrawby Road including new roundabouts and associated junctions connecting to the 
existing local highway network. A master plan will be required to demonstrate the 
phasing and delivery of the new link road and dwellings through the allocated sites 
H1P-15, H1P-16 and H1P-17. Developers will be required to enter into a legal 
agreement to implement this proposal or make an appropriate financial contribution 
towards its completion. 
e. A route is to be protected within the design of the site that maintains and safeguards 
an alignment for the creation of a single access link road to a suitable standard to 
connect Atherton Way and Wrawby Road. The design should accord with Manual for 
Streets and enable suitable vehicular and pedestrian access. Land will need to be 
safeguarded to provide suitable access points into Policy H1P-15 and Policy H1P-17 
to ensure the link road can be delivered and will be agreed with the Highways 
Authority at the planning application stage. 
f. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
g. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
h. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
i. Significant landscaping will need to be provided around the boundary in order to 
mitigate the visual impact that this proposal will create. 
j. Biodiversity enhancements should be incorporated into site design. 
Heritage 
k. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
l. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Page 108 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Contamination, noise, and odour 
m. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact associated with road traffic. Prior to submission of a planning application for 
residential development, it will be necessary to carry out assessment of land 
contamination and noise so that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures 
can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
n. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation 
o. Development of Policy H1P-16 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-18 of the plan period. 
LAND AT WRAWBY ROAD PHASE 1 
5.83 The land at Wrawby Road Phase 1 is open flat agricultural land on the northern 
boundary of Brigg. Agricultural land lies to the north and east of the site and residential 
properties and Wrawby Road lie to the south. Brigg recreation ground lies to the west of 
the site. 
Proposed Development 
5.84 The site is currently available for development and is within walking distance to local 
schools, district centre and employment opportunities. The accessibility of the site makes 
it a good location for residential development. The site could accommodate 
approximately 152 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site and 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 109 a mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any 
updates. 
5.85 At present vehicles travelling through Brigg can suffer from congestion at peak times. To 
reduce this impact, a new link road will be constructed as part of the requirement to serve 
the allocated sites to the north of Brigg. Land at Wrawby Road Phase 1 and the other 
allocations (H1P-15 and H1P-16) will need to be considered jointly and development of 
these sites phased appropriately through a master plan approach to provide the new link 
road and associated junctions to enable connectivity to Wrawby Road and Grammar 
School Road. An associated traffic management scheme on the existing roads will 
ensure that the scheme is effective. 
5.86 A new vehicular access will be constructed to serve the development via Wrawby Road. 
This should be designed to the Local Highways Authority’s standards. Improvement will 
also be required to the existing Wrawby Road/Churchill Avenue junction. 
5.87 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. As the site measures more than 1ha a Flood Risk 
Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall level of 
flood risk. 
POLICY H1P-17: LAND AT WRAWBY ROAD PHASE 1 
1. Land at Wrawby Road Phase 1 (4.31ha) is allocated for housing (152 dwellings). The 
site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular, pedestrian and cycle access point/s are to be taken from Wrawby Road and 
will need to be agreed with the Local Highways Authority. 
d. A new link road to be constructed between Atherton Way, Grammar School Road and 
Wrawby Road including new roundabouts and associated junctions connecting to the 
existing local highway network. A master plan will be required to demonstrate the 
phasing and delivery of the new link road and dwellings through the allocated sites 
H1P-15, H1P-16 and H1P-17. Developers will be required to enter into a legal 
agreement to implement this proposal or make an appropriate financial contribution 
towards its completion. 
e. A route is protected within the design of the site that maintains and safeguards an 
alignment for the creation of a single access link road to a suitable standard to connect 
Atherton Way and Wrawby Road. The design should accord with Manual for Streets 
and enable suitable vehicular and pedestrian access. Land will need to be 
safeguarded to provide suitable access points into Policy H1P-15 and Policy H1P-16 
to ensure the link road can be delivered and will be agreed with Highways Authority 
at the planning application stage. 
Page 110 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) f. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
g. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
h. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
i. Significant landscaping will need to be provided around the boundary in order to 
mitigate the visual impact that this proposal will create. 
j. Biodiversity enhancements should be incorporated into site design. 
Heritage 
k. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
l. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
m. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact associated with road traffic. Prior to submission of a planning application for 
residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessment of land 
contamination and noise, so that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures 
can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
n. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation o. Development of Policy H1P-17 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected years 1-11 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 111 LAND AT HORSTEAD AVENUE 
5.88 The land at Horstead Avenue is previously developed land and comprises of a vacant 
building, car park and grassland to the rear of the site. The site is located within a 
residential area and adjoins the proposed housing allocations Policy HP1-14 Land at 
Wrawby Road Phase 2 and Policy HP1-15 Land at Wrawby Road Phase 1. 
Proposed Development 
5.89 The site is currently available for development and is within walking distance to the local 
schools, Brigg Town Centre and employment opportunities. The accessibility of the site 
makes it a good location for residential development. The site could accommodate 
approximately 20 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site and a 
mixture of housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North 
Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any 
updates. 
5.90 The site mainly lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. 
5.91 Highway access to the site is off Horstead Avenue and the location of the vehicle access 
points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
Page 112 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-18: LAND AT HORSTEAD AVENUE 
1. Land at Horstead Avenue (0.46ha) is allocated for housing (20 dwellings). The site will 
be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular, pedestrian and cycle access point/s are to be taken from Horstead Avenue 
and will need to be agreed with the Highways Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the town centre, local services, and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Existing boundary features should be retained to protect existing habitats, including 
hedgerows and mature trees. At the southern, western, and northern boundaries new 
landscaping should be provided to strengthen the existing retained vegetation and 
soften the edges of the site. 
h. Biodiversity enhancements should be incorporated into site design. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A site-specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Utility and service provision 
k. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation l. Development of Policy H1P-18 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected years 1-11 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 113 BARNETBY LE WOLD 
LAND AT KINGS ROAD 
5.92 Land at Kings Road is an agricultural field located on the edge of Barnetby le Wold. The 
site is surrounded by residential properties and agricultural land to the east. 
Proposed Development 
5.93 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
43 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.94 Highway access to the site can be gained from Kings Road. Vehicle access points will 
need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. This site has good access to local 
services and facilities and is well connected to existing pedestrian, cycle, and public 
transport routes. 
5.95 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 114 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-19: LAND AT KINGS ROAD 
1. Land at Kings Road (1.2ha) is allocated for housing (43 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
k. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation l. Development of Policy H1P-19 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 115 BARROW UPON HUMBER 
LAND OFF FERRY ROAD 
5.96 Land off Ferry Road is an agricultural field located on the edge of Barrow upon Humber 
and surrounded by agricultural land. This site will come forward once the adjoining land 
at Policy H1C-34 has commenced. 
Proposed Development 
5.97 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
40 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.98 Highway access to the site can be gained from Ferry Road. Vehicle access points will 
need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. A new footpath would need to be 
provided alongside the southern edge of Ferry Road to link into existing facilities. 
5.99 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 116 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-20: LAND OFF FERRY ROAD 
1. Land off Ferry Road(1.65ha) is allocated for housing (54 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. A new footpath will need to be 
created alongside the southern edge of Ferry Road to link into existing facilities. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the local highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
k. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers, in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation l. Development of Policy H1P-20 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 117 BROUGHTON 
LAND OFF THE B1207 
5.100 Land off the B1207 is an agricultural field located on the Western Edge of Broughton 
mainly surrounded by agricultural land with residential properties to the west. 
Proposed Development 
5.101 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
84 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.102 Highway access to the site can be gained from B1207. Vehicle access points will need 
to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. A new footpath would need to be 
provided along the B1270 linking to the existing footpath. 
5.103 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 118 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-21: LAND OFF THE B1207 
1. Land off the B1207 (4ha) is allocated for housing (84 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. A new footpath will need to be 
created alongside the B1207 linking to the existing footpath. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the local highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
k. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation l. Development of Policy H1P-21 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-11 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 119 CROWLE 
LAND TO THE EAST OF FIELDSIDE 
5.104 The land to the east of Fieldside is a mixture of previously developed land and greenfield 
land. The site is currently a garden nursery and comprises some agricultural land. The 
site is surrounded by residential properties, St Norbert’s Catholic Primary School, and 
agricultural land. 
Proposed Development 
5.105 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
75 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.106 Highway access to the site is off Fieldside Road, although improvements to the road are 
needed due to its limited width and construction. The location of the vehicle access point 
will need to be agreed with the local Highways Authority. The site is located close to and 
is in walking distance from the town centre and local services. 
5.107 The site adjoins the boundary of the Crowle Conservation Area. Development proposals 
should ensure that those elements which contribute to its significance are conserved. 
5.108 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 120 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-22: LAND TO THE EAST OF FIELDSIDE 
1. Land to the east of Fieldside (2.80ha) is allocated for housing (75 dwellings). The site 
will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. Localised highway improvements to 
Fieldside will be required as part of the development. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
f. There is a public right of way on the site therefore there may be access issues. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
g. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
h. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
i. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
j. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
k. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
l. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land 
contamination. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development, it will be necessary to carry out assessment of land contamination so 
that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
m. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 121 Other requirements 
n. Demolition of existing buildings is necessary to allow comprehensive redevelopment. 
Implementation 
o. Development of Policy H1P-22 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 1-11 of the plan period. 
LAND OFF MILL ROAD 
5.109 The land off Mill Road comprises of a residential property and vacant grassland. The site 
is surrounded by residential properties and agricultural land to the north. 
Proposed Development 
5.110 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
57 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.111 Highway access to the site can be gained from Mill Road. Vehicle access points will need 
to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
5.112 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 122 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-23: LAND OFF MILL ROAD 
1. Land off Mill Road (1.05ha) is allocated for housing (52 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. Consideration needs to be given to the proximity of the site 
access to the junction of Mill Road/ Lindsey Drive. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land 
contamination. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development, it will be necessary to carry out assessment of land contamination so 
that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation m. Development of Policy H1P-23 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 123 LAND OFF FIELDSIDE 
5.113 Land of Fieldside is previously developed land. The site is currently vacant and 
surrounded by residential properties and St Norbert’s Catholic Primary School. 
Proposed Development 
5.114 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
20 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.115 Highway access to the site is off Fieldside Road, although improvements to the road are 
needed due to its limited width and construction. The location of the vehicle access point 
will need to be agreed with the local Highways Authority. The site is located close to and 
is in walking distance from the town centre and local services. 
5.116 The site adjoins the boundary of the Crowle Conservation Area. Development proposals 
should ensure that those elements which contribute to its significance are conserved. 
5.117 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1. 
Page 124 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-24: LAND OFF FIELDSIDE 
1. Land off Fieldside (0.5ha) is allocated for housing (20 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. Localised highway improvements to 
Fieldside will be required as part of the development. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential land 
contamination. Prior to submission of a planning application for residential 
development, it will be necessary to carry out assessment of land contamination so 
that appropriate design criteria and mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation m. Development of Policy H1P-24 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 125 EPWORTH 
LAND AT YEALAND FLATS 
5.118 Land at Yealand Flats is an agricultural field located on the edge of Epworth mainly 
surrounded by agricultural land with residential properties to the south. The site is 
located in the Area of Special Historic Landscape Interest. This area surrounded the town 
of Epworth and parts of the Isle of Axholme. 
Proposed Development 
5.119 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
45 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.120 Highway access to the site can be gained from A161. Vehicle access points will need to 
be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. The speed limit restriction on 30mph need 
to be extended northwards to include any access to this site. 
5.121 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
5.122 The development of the site will need to consider the impact on the Area of Special 
Historic Landscape Interest. 
Page 126 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY HP1-25: LAND AT YEALAND FLATS 
1. Land at Yealand Flats (1.5ha) is allocated for housing (45 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. A new footpath will need to be 
created alongside the B1207 linking to the existing footpath. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
k. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation l. Development of Policy H1P-25 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-11 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 127 HAXEY 
LAND AT FIELD HOUSE 
5.123 Land at Field House is an area of moderate agricultural land along with farm buildings, 
which are now redundant and a farm building that now been converted to residential 
use. The site is on the edge of Haxey with residential properties to the north, recreational 
planning field to the west and agricultural land to the south and east. The site is located 
within the Area of Special Historic Landscape Interest. 
Proposed Development 
5.124 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
75 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.125 Highway access to the site can be gained from Graizelound Fields Road. Vehicle access 
points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
5.126 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
5.127 The development of the site will need to consider the impact on the Area of Special 
Historic Landscape Interest. 
Page 128 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H1P-26: LAND AT FIELD HOUSE 
1. Land at Field House (2.91ha) is allocated for housing (75 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30-40 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Heritage 
f. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
g. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
h. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation i. Development of Policy H1P-26 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 129 KIRTON IN LINDSEY 
LAND AT FORMER RAF KIRTON IN LINDSEY 
5.128 RAF Kirton in Lindsey is a former World War II RAF base utilised by the Ministry of 
Defence (MOD) as an army barracks with associated barrack blocks, aviation hangers, 
bunkers and associated facilities. The site is located on the southern fringe of Kirton in 
Lindsey in the open countryside and occupies a highly visible landscape location, with 
views across the surrounding rural area. The majority of the site comprises greenfield 
land including a golf course, gliding club and agricultural land. The main vehicular gates 
to the site at the B1400 are also located in this area. 
5.129 The MOD declared RAF Kirton in Lindsey surplus to requirements and disposed of the 
site in 2014. It is essential that this large site is brought back into beneficial uses as 
quickly as possible to prevent the site and buildings falling into a state of dereliction and 
causing blight to the entire area. 
5.130 As the majority of the site comprises undeveloped greenfield land it could be brought 
back into beneficial uses compatible with the open countryside, including the uses 
currently occupying the site (Trent Valley Gliding Club). However the northern operational 
land is heavily contaminated and considered incapable of redevelopment unless high 
value uses, such as residential, is proposed on this part of the site. The remaining four 
hangers are considered suitable for renovation and commercial and business uses that 
are compatible with surrounding land uses are considered to be acceptable 
Proposed Development 
5.131 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
302 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of 
housing types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire 
Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
Page 130 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5.132 Due to the sites exceptional circumstances, its landscape location and its strategic 
importance a high quality and well designed layout will be required and should be strictly 
controlled. High standards of design will be required throughout; with low density 
residential development that takes account of the site’s built heritage, sympathetic green 
infrastructure (open space, tree planting, landscaping, allotments etc) to ensure that it 
does not overdominate in this highly visible landscape location and it is complementary 
to the land uses being promoted in the existing hangers. A development brief for the will 
be prepared to contribute towards creating a strong and positive identity for the site. 
5.133 Highway access to the site can be gained from B1400. Vehicle access points will need 
to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. This site has good access to local services 
and facilities and is well connected to existing pedestrian, cycle, and public transport 
routes. 
5.134 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
POLICY H1P-27: LAND AT FORMER RAF KIRTON IN LINDSEY 
1. Land at Former RAF Kirton in Lindsey (14.26ha) is allocated for housing 
(302dwellings). The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-
specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 40-45 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and employment areas. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Residential Travel Plan will be required to demonstrate 
that the development will have no adverse impacts on the highway network. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. 
g. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
h. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement is 
required. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 131 Flood, drainage, and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
k. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact, odour and light pollution associated with the neighbouring industrial site 
together with potential land contamination. Prior to submission of a planning 
application for residential development it will be necessary to carry out assessments 
for noise, odour, light, and land contamination so that appropriate design criteria and 
mitigation measures can be considered. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers to establish 
available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Other Requirements 
m. The site is currently occupied by vacant sporting facilities/pitches. Prior to the 
determination of any planning application for residential development, it will be 
necessary to assess the sporting facilities/pitches provision situation and if there is a 
shortfall identified because of the proposed development, replacement sporting 
facilities/pitches will be provided of an equivalent or better quality and quantity in at a 
suitable and accessible alternative site. 
Implementation 
n. Development of Policy H1P-27 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-18 of the plan period. 
Page 132 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) EALAND 
LAND ADJACENT TO IVY HOUSE FARM ON MAIN STREET 
5.135 Land adjacent to Ivy House Farm on Main Street is flat agricultural land located on the 
eastern edge of Ealand. The site is surrounded by residential properties to the south and 
west and agricultural land to the north and east. 
Proposed Development 
5.136 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
21 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.137 Highway access to the site can be gained from either Bonnyhale Road or Main Street. 
Vehicle access points will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
5.138 The site lies within SFRA Flood Risk Zone 2/3a, therefore an Exception Test will be 
required to demonstrate that development provides a wider sustainable benefit to the 
community that outweighs flood risk. It should also show that development will be safe 
without increasing flood risk elsewhere by integrating water management methods into 
development. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 133 POLICY H1P-28: LAND ADJACENT TO IVY HOUSE FARM ON MAIN STREET 
1. Land adjacent to Ivy House Farm on Main Street (1 ha) is allocated for housing (21 
dwellings). The site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific 
criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30 -35 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
Heritage 
e. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
f. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
g. A detailed drainage assessment will be required as part of any planning application 
to demonstrate the development has a positive impact on the local drainage system. 
Utility and service provision 
h. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation i. Development of Policy H1P-28 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
Page 134 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) EAST HALTON 
LAND OFF MILL LANE 
5.139 Land off Mill Lane is a grass paddock that is currently used for grazing horses. The site is 
surrounded by residential properties to the east and south and agricultural land lies to the 
north and west. 
Proposed Development 
5.140 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
26 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.141 Highway access to the site can be gained from Mill Lane. Vehicle access points will need 
to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. Mill Lane will require some localised 
improvements including footway provision. 
5.142 The site is within SFRA Flood Zone 1 and as the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood 
Risk Assessment will be required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 135 POLICY H1P-29: LAND OFF MILL LANE 
1. Land off Mill Lane (1ha) is allocated for housing (26 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30 -35 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. The survey should focus on bats but take into 
account the possible presence of other protected species such as breeding birds. 
f. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
h. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
i. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact associated with the adjacent school. 
Utility and service provision 
j. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation k. Development of Policy H1P-29 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
Page 136 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) SCAWBY 
LAND SOUTH OF MAIN STREET 
5.143 Land south of Main Street is agricultural land on the edge of Scawby. The site is 
surrounded by residential properties and a farm. 
Proposed Development 
5.144 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
24 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.145 Highway access to the site can be gained from Main Street. Vehicle access points will 
need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
POLICY H1P-30: LAND SOUTH OF MAIN STREET 
1. Land south of Main Street (0.79ha) is allocated for housing (24 dwellings). The site will 
be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30 -35 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 137 Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. The survey should focus on bats but take into 
account the possible presence of other protected species such as breeding birds 
f. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Utility and service provision 
h. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation i. Development of Policy H1P-30 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 6-18 of the plan period. 
Page 138 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) SOUTH KILLINGHOLME 
LAND AT SCHOOL ROAD 
5.146 Land at School Road is a farm, that includes a number of farm buildings and a residential 
property. Some of the farm buildings are considered suitable for conversion. The site is 
surrounded by residential properties. 
Proposed Development 
5.147 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
21 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.148 Highway access to the site can be gained from School Road. Vehicle access points will 
need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. School Road may require some 
localised improvements including footway provision. 
5.149 The site is located in Flood Zone 1. 
POLICY H1P-31: LAND AT SCHOOL ROAD 
1. Land at School Road (0.69ha) is allocated for housing (21 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30 -35 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 139 b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. The survey should focus on bats but take into 
account the possible presence of other protected species such as breeding birds. 
f. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
h. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
Contamination, noise, and odour 
i. This site is subject to environmental constraints including potential adverse noise 
impact associated with the A160 and the nearby refineries. 
Utility and service provision 
j. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation k. Development of Policy H1P-31 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
Page 140 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) WESTWOODSIDE 
LAND SOUTH OF DONCASTER ROAD 
5.150 Land south of Doncaster Road is agricultural land and is located on the South edge of 
Westwoodside. The site is surrounded by residential properties and agricultural land. The 
site is located within the Area of Special Historic Landscape Interest. 
Proposed Development 
5.151 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
26 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.152 Highway access to the site can be gained from Doncaster Road. Vehicle access points 
will need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
5.153 The site lies within SFRA Flood Risk Zone 2/3a, therefore an Exception Test will be 
required to demonstrate that development provides a wider sustainable benefit to the 
community that outweighs flood risk. It should also show that development will be safe 
without increasing flood risk elsewhere by integrating water management methods into 
development. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 141 POLICY H1P-32: LAND SOUTH OF DONCASTER ROAD 
1. Land south of Doncaster Road (0.97ha) is allocated for housing (26 dwellings). The 
site will be developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30 -35 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision are to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. The survey should focus on bats but take into 
account the possible presence of other protected species such as breeding birds 
f. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
h. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
i. A detailed drainage assessment will be required as part of any planning application 
to demonstrate the development has a positive impact on the local drainage system. 
Utility and service provision 
j. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation k. Development of Policy H1P-32 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
Page 142 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) WROOT 
LAND AT FIELD LANE 
5.154 Land at Field Lane is agricultural land and is located on the south east edge of Wroot. 
The site is adjacent to residential properties and next to a church. 
Proposed Development 
5.155 The site is currently available for development and could accommodate approximately 
13 dwellings. Affordable housing provision will be expected on site. A mixture of housing 
types should be provided, reflecting the findings of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
5.156 Highway access to the site can be gained from Field Lane. Vehicle access points will 
need to be agreed by the Local Highways Authority. 
POLICY H1P-33: LAND AT FIELD LANE 
1. Land at Field Lane (0.43haha) is allocated for housing (13 dwellings). The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site-specific criteria: 
Housing Mix and Tenure 
a. A mix of housing size and tenure should be provided on the site and developed at 
approximately 30 -35 dwellings per hectare in accordance with Policy H2. 
b. Affordable housing will be provided on site in accordance with Policy H3, having 
regard to any abnormal cost, economic viability and other requirements associated 
with the development. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 143 Access and highways 
c. Vehicular pedestrian and cycle access points to the site will need to be agreed with the 
Local Highway Authority. 
d. Good footpath and cycle provision to be delivered throughout the site, linking the 
development with the local services and facilities. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. An Ecological Appraisal and possible Ecological Impact Assessment will be required 
at the planning application stage. The survey should focus on bats but take into 
account the possible presence of other protected species such as breeding birds 
f. Any existing trees and hedges around the boundary shall be retained and enhanced. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
Flood, drainage, and water management 
h. A site specific flood risk assessment will be required to determine the nature and 
scope of any mitigation necessary and demonstrate that safe development can be 
achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. 
i. A detailed drainage assessment will be required as part of any planning application 
to demonstrate the development has a positive impact on the local drainage system. 
Utility and service provision 
j. Early engagement will be required with the utility and service providers in order to 
establish available supply capacity to the site and, depending on the type of proposed 
development, what reinforcement will be required. 
Implementation k. Development of Policy H1P-33 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected in years 11-18 of the plan period. 
Page 144 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) HOUSING MIX AND DENSITY 
5.157 The Local Plan aims to ensure new housing provided in North Lincolnshire over the next 
20 years best meets the changing needs of the population. An appropriate mix of 
housing is necessary to secure mixed and balanced communities where people’s needs 
and aspirations for new housing are met. Housing mix refers to both the size of the 
property (number of bedrooms) and the type of housing, whether detached, semi, 
terraced, apartments including adaptive and accessible properties. 
5.158 North Lincolnshire’s Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 
identifies that the area has a significantly higher proportion of detached and semi-
detached properties compared to the region and England as a whole. It is expected that 
the future household size within North Lincolnshire will decrease over the next 20 years 
and this will push up the demand for smaller properties within the area. It is anticipated 
that there will be a continuing market for family / executive homes, but the existing stock 
is expected to make a significant contribution to meeting this demand, as retirement 
aged people downsize for a number of reasons, including release of equity from existing 
homes and health reasons. Delivery of smaller properties within North Lincolnshire will 
support the needs and home ownership aspiration of the younger generation, for 
example by providing starter homes within all new developments and other intermediate 
home ownership products. 
5.159 As part of the North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 
2020 the council have modelled the future housing mix requirements by assessing the 
number of bedrooms future households will require within the plan period. The modelling 
has used Census data by age and the ratio of rooms to age and projected this forward. 
Assumptions have been made that the proportion of households by age will want the 
same number of bedrooms in the future as they did in 2011. On the basis of these factors 
the following mix of market housing is recommended. 
TABLE 5.2: BEDROOM MIX 
Bedrooms Proportion of bedrooms required (%) 
1 bedroom 8.1 
2 bedrooms 22.5 
3 bedrooms 53.1 
4 + bedrooms 16.3 
5.160 The mix and type of dwellings will be assessed against the proportions set out in Policy 
H2 below as informed by the recommendation of the North Lincolnshire Housing and 
Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates. 
HOUSING DENSITY 
5.161 The increased demand for new homes is putting development land under pressure. In 
order to maximise the use of available sites and reduce the pressure on greenfield land, 
priority will be to reuse previously developed land. 
5.162 In recent years North Lincolnshire has seen housing development with densities 
between 35-45 dwellings per hectare, depending on its location and the nature of the 
site in question. These sites have included a variety of housing types, for example family 
homes, apartments and town houses. These densities were set using evidence from the 
North Lincolnshire SHELAA which identified the dwelling densities that had been 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 145 achieved within North Lincolnshire over the past 10 years on a variety of sites, sizes and 
locations. 
POLICY H2: HOUSING MIX AND DENSITY 
1. Development proposal for new housing should deliver a mix of house types, tenures 
and size to create a mixed and balance communities. The precise mix should take 
account of the following: 
a. Market conditions 
b. Housing needs and economic viability 
c. Sites specific circumstances (size, character, setting) 
d. The North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment Housing Mix 
information set out in Table 2 or in any future updates of the housing mix evidence. 
2. New housing development should make effective use of land and be built at a density 
appropriate to the character, location and setting of the area and should support the 
development of sustainable, balanced communities. Any application should provide 
justification on the proposed density ranges. 
3. Depending on the location of the development, the following net density ranges 
should be achieved: 
• Scunthorpe town centre: 45-70 dwellings per hectare. 
• Within Scunthorpe Urban Area: 40-45 dwellings per hectare. 
• Strategic Site Allocation – Lincolnshire Lakes: 30-35 dwellings per hectare. 
• Principal Towns: 40-45 dwellings per hectare. 
• Larger Service Centre: 30-40 dwellings per hectare. 
• Larger Rural Settlements, Smaller Rural Settlements: 30-35 dwellings per hectare 
• Rural Hamlets and Villages and in the Open Countryside: 20-30 dwellings per hectare. 
4. Where an applicant considers there are significant economic viability constraints that 
would prevent a mix of housing in accordance with the policy, they will be required to 
provide full justification of the exceptional circumstances to the Council's satisfaction. 
5. Where a viability assessment is required, it should refer back to the viability 
assessment that informed the plan, providing evidence of what has changed since 
then. Any viability assessment will be funded by the applicant and should reflect the 
government’s recommended approach as set out in National Planning Practice 
Guidance. The applicant will be expected to fund the independent verification of the 
submitted viability assessment by a person appointed by the Council. 
5.163 Policy H2 provides a range of housing density depending on the location of the 
development. The density ranges have been developed taking account of the densities 
achieved in North Lincolnshire over the past 10 years. The SHELAA provides an 
indication of the dwelling densities that have been achieved over the past ten years on a 
variety of site sizes and locations within North Lincolnshire; it identified that the net 
densities set out in Policy H2 had been achieved. 
5.164 NPPF requires the council to plan for a mix of homes of different sizes and types to meet 
the needs and demands of the current and future population for North Lincolnshire, 
based on the findings of the Local Housing Needs Assessment. 
Page 146 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) AFFORDABLE HOUSING & THE NEEDS OF DIFFERENT GROUPS 
5.165 Achieving a good supply and range of high quality affordable homes across North 
Lincolnshire will provide choice for those in housing need and help to deliver balanced, 
sustainable communities. Both open market house builders and Registered Providers of 
social housing will be required to contribute to the delivery of affordable homes to ensure 
that affordable products are delivered to meet North Lincolnshire housing needs. 
5.166 Affordable housing as defined in the NPPF, includes social rented, affordable rented and 
intermediate tenure types (First Homes, Discounted Market Sales and other affordable 
routes to home ownership) , provided for eligible households whose needs are not met 
by the market. 
5.167 In accordance with NPPF, the council is seeking through the provision, distribution and 
design of affordable homes to create sustainable, inclusive and mixed communities. Of 
particular importance is the need to ensure that within any scheme the affordable homes 
are integrated and evenly distributed throughout the site (otherwise known as ‘pepper 
potting’), in order to promote mixed and balanced communities. This will be an important 
factor of the overall design of the development of a site. 
5.168 The aim of the affordable housing policy will be to deliver as many affordable homes as 
possible in order to meet our needs without compromising overall housing delivery. The 
North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 (HENA) 
now identifies an affordable housing need of 115 homes per year and indicates the 
tenure should be split 31% intermediate products (First Homes, Discounted Market Sales 
and other affordable routes to homes ownership) and 69% social and affordable rent 
products. The average delivery of affordable housing within North Lincolnshire over the 
past 5 years has been 81 units, with the highest year being 133 units and the lowest 
being 59 units. This figure includes a range of affordable products including Market 
Discount Sale, Rent to Buy, Help to Buy and Home Buy, Shared Ownership and 
Affordable Rent. 
5.169 The NPPF requires that at least 10% of homes on all major housing developments should 
be provided for affordable homes ownership, this includes Starter Homes, Discounted 
Market Value and other affordable routes to home ownership. North Lincolnshire 
Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 provides further conclusions 
on the most appropriate mix of affordable housing tenures to best ensure the housing 
needs of residents can be met. This includes identifying that 31% of affordable homes 
should provide affordable routes to home ownership and analysis takes into 
consideration the range of products available and described above. 
5.170 In May 2021, the Government introduced First Homes, a new tenure of affordable 
housing, to the Planning Practice Guidance (PPG). First Homes are a specific type of 
discounted market housing which are discounted by a minimum of 30% against market 
value, sold to people meeting set eligibility criteria. The PPG stipulates that First Homes 
should make up at least 25% of all affordable housing units being delivered through 
planning obligations, as the Government’s preferred discounted market tenure. The 
purpose of First Homes is, as set out in the PPG, a mechanism to allow people, 
particularly key workers, to get on the housing ladder in their local area. 
5.171 The Council will work proactively with landowners and developers to secure a minimum 
10% affordable home ownership on major sites as informed by the NPPF. The proposed 
mix of housing tenures set out in the affordable housing policy has been tested through 
the Council's area wide viability assessment. 
5.172 In line with national planning policy, affordable units should be provided on site. Where 
provision is less than one whole home it will be met through the payment of a commuted 
sum. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 147 5.173 The council has identified that the provision of affordable housing is a priority, however it 
is recognised that site and market conditions can vary both between sites and in certain 
circumstances, particularly where abnormal costs or other circumstances apply. It is 
possible that there may be viability issues on specific sites, therefore the Council has 
commissioned an assessment to review its proposed Local Plan policies in order to 
understand the individual and cumulative impact of them on development viability. The 
area wide viability assessment has identified that the maximum proportion of affordable 
housing that will be achievable is 10%. 
5.174 The provision of affordable housing on-site as part of a wider housing development 
supports the creation of sustainable, inclusive and balanced communities. There may 
however, be some circumstance in which it may be appropriate to provide affordable 
housing off-site, examples might include: development that only delivers small amounts 
of affordable housing which would be difficult for Registered Providers to manage or 
where an off-site contribution would provide more affordable housing elsewhere to meet 
local needs. 
RURAL AND ENTRY LEVEL EXCEPTION SITES 
5.175 Another way of delivering affordable housing to meet local needs within North 
Lincolnshire is through a rural exception sites policy. This is usually where land adjacent 
to existing settlements, but outside of the development limits, is utilised to provide 
additional affordable housing on land that would not usually be promoted for 
development. The use of exception sites has been successful in delivering additional 
affordable housing within North Lincolnshire over the past 10 years. 
5.176 The Council expects new homes on rural exception sites to be well designed, having 
regard to the effect on the surrounding environment, access to and from the site and 
flood risk. The Council will take account of the positive contribution that new affordable 
homes make to meeting local housing needs when assessing this type of application. 
5.177 The affordable housing provided on rural exception sites should only be used to meet a 
clearly identified local need and occupied in perpetuity as an affordable home. Local need 
must be proved through an acceptable and up-to-date survey of parish housing need. 
The survey should demonstrate whether there are people living in the parish / village who 
are in housing need and unable to compete in the general housing market (to rent or buy) 
due to the low level of their income. Such considerations would include identification of 
the needs for "entry level" homes suitable for first time buyers that are not already being 
met by other ongoing or proposed development in North Lincolnshire. 
5.178 Rural exception sites provide people that have an existing local connection (living in the 
parish, close family living in the parish, employed in the parish or having grown up in the 
parish) and with a housing need are given priority in the affordable housing allocation 
process. The affordable homes on rural exception sites must always be offered to 
households with a local connection to the parish where it will be built in the first instance 
and for any future vacancies. If there are no households with a local need in the parish 
where the homes are to be built, households in adjacent parishes will be considered, 
followed by households from across the North Lincolnshire. 
5.179 The NPPF suggests that Councils may consider allowing some market housing on rural 
exception sites to cross-subsidise the affordable housing and provide a financial 
incentive for landowners to bring sites forward. Given the purpose and objectives of rural 
exceptions sites, the Council expects that the majority of homes will need to be 
affordable. The Council commissioned a high level viability study to look into the 
proportion of market homes that would be needed to encourage development on rural 
exceptions sites, which concluded that rural exception sites can be viably delivered 
where up to 30% are sold on the open market. 
Page 148 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5.180 Where a developer considers that some market homes are needed to bring forward a 
rural exception site, the Council will use 30% as a maximum for any site specific 
negotiations. The Council will not permit applications for rural exception sites that fail to 
deliver proportions that significantly differ from the affordable housing policy. 
5.181 The NPPF provides policy for councils when assessing planning applications for entry-
level exception sites. The policy includes direction on: the types of affordable housing 
permitted on entry-level exception sites, the position / scale / design of development, site 
size for entry level exceptions sites and a prohibition on entry-level exception sites in 
National Parks / AONB / green belt. 
POLICY H3: AFFORDABLE HOUSING 
1. New residential housing development of 10 or more dwellings in North Lincolnshire 
must make provision for 10% of affordable housing provision onsite which is 
accessible to those unable to compete in the open housing market. 
2. The exact tenure mix for individual sites should be determined following discussions 
with the local planning authority and informed by the latest government guidance and 
Local Housing Needs Assessment. At least 10% of affordable housing will be 
delivered per site, and as an initial basis for discussion, 25% of all affordable housing 
delivered through planning obligations will be First Homes. After which priority will be 
for the delivery of affordable rent, subject to satisfying national policy requirements for 
10% of all housing being for affordable home ownership. This will form the basis of a 
s106 agreement to accompany the planning permission. Exemptions to this 10% 
requirement will be made where the site or proposed development: 
a. Provides solely for Build to Rent homes; or, 
b. Provides specialist accommodation for a group of people with specific needs (such as 
purpose-built accommodation for the elderly or students); or, 
c. Is proposed to be developed by people who wish to build or commission their own 
homes; or, 
d. Is exclusively for affordable housing, an entry-level exception site or a rural exception 
site. 
3. Development of affordable housing should be: 
a. Provided on-site in order to help achieve mixed and balanced communities. However, 
off-site provision or a financial contribution made in lieu maybe considered acceptable 
where it can be robustly justified. 
b. Retained in affordable use in perpetuity; 
c. Provided to the same design and building standard as the market housing and be 
pepper-potted throughout the site; and, 
d. 5% of the affordable housing component of every housing development providing or 
capable of acceptably providing 5 or more self-contained affordable homes, should 
meet Building Regulations requirement M4 (3) ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ to be 
wheelchair accessible, or be easily adapted for residents who are wheelchair users. 
4. Affordable housing provision required as part of North Lincolnshire Local Plan site 
allocations will be provided on site without exception. In any other circumstance, the 
payment of a commuted sum for delivery of affordable homes off-site, to a value 
equivalent to on-site provision, will only be agreed where there are clear site specific 
constraints that would impact the economic viability of development 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 149 5. Where an applicant considers there are significant economic viability constraints that 
would prevent the provision of affordable housing in accordance with the policy, they 
will be required to provide full justification of exceptional circumstances to the 
Council’s satisfaction. Where a viability assessment is required, it should refer back to 
the viability assessment that informed the plan, providing evidence of what has 
changed since then. Any viability assessment will be funded by the applicant and 
should reflect the government’s recommended approach as set out in National 
Planning Practice Guidance. The applicant will be expected to fund the independent 
verification of the submitted viability assessment by a person appointed by the 
Council. 
6. To ensure the development of mixed and sustainable communities, the affordable 
housing element of schemes should be fully integrated or distributed through the site 
as far as possible. 
Rural Exception Sites 
7. In order to meet local community needs in rural areas, affordable housing will be 
permitted within or adjacent to the development limit of rural settlements where: 
a. The Council is satisfied that the proposal will meet local identified need within the 
settlement parish; 
b. The site is not remote from existing buildings and there is an opportunity to use 
sustainable modes of transport (Walking, cycling and public transport) to access 
employment opportunities, service and facilities unless the applicant can demonstrate 
that there are no other suitable alternatives in the parish to address the need; 
c. The number of homes on each exception sites should reflect local community needs, 
the size of the village it most closely relates to, available infrastructure and services 
and the character of the surrounding areas; and, 
d. Housing on Rural Exceptions Sites shall remain ‘affordable’ in perpetuity to continue to 
meet local need. 
8. On rural exception sites a small amount of market housing may be permitted, 
provided it is demonstrated as being necessary to enable the provision of significant 
additional affordable housing to meet local needs. At least 70% of the homes will be 
affordable homes, unless the applicant can demonstrate through a financial appraisal 
that it would not be viable to deliver the required number of affordable homes, and 
provided that the scheme would still predominantly be an affordable housing scheme, 
in accordance with the definition of a rural exception site. 
9. The applicant will be expected to fund the independent verification of the submitted 
viability assessment by a person appointed by the Council. 
5.182 Policy H3 sets out the council’s approach for the delivery of affordable housing as part of 
major housing developments comprising of 10 dwellings or more. The affordable housing 
requirements set out within the policy reflects current and future housing requirements in 
North Lincolnshire informed by the North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs 
Assessment November 2020. 
5.183 The council recognises that the full affordable housing requirement identified within the 
North Lincolnshire Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 will not 
be met by policy H3. This is due to some of the sites being located within a lower cost 
market area and or the site has a number of abnormal costs associated with it that 
makes the viability difficult. The policy is therefore flexible enough to ensure that in these 
circumstances, the council can agree a lower affordable housing requirement to ensure 
deliverability of a scheme. In such circumstances, the applicant will be expected to 
submit a detailed viability assessment to clearly demonstrate how the affordable 
housing requirement, set out within Policy H3, would make the scheme unviable. Where 
Page 150 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) the council accepts that a lower proportion of affordable housing would be appropriate 
on viability grounds, the applicant will be expected to deliver the maximum level of 
affordable housing possible. 
5.184 Affordable housing will be secured by a Section 106 legal agreement to ensure, where 
applicable, the provision remains affordable indefinitely. It is the council’s preference for 
affordable housing to be transferred by the developer to a Registered Provider working 
as one of the council’s partners. 
SPECIALIST HOUSING 
5.185 The NPPF requires Local Planning Authorities to plan for the needs of different groups of 
the community including older people and those with a disability. 
5.186 North Lincolnshire has an above average population of persons aged 65+. In 2020, 
20.6% of the resident population were aged 65 and over. This compares to 18.5% for 
England and 18.9% for Yorkshire and the Humber (ONS population estimates). Based on 
the 2020 subnational population projections produced by the Office for National 
Statistics, the proportion of over 65s is set to rise to 28.3% by 2040 (compared to 23.8% 
for England and 23.8% for Yorkshire and the Humber). There are approximately over 
37,300 people aged 65+ resident in North Lincolnshire, and over a third of these people 
are estimated to live alone. North Lincolnshire’s population is aging compared to the 
regional and national trends, meaning that the area will face increasing pressures over 
the plan period. 
5.187 North Lincolnshire has an ageing population means that it is important that more homes 
are constructed at an adaptable standard to give greater choice and the opportunity for 
older people to remain in their homes, whilst supporting and encouraging the provision 
of specialist and older person housing when appropriate. 
5.188 There is a Building Regulation standard in force relating to accessible dwellings, which 
sets standards in relation to accessible and adaptable dwellings (Part M4(2)) and 
wheelchair accessibility dwellings (Part M4(3)), which are over and above the minimum 
requirements27. LPAs can apply these standards, by incorporating a requirement within 
their planning policies. The LNHA identifies that there will be an increase of people across 
the North Lincolnshire during the Plan period that will require adaptable homes. 
POLICY H4: SPECIALIST AND SUPPORTED HOUSING 
1. Planning permission will be granted for the development of specialist and supported 
housing, subject to the development being: 
a. Supported by evidence of the demonstrable need for this form of development within 
North Lincolnshire; 
b. Suitable for the intended occupiers in relation to the quality and type of facilities, and 
the provision of support and/or care; 
c. It is unlikely to cause unacceptable impact on the residential amenity; 
d. Appropriate measures will be in place to ensure access for emergency vehicles and 
safety measures such as fire escapes; 
e. Satisfactory outside space, highway access, parking and servicing can be achieved; 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 151 f. Accessible to local shops and services, public transport and other sustainable modes 
of transport, and community facilities appropriate to the needs of the intended 
occupiers; and 
g. Meets the requirements for accessible and adaptable dwellings under Part M4(2) of 
Building Regulations (or any relevant regulation that supersedes and replaces). 
5.189 This policy is to ensure development meets a set of identified local needs within the North 
Lincolnshire. It is also to ensure that supported and special needs housing is provided in 
an appropriate manner, so that it contributes to the quality of life for its residents and 
meet wider sustainable development requirements. Supported and special needs 
housing includes accommodating care for older, disabled or vulnerable people and care 
leavers, people with learning difficulties, mental illness and physical disabilities. 
HOUSING FOR OLDER PEOPLE 
5.190 North Lincolnshire has an aging population, over the next 20 years (2020-2039 the 
resident population aged 65-84 years is predicted to increase by 37.2% (from 36,654 to 
50,313). The resident population aged 85+years is also anticipated to increase by 126% 
(from 4,360 to 9,866). This represents a significant demographic shift, which gives rise to 
a range of housing issues affecting both older people and the housing market as a whole. 
It is therefore essential that a policy is established to ensure that the needs of older 
people are met over the plan period. The plan aims to give all adults that require provision 
of care more choice and control over where and how they live and receive care. 
5.191 Most of the housing built within North Lincolnshire over the past 20 years has been built 
for families, with a small amount aimed at older people. There are a number of housing 
options which older people may consider, including retirement villages, building smaller 
properties which have the ability to be easily adapted to meet future care and support 
needs, bungalows, larger multi-generational housing like sheltered accommodation and 
extra care which has 24 hour care available. 
5.192 The Housing LIN for North Lincolnshire commissioned on behalf of the Greater 
Lincolnshire Local Economic Partnership, identified that North Lincolnshire’s current 
provision for older people social rented accommodation and residential care is 
significantly above national average. Private sector retirement housing, housing with 
care and Nursing Care are significantly below the national average. 
5.193 Providing housing to meet the needs of the older population has a number of benefits, 
including freeing up larger family homes, making limited mortgage lending go further, 
potentially free up hospital beds if older patients have suitable housing to return to and 
addressing fuel poverty. 
5.194 In addition to measures to enable more people to live independently for longer in their 
existing homes, the council is currently working with the North East Lincolnshire Clinical 
Commissioning Group and other partners to develop Extra Care Housing schemes. This 
type of housing is considered to be an attractive alternative to traditional residential care. 
It allows couples to remain together and allows people to retain their own front door and 
independent address, whilst having easy access to the care and support they will need 
to keep healthy and continue living independently. The Extra Care Housing being 
developed is for frailer older people, or for those with dementia. The homes are being built 
to high standards. 
Page 152 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H5: HOUSING FOR OLDER PEOPLE 
1. The council will support the provision of housing that maximises independence and 
choice for older people and other people with specific needs. When assessing the 
suitability of sites and/or proposals for the development of residential care homes, 
extra care housing and continuing care retirement communities, the council will have 
regard to the following: 
a. the local need for the accommodation proposed using the North Lincolnshire Housing 
and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 and any future updates; 
b. the ability of future residents to access essential services, including public transport, 
GP Surgeries and shops; 
c. whether the proposal would result in an undue concentration of such provision in the 
area; and, 
d. impact upon the local environment and the character of the area. 
2. All new specialist homes designed for older people shall be built to M4 (2) and (3) of 
the Building Regulations, (or subsequent replacements), as a minimum. 
3. In addition to the provision of specialist accommodation, the council aims to ensure 
that older people are able to secure and sustain ongoing independence either in their 
own homes or with the support of family members. To enable this, the council will: 
a. Encourage the incorporation of adaptable features within all new residential 
development to meet household needs over time; and on large strategic sites 
developers will be required to deliver specific provision to meet older people’s needs 
including bungalows, level access flats and supported homes; and 
b. On large strategic sites developers will be required to deliver specific provision to meet 
older people’s needs including bungalows, 
c. Support evidence based proposals for self-contained annexes and extensions to 
existing dwellings in order to accommodate, for example, an elderly or disabled 
dependent. 
4. A proportion of the following sites allocations will be allocated for older people: 
Local Plan HELA DPD/ 
Planning Ref. Settlement Site Location Greenfield/ 
Brownfield Site Area 
(Ha) Number of 
dwellings allocated for 
Older People 
Proposed Sites 
SSH1 , SSH2 Lincolnshire 
Lakes (PA/
2013/1000 and
PA/2013/1001) Scunthorpe West of 
Scunthorpe Greenfield 1000.00 100 
H1P-2 SCUH-2 Scunthorpe Phoenix ParkwayPhase 2 Greenfield 1.88 10 
H1P-4 SCUH-C7 Scunthorpe Land at former 
South Leys
School ,
Enderby Road Greenfield 9.16 40 
H1P-11 SCUH-C2( PA/ Scunthorpe Brumby Brownfield 2.03 30 
2015/1369 and Resource 
(PA/2017) Centre, East
Common Lane 
H1P-19 Barnetby le
Wold Land at King`s
Road Land Greenfield 2.80 20 
H1P-26 Epworth Yealand Flats Greenfield 1.5 20 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 153 5. Proposals for a self-contained annex should accommodate the functional need of the 
occupant(s), be proportionate in scale and remain ancillary to the main dwelling 
throughout the lifetime of its occupancy. 
6. Where appropriate, the council will consider the use of planning conditions to restrict 
occupancy and subsequent sale. 
5.195 North Lincolnshire has an aging population and the future housing needs will require 
changes to the types and mix of housing that is delivered. With a pattern of lower birth 
rates, smaller families, increased divorce rates and increasing mobility many people will 
continue to face old age on their own. This can result in increased pressure on social care 
if homes cannot be adapted to meet the needs of older occupiers. Simple adaptations 
can extend the flexibility of homes to meet changing household needs over time. There 
will still be a growing requirement for more specialist homes as well to maximise 
independence. 
5.196 Policy H5 Housing for Older People aims to support North Lincolnshire’s aging population 
to live independently in their own homes, with support from family members or specialist 
housing. All planning permission granted for self – contained annexes will be conditioned 
to restrict occupancy and subsequent sales where amenity issues could arise, if the 
annex were to be split from the main dwelling and serve as an independent dwelling. 
This could be due to the loss of privacy, access and parking or the nature of the 
constriction of the annex. 
5.197 The Government has introduced a new system of standards for new housing, 
rationalising many differed previous standards. Mandatory Building Regulations 
covering the physical security of new dwellings came into force in October 2015. The 
council will require all new housing specifically for older people to be built in accordance 
with Part MM4 (2) OR M4 (3) of the Building Regulations that has been expanded to 
include new enhanced levels of accessibility. 
NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE TRAVELLING COMMUNITIES 
5.198 The definitions for Gypsies and Travellers vary across legislation. The definition used in 
Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (PPT) is: “Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever 
their race or origin, including such persons who on grounds only of their own or their 
family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel 
temporarily or permanently but excluding members of an organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such”. National planning policy also 
states “travelling showpeople”. This means: Members of a group organised for the 
purposes of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as such). 
This includes such persons who on the grounds of their own or their family’s or 
dependants’ more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or old age 
have ceased to travel temporarily, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined above. 
5.199 North Lincolnshire Gypsy and Travellers Accommodation Needs Assessment 2021 
provides an objective assessment of future pitch requirement for Gypsy and Travellers 
including Travelling Show people in accordance with national policy. The assessment 
identifies that North Lincolnshire needs to find provision for 17 permanent residential 
pitches and 0 transit pitches Between 2021 and 2038. The GTTAA identifies a need for 
8 permanent residential pitches between the first five years of the plan. Currently North 
Lincolnshire has two locations (Brigg and Kirton in Lindsey) providing permitted 
permanent Gypsy and Travellers facilities. To ensure delivery the council are proposing to 
set out a criteria based policy and work with the market to bring forward sites to meet 
the identified needs within the plan period. 
Page 154 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY H6: NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE’S TRAVELLING COMMUNITIES 
1. In determining proposals for new sites to accommodate Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople, consideration will be given to whether: 
a. there is a proven identified need for the scale and nature of the development proposed 
which supports the development of, or extension to an existing Gypsy, Traveller or 
Showpeople site; 
b. the development is sensitive to the character and appearance of the landscape and 
the amenity of neighbouring properties; 
c. the site has safe and satisfactory vehicular and pedestrian and cycle access for the 
type of vehicles that could reasonably be expected to use or access the site; 
d. there are no significant constraints to development in terms of flood risk, poor 
drainage, land contamination, or environmental impacts; 
e. the site is suitable with regard to accessing local services and amenities; 
f. the site can be properly serviced and supplied with essential infrastructure, including 
water, power, sewerage, drainage and waste disposal; 
g. the site provides adequate space for vehicle parking, turning and servicing of large 
vehicles, storage, play and residential amenity; and 
h. will result in an acceptable living environment for its residents. 
2. Acceptable proposals will be subject to a condition or agreement that ensures that the 
future use of the site shall only be to meet the needs of the Gypsy and Traveller 
community. Consideration may be given to development adjacent to existing 
permitted sites where it has been demonstrated that there are benefits to the social 
grouping and that overall impacts meet the criteria of this policy. 
3. Where it is possible that a proposal may cause material harm to nearby uses, a 
temporary permission may be granted to assess its actual impact provided that there 
are strong compassionate or other personal grounds on behalf of the applicant to do 
so. In such cases the temporary permission may be restricted to a personal permission 
for the applicant only. Applications for new sites and refurbishment of existing sites 
should meet the design guidelines as detailed in National Guidance, where possible 
and relevant. 
4. The Council will seek to meet any new need deemed to be necessary for further 
provision of sites to accommodate Gypsies, Travellers or Travelling Showpeople as 
the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment is updated over the plan period. 
5.200 Policy H6 will be used to determine planning applications for Gypsies, Travellers, and 
Travelling Showpeople proposals. This will be used in the assessment of developments 
to address identified needs and any applications that may come forward over the plan 
period. 
AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL WORKERS’ DWELLINGS 
5.201 To support farm and other businesses appropriate to rural areas, the council will permit 
new dwellings for rural workers where it is essential. The council will need to clearly 
establish whether the requirement for a new dwelling is genuine, whether it can be met 
by an existing dwelling on the holding or through the conversion of a building. Where a 
need for a new dwelling is successfully demonstrated, consent will be conditional on the 
dwelling remaining for occupation by a rural worker in perpetuity. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 155 5.202 NPPF at Paragraph 80 aims to avoid the development of isolated homes in the open 
countryside unless the development is essential for rural workers including taking 
majority control of a farm business. 
5.203 The council has previously successfully used the now revoked national policy set out in 
Annex I of Planning Policy Statement 7: Sustainable Development in Rural Areas to 
determine the criteria for assessing housing development for use by rural enterprise 
workers. In the absence of new guidance from the Government following the publication 
of the NPPF, the council will continue to use similar criteria. 
POLICY H7: NEW AGRICULTURAL WORKERS OR FORESTRY DWELLINGS 
1. In the open countryside outside of the Development Limits, the erection of new 
dwellings in connection with a farm or other rural business will only be allowed where 
it satisfies other relevant policies of the Plan and meets all of the following criteria: 
a. The applicant demonstrates that there is no other viable option of utilising the 
following types of accommodation: 
i. Existing vacant dwellings in the nearest settlements or vacant agricultural 
buildings closer to the site than the nearest settlements; or, 
ii. Conversion of an existing building to the holding to residential uses; or, 
iii. The rearrangement, sub division or extension of existing dwellings; or, 
iv. Any viable options for the refurbishment of a derelict or under-used dwelling on 
the holding or in the locality; or, 
v. Extant residential permission in the locality. 
2. Evidence has been submitted to the satisfaction of the council that there is an existing 
functional need for a permanent dwelling in the particular location: 
a. The need relates to a full-time worker or one who is primarily employed in agriculture 
or another rural-based enterprise considered acceptable by the council; and, 
b. The unit and the agricultural/rural activity concerned has been established for at least 
three years, has been profitable for at least one of them, is currently financially sound, 
and has a clear prospect of remaining so; 
3. The size of, and the accommodation to be included within the proposed dwelling, is 
appropriate with the needs of the enterprise rather than those of the owner or 
occupier and is well designed and located within, or adjacent to, the existing building 
on the holding; 
a. The occupation of the dwelling shall be restricted to a person solely or mainly working, 
or last working, in the locality in agriculture or in forestry, or a widow or widower or 
surviving civil partner of such a person, and to any resident dependants;, 
b. Where necessary, an agreement or obligation will be entered into between North 
Lincolnshire Council and the applicant in order to tie the occupancy of the dwelling to 
the related operation; and, 
c. The external appearance and materials reflect local building traditions and the means 
of access is acceptable. 
d. In areas at risk of flooding, opportunities are taken to maximise reduction in flood risk 
and improvements to flood resilience. 
Page 156 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5.204 Policy H7 provides additional policy criteria to ensure the erection of a new dwelling 
within the open countryside is essential to the development of a farm or forestry 
business. 
REPLACEMENT, ALTERATION AND EXTENSIONS TO DWELLINGS IN THE OPEN
COUNTRYSIDE 
POLICY H8: REPLACEMENT, ALTERATION AND EXTENSIONS TO DWELLINGS
IN THE OPEN COUNTRYSIDE 
1. Proposals to replace, extend or alter dwellings in the open countryside will only be 
permitted provided that: 
a. the replacement dwelling would not exceed the volume of the original dwelling, which 
it is to replace, by the volume that can be developed under permitted development 
rights, and would not be substantially higher in elevation; 
b. the volume of the proposed extension or alteration does not exceed that of the original 
dwelling by 20%, inclusive of the permitted development rights, and the original 
dwelling forms the dominant visual feature of the dwelling as extended; 
c. all new construction is of a high standard of design and in particular reflects the 
architecture of the building and/or vernacular styles in the locality; 
d. the appearance or use of the dwelling as replaced, extended or altered will not 
adversely affect the amenity of local residents or the appearance of the locality; 
e. in areas at risk of flooding, opportunities are taken to maximise reduction in flood risk 
and improvements to flood resilience; and, 
f. an ecological survey as part of any planning application to ensure protected species 
such as ensure protected species such as bats and barn owls are protected. 
5.205 This policy is intended to ensure that the replacement of dwellings, and alterations and 
extensions to existing dwellings in the open countryside are allowed only where 
absolutely necessary. Any new construction should reflect the style, scale and character 
of the local architecture. The siting of any replacement dwelling should have regard to the 
existing layout, character and amenity of the site and surroundings. 
5.206 It is important that the replacement does not have a detrimental effect upon the 
character of the area and visual amenity of the countryside and needs to be located 
where possible to make the best use of existing site features. The planning authority will 
ensure that development respects and enhances the character of the countryside and 
will impose landscape conditions on new development in order to ensure the integration 
of the proposed dwelling with the surrounding landscape. 
5.207 Buildings that are in ruins, sites of former dwellings and temporary or mobile structures 
used as dwellings will not be considered as dwellings for the purposes of this policy. 
5.208 Though it would be normal to condition the removal of the original building as part of the 
planning permission for a replacement dwelling, consideration should be given to species 
of wildlife which are protected by law and are often found in old buildings. In such 
circumstances it may be desirable to retain the original structure and renovate it rather 
than build a replacement or retain it in non-residential use ancillary to the new dwelling. 
Where bats and barn owls are present the developer will be required to submit a survey 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 157 report together with proposals to mitigate and compensate for the effects of demolition 
and may include restrictions as to the time of year works can be carried out. 
SELF-BUILD AND CUSTOM BUILD 
5.209 The government introduced the Self-Build and Custom Housing Building Act 2015 which 
aims to support the Self-Build and Custom Build sector and remove the barriers which 
prevent people from building or commissioning their own homes and the NPPF places a 
strong emphasis on supporting self builds housing through planning. 
5.210 The Council encourages the development of Self-Build and Custom Build within North 
Lincolnshire and recently has implemented a local register for people who want to build 
their own homes, and to date there are 23 entries. It is likely that there will be further 
entries as the existence of the register become more well-known. The Council has a 
statutory duty to grant suitable development permission in respect of enough serviced 
plots of land to meet the demand for self-build and custom housebuilding in the 
authority’s area arising in each base period. 
5.211 The Council will have regard to the register when carrying out their functions in relation 
to housing, planning, land disposal and regeneration. The number of mortgages 
available for this product is set to increase substantially. Self-build development is 
exempt from Community Infrastructure Levy and Section 106 Contributions. 
POLICY H9: SELF-BUILD AND CUSTOM BUILD 
1. The Council will support the development of self-build and custom build homes that 
assist in meeting the overall housing needs. 
2. Residential proposals for ten houses or more (excluding houses that are to be 
provided as affordable homes) will consider making appropriate provision for plots as 
self– or custom-build wherever viable and achievable, based on the number of entries 
on the self-build register. 
3. The council will support locally proposed self-build projects identified within a 
Neighbourhood Plan wherever possible. 
4. ,All self-build and custom build development granted planning permission should 
have a condition requiring the development to be completed within 3 years of the self-
builder purchasing a plot. 
5. The provision of self-build plots will be secured through legal agreement. Any plots 
that have not been sold after 12 months of appropriate marketing will revert to the 
developer to build. 
5.212 The Council considers that self-build and custom build housing can play an important 
part in contributing to the supply of housing, increasing the mix of housing types and 
tenures, and have the potential to increase the delivery of innovative and highly 
sustainable developments in a cost effective manner. It is highly unlikely that the 
statutory duty to grant enough permissions will be met without some form of policy 
intervention. For this reason, it is considered appropriate that larger schemes of houses 
(not including flats and maisonettes or non-C3 forms of housing such as student 
accommodation) should consider making a contribution to meeting this need. 
5.213 However, it is possible that the entries on the register will not always translate to firm 
demand on the ground. Households may not be in a position to make an offer on a plot, 
their circumstances may have changed, or their needs may be met in another authority. 
Page 158 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) The provision of self-build cannot therefore be allowed to unacceptably delay the 
delivery of new homes. Therefore, if after 12 months of appropriate marketing, a plot has 
not sold, it will revert to the developer to build. 
5.214 The Localism Act 2011 provides communities with the opportunity to encourage self-
build and custom build housing by creating planning policies or allocating new 
development sites in their area. The Council will support locally proposed self-build 
projects identified within a Neighbourhood Plan wherever possible. 
FLATS ABOVE SHOPS AND VACANT BUILDINGS FOR HOUSING 
5.215 The conversion of suitable vacant buildings for housing and other initiatives, such as 
promoting flats above shops, can bring new life into towns and further reduce the need 
for building on greenfield land. Re-using vacant and under-used buildings in towns and 
urban areas can also reduce the need to travel and do much to stimulate the night-time 
economy and encourage mixed uses. Policy H9 will work alongside any future changes 
to Permitted Development Rights which will allow some building to be converted to 
dwellings depending on their Use Class. 
POLICY H10: FLATS ABOVE SHOPS AND THE USE OF VACANT BUILDINGS 
FOR HOUING 
1. The use of premises above shops for residential uses will be permitted provided that 
there is no conflict with existing land uses and that there is adequate access and car 
parking nearby. Elsewhere the Council will seek to maximise the residential use of 
both vacant and under-used housing. The conversion of under-used commercial 
premises in town centres ,for housing will be permitted provided that there is no 
conflict with existing land uses, access, parking and the environment including 
protected species and that residents will be safe from flood risk. 
5.216 Flats over shops and the use of other vacant buildings can be a valuable source of new 
housing. In Scunthorpe, major retail redevelopment of the town centre will provide 
additional retail and leisure facilities. This is expected to provide a number of 
opportunities for increasing housing provision from both conversions and re-
development in the future in other parts of the town centre. In many other town centres 
and elsewhere in the Scunthorpe and Bottesford Urban Area there is potential to provide 
additional housing by re-using vacant buildings and providing flats above shops. The 
Council will encourage such proposals wherever practicable in order to promote urban 
renaissance and sustainable living. 
BACKLAND DEVELOPMENT AND TANDEM DEVELOPMENT 
5.217 There are many areas of land within the curtilages of properties and premises, behind 
frontage buildings and away from the highway. Such land is commonly known as 
backland. Proposals are submitted to the Council for dwellings on these sites which if not 
carefully located can result in tandem development, whereby one house is immediately 
located behind the other and shares the same narrow access. This can have a significant 
impact on local distinctiveness and conservation by the erosion of the unique character 
that makes these places special, particularly if the principles of good design are not taken 
into account. 
5.218 Such proposals need to be carefully controlled to prevent problems arising from access, 
loss of privacy and amenity. It is essential therefore if development takes place in these 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 159 areas, that it is appropriate in all respects and that it makes a positive contribution to the 
environment and community within which it is located, having regard to conservation 
and sustainable design policies to ensure the local distinctiveness and character of these 
areas is maintained. 
POLICY H11: BACKLAND AND TANDEM DEVELOPMENT 
1. Backland development or tandem development will be permitted provided that: 
a. there is no adverse effect on the amenities of any residential premises or adjoining use 
through: 
i. overlooking and loss of privacy; 
ii. loss of amenity area to the adjoining dwellings; and, 
iii. the level of nuisance resulting from the movement of vehicles to and from the 
proposed development. 
b. it would not affect the general quality and character of the area in which it is located 
by: iv. unacceptably increasing the density of development in that area; and, 
v. resulting in the loss of important natural and man-made features) leading to an 
unacceptable proliferation of vehicular accesses to the detriment of the street 
scene and/or road safety. 
5.219 The development of back gardens and other backland for new housing should be in 
keeping with the character and quality of the local environment. Where development of 
back gardens or backland is allowed, it will require careful planning. For example, there 
must be proper means of access, which is convenient and safe for both drivers and 
pedestrians, and adequate provision for vehicle parking and turning. There must be 
adequate space between old and new buildings to avoid detrimental impacts the 
amenity of neighbouring houses and overshadowing must be avoided. 
5.220 Sensitive design and good landscaping are particularly important if new developments 
are to be accommodated successfully in established residential areas. Tandem 
development, consisting of one house immediately behind another and sharing the same 
narrow access, is generally unsatisfactory because of the difficulties of access to the 
house at the back and the disturbance and lack of privacy suffered by the house in front. 
HOUSES IN MULTIPLE OCCUPATION 
5.221 The Housing Act 2004 provides a definition of a House in Multiple Occupation (HMO), 
which, in summary, is a building or part of a building that is rented out by at least three 
people who are not from one ‘household’ (e.g. a family) but share some facilities such as 
a bathroom or kitchen. 
5.222 HMOs accommodating six or more unrelated individuals are unclassified by the Town 
and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, as amended. They are therefore 
described in planning terms as ‘Sui Generis’ and require planning permission. Policy H11 
provides a framework for determining planning applications for HMOs considered as 
being ‘Sui Generis’. 
5.223 HMO’s can be associated with student accommodation and single/multiple person 
accommodation within the private rented sector. Where there is a high density of HMO 
Page 160 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) accommodation this can result in a decline of traditional dwelling houses and a rise in 
amenity issues for more permanent residents. HMOs can raise a number of issues and 
problems, particularly in areas of high concentration, including: parking provision, waste/ 
recycling storage and removal, privacy and visual and residential amenity (particularly in 
terms of noise generation). 
5.224 Any significant impact on the surrounding roads and the amenity of future residents and 
adjoining or neighbouring properties should be minimised. Furthermore, it is important to 
ensure that development takes place in appropriate locations, avoiding the over-
concentration of such properties where the issues above would be proliferated. 
5.225 NPPF favours development which facilitates the use of sustainable modes of transport. 
Properties should therefore have good walking and cycling access to key services, 
facilities and a bus service (by which residents can reach such services and facilities). A 
distance of 400m is generally accepted as an appropriate walking distance to key 
services, facilities and public transport from home. 
5.226 Proposals for the creation of HMOs should provide satisfactory standards of 
accommodation. One step in achieving this is to ensure that there is adequate living 
space which complies with DCLG Nationally Described Space Standards March 2015 (or 
any successor). Furthermore, for some large HMOs, a licence is required. Where this is 
the case, the proposal should be in accordance with DASH space standards (or any 
successor). 
5.227 Where there is evidence to demonstrate an over intensification of HMO’s within North 
Lincolnshire which is having a detrimental impact upon the character and amenity of the 
local area, the Council will seek to put in place an Article 4 Direction. In these 
circumstances the Article 4 Direction would seek to require that a planning application is 
made to North Lincolnshire Council for the change of use of a building from a dwelling 
house (Planning Use Class C3) to a small HMO (Planning Use Class C4) by removing 
existing Permitted Development Rights for dwelling houses to convert to HMO’s without 
planning approval. 
5.228 In ensuring that any change of use to a HMO within the area covered by the Article 4 
Direction, either individually or cumulatively, does not unduly dilute or harm an existing 
mixed and sustainable community through the significant loss of single family housing in 
line with the policy, the following guidance will be used to determine a planning 
application for change of use from C3 (dwellinghouse) to a HMO. 
5.229 Planning permission will not normally be granted where the proportion of HMOs (either 
C4 or sui generis) will result in HMOs representing 25% or more of the residential 
properties within a circle of 50m radius measured from the application site. 
5.230 The centre of the radius will be the front door of the property. A 50m radius will be drawn 
from this point and any properties or any part of a building falling within the radius will 
be taken into account in the assessment. If a part of a building falls within the circle and 
partly without, then the property will form a part of the assessment. 
5.231 Where the radius includes entire buildings falling within an B, C1 or C2, E, F or sui generis 
use class (apart from a sui generis HMO) they will be discounted from the total number 
of buildings in the radius. Similarly, purpose-built flats will be discounted from the total 
number of buildings in the radius. Any existing flat conversions will be included in the 
number of C3 dwellings and will not be included in the number of HMOs for the purposes 
of the threshold calculation. 
5.232 The Council will use information available to it to identify which properties are within an 
HMO use (either C4 or sui generis). It is anticipated that the information to calculate the 
percentage will initially be based primarily on Environmental Health and Council Tax 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 161 information, given data protection and other regulations preventing the use of certain 
information. Where there is significant doubt as to whether a property is an HMO, it will 
not be counted towards the threshold. For the avoidance of doubt, the application 
property will be taken into account in calculating this percentage of properties. 
5.233 The applicant should also undertake their own estimate of the number of HMOs to 
accompany the planning application and provide all of their supporting data. It is advised 
that pre-application advice is sought prior to submitting any planning application. 
5.234 Planning permission will be required to change the use of a small HMO to a large HMO, 
or to intensify the use of a lawful large HMO (without any physical extension or external 
alteration to the property) by increasing the number of occupiers. In this instance the 
threshold limit will not be triggered as the HMO has already been established in the 
street and, therefore, have no further effect on the concentration of HMOs and balance 
and mix of households in the local community. 
POLICY H12: HOUSES IN MULTIPLE OCCUPATION 
1. Proposals for the creation of large Houses in Multiple Occupation and the sub-division 
of dwellings will be permitted provided that, in each case: 
a. It would not result in the loss of family-sized dwellings in high density residential areas 
and streets of predominantly terraced and/or semi-detached properties; 
b. It would not significantly harm the amenities of the occupiers of adjoining or 
neighbouring properties, by way of noise, overlooking, general disturbance or impact 
on visual amenity; 
c. It would not have a significant adverse impact on the character and appearance of the 
area, including the historic and natural environment; 
d. Adequate provision is made for the storage and disposal of refuse and recycling; 
e. It would not have a significant adverse impact on the surrounding area by way of 
increased on-street parking, impaired highway safety or by impeding proper access to 
the area; 
f. The site has good access – by walking and cycling – to community facilities, services, 
public transport and local employment; 
g. An adequate standard of residential accommodation and residential amenity is 
provided for future occupiers; 
h. Adequate provision is made for the communal gardens and amenity areas; and, 
i. Where the HMO is located in Flood Zone 2 or 3, no bedrooms at ground floor level are 
proposed (unless a supporting flood risk assessment demonstrates that they will be 
above predicted flood levels. 
2. Where all of the above criteria are satisfied, the DCLG Nationally Described Space 
Standards March 2015 (or any successor) will be applied to ensure that the occupiers 
have adequate floor space. 
3. Where appropriate for licensing purposes, proposals for the creation of an HMO 
should be in accordance with North Lincolnshire Council Amenity Standards Guide 
and any future updates. 
4. Planning permission will not normally be granted where the proportion of HMOs 
(either C4 or sui generis) will result in HMOs representing 25% or more of the 
residential properties within a circle of 50m radius measured from the application 
site. 
Page 162 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5.235 HMOs form an important element of North Lincolnshire’s housing stock and can provide 
a useful low-cost form of accommodation for single persons and those on low incomes. 
But they can result in the loss of family-sized units and a consequential increase in the 
overall number of units unsuited to family occupation. This poses serious issues for 
maintaining a mixed housing offer across North Lincolnshire. The North Lincolnshire 
Housing and Economic Needs Assessment November 2020 for the Local Plan identifies 
a need for single person homes within the plan period . It is important, therefore, that an 
approach is taken on the creation of HMO and sub-division of existing properties, which 
allows only those that do not impact upon the overall supply of family-sized homes. In 
applying this policy, ‘family-sized dwellings’ means houses with 3 or more bedrooms. 
CHILDREN’S HOMES 
5.236 In 2016 the government set out its ambitions and strategy to reform Children’s Social 
Care. The Government’s vision is that every child in the country, whatever their 
background, whatever their age, whatever their ethnicity or gender, should have the 
opportunity to fulfil their potential. For the around 70,000 children who are looked after, 
this means that their experience of care should prepare them for a future where they are 
able to fulfil their potential and ambitions. 
5.237 The children and young people living in children’s homes are among the most vulnerable 
in society. Whilst children's homes have traditionally been for children under 16, provision 
for young people beyond the age of 16 years old would also be determined against this 
policy or addressing housing needs. Many have special educational needs or disabilities, 
including social, educational and mental health difficulties and many are victims of abuse 
or neglect. It is therefore vital that we do everything possible to improve their experience 
of being looked after in care, helping them to overcome their previous experiences, and 
setting them up for future which allows them to achieve their potential. 
5.238 In order to understand the issues surrounding supply and demand and to get a national 
picture of the needs of the children placed on welfare grounds, the Government set up a 
National Coordination Unit in May 2016. With the data gathered by the unit the 
Government is developing options for how secure places can be better planned, co-
ordinated and joined up at national level, to better meet the needs of young people 
needing secure accommodation. 
5.239 A Review by Sir Martin Narey suggested that children should be placed within 20 miles 
from their home. Nationally, 37% of children in children’s homes were placed over 20 
miles from home and outside their local authority at 31 March 2015. 
5.240 In support of any planning application, evidence will need to be provided that the needs 
will be met in terms of access to any services and facilities and to ensure that any 
necessary safeguards are put in place including having had regard to any crime or safety 
concerns of the particular area. A locality risk assessment will be required which is in line 
with the Care Standards Act and will need to be submitted in support of a planning 
application. This should be undertaken through consultation with relevant organisations 
including Humberside Police, North Lincolnshire Council Children Services and will be 
required to also take into account the cumulative impact of any similar establishments in 
the locality and the impact this could have of emergency services. 
5.241 In addition to the safeguarding and general needs of the children, consideration must 
also be given to the existing residents in terms of residential amenity. Any proposals must 
demonstrate that there will be no unacceptable impact on the character of the area. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 163 POLICY H13: CHILDREN'S HOMES 
1. The development of both new and converted properties for Children Homes will be 
permitted provided that: 
a. The development is located within either the Scunthorpe and Bottesford Urban Area, 
Principal Towns, or Larger Service Centres. 
b. Sites offer a positive and safe environment for the occupants of the premises ensuring 
that there is appropriate access to services and facilities; 
c. The occupants would not be placed at any risk having regard to the latest crime and 
safety statistics in the area and that this has been agreed in advance with 
Humberside Police, the Council’s Children's Services and other appropriate agencies; 
d. There is no unacceptable, cumulative impact relating from concentrations of similar 
establishments within the locality through liaison with the Council Children's Services 
and any other appropriate agencies; 
e. It is unlikely to cause unacceptable impact on the residential amenity; 
f. Satisfactory outside space, highway access, parking and servicing can be achieved. In 
all instances, a planning application must be supported by a management plan which 
incorporates a locality risk assessment, for approval by the Local Planning Authority in 
consultation with the Council Children's Services and any other appropriate agencies; 
and, 
g. Appropriate measures will be in place to ensure access for emergency vehicles and 
safety measures such as fire escapes. 
5.242 Policy H13 provides additional criteria to support the delivery of Children Homes in the 
most suitable locations to support the needs of the occupants, staff and local community. 
Page 164 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 6 Delivering Jobs & Supporting Our
Economy 
6.1 National policy and guidance requires Local Plans to proactively drive and support 
sustainable economic development to deliver jobs that the country needs. The new Local 
Plan must ensure that sufficient employment land of the right type is available, in the 
right places and at the right time to support growth and innovation. It must also address 
other issues that are important to businesses such as affordable homes for workers, 
transport, and infrastructure, and will need to address how many new jobs need to be 
provided and how best can we support our existing and growing employment sectors. 
Barriers to investment should be addressed and priority areas identified for economic 
regeneration, infrastructure provision and environmental enhancement. Economic 
development is a critical component that drives growth, creating high wage jobs and 
facilitating an improved quality of life. 
6.2 The Council places a key emphasis on driving economic vitality. It seeks to shape the area 
into a more prosperous place for residents and businesses alike and to be ‘safer, greener 
and cleaner’ by increasing economic growth and prosperity through higher employment 
and increased home ownership. 
6.3 As part of previous consultations there was broad support for continuation of the existing 
strategic locational approach taken in the Core Strategy. In terms of identifying additional 
employment land, main transport corridors were highlighted as the preferred strategic 
locations for future growth outside of Scunthorpe and the market towns. In a North 
Lincolnshire context this would relate to land alongside, or near to, the M180/M181, 
A180, A160, A18, A15, the A1077 Scunthorpe orbital, the Cleethorpes to Doncaster 
railway line and Humberside Airport. 
6.4 There was also support for a greater distribution of employment land to the villages and 
wider rural areas but at a scale commensurate to their localities. With the market towns 
having a greater proportion of employment land than currently allocated as they 
represent popular sustainable settlements which could accommodate greater growth. In 
general, there was support for continued economic growth across North Lincolnshire 
provided that the infrastructure was capable of sustaining growth, and if not, then 
improvements would be essential. 
6.5 The Council places great emphasis on economic growth and the benefits that a 
prosperous economy will bring about for the residents of North Lincolnshire. This is 
supported through the Council Plan, Economic Growth Plan and the Local Economic 
Assessment. The North Lincolnshire Council Plan 2018/2019 as a priority, seeks to grow 
the economy. It aims to achieve a more prosperous North Lincolnshire, to help the Council 
to invest further in communities and to create jobs and opportunities for everyone. 
6.6 The Economic Growth Plan focuses on the next five years and lays the foundations for 
continued growth from 2023 and beyond, whilst setting out the ideas and support we 
need over this period that will put us in a strong place on which to build and develop. The 
plan, with the emerging Local Industrial Strategy, offers North Lincolnshire the 
opportunity to deliver its ambitions and realise its potential. Together, we can deliver a 
substantial contribution to UK plc as well as rebalancing our region for generations to 
come. 
6.7 It is important that North Lincolnshire builds on its strengths, with the Economic Growth 
Plan focusing on both the energy corridor stretching from the coast to South Yorkshire, 
encompassing energy production and consumption, steel and process engineering, 
chemicals and associated logistics and the food sector, and the food belt corridor from 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 165 York to Lincoln encompasses growing, logistics, processing and research and 
development. Central to both approaches is the recognised need to add value and 
increase productivity. 
6.8 The following table demonstrates that the local economy is currently highly dependent 
upon manufacturing. Around 23%¹ of employees in North Lincolnshire work in this sector 
when compared with 11.3% regionally and 7.9% nationally. On the basis of Scunthorpe’s 
steel making heritage, metal manufacturing accounts for 23.5%² of manufacturing jobs 
with food manufacturing running at 20.7%³. 
TABLE 6.1 EMPLOYMENT BY INDUSTRY 
North 
Lincolnshire Yorkshire and 
The Humber England 
Agriculture and Fishing 1.1% (800) 0.5% 0.6% 
Mining, quarrying & utilities 2.0% (1,500) 1.1% 1.1% 
Manufacturing 23.0% (17,000) 11.3% 7.9% 
Construction 8.1% (6,000) 5.4% 4.8% 
Retail & Wholesale (inc Motor Trades) 14.9% (11,000) 21.3% 15.1% 
Transport & storage (inc postal) 8.1% (6,000) 5.1% 5.0% 
Accommodation & food services 4.7% (3,500) 6.5% 7.5% 
Public Administration, Education and Health 23.0% (17,000) 27.9% 25.4% 
Other Services 15.7% (11,600) 26.7% 32.4% 
Source: Business Register and Employment Survey (2019) 
6.9 The largest industry sectors for employment in North Lincolnshire, both employing 23% 
of employees (17,000), are the Public Administration, Education and Health and 
Manufacturing Sectors. 
6.10 The Public Administration, Education and Health Sector is also the largest regionally and 
nationally at 27.9% and 25.4% respectively. It is not equivalent to the Public Sector as it 
does not include various publicly owned corporations and bodies but does include private 
sector health and education. The Manufacturing sector is a significant major employer in 
North Lincolnshire, employing 17,000 residents, a rate of 23.0%, outperforming the 
regional and national rates of 11.3% and 7.9%. 
Key Facts 
• As of December 2020, in North Lincolnshire there are fewer economically active women 
(37,500) when compared to economically active men (42,500) (Annual Population 
Survey APS Dec 2020). 
• In 2019, the number of new businesses (670) far outstrips the number of Businesses 
ceasing trading (580) in North Lincolnshire (ONS Business Demographics 2019). 
• A higher proportion of North Lincolnshire’s population (22.5%) is economically inactive in 
comparison to the national average (20.5%) (APS Dec 2020). 
• 20.5% of the population in North Lincolnshire is classed as retired compared to a national 
average of 13.5% (APS Dec 2020). 
1 BRES 2019 data 
2 BRES 2019 data. metal manufacturing is combined basic metals and fabricated metal products excluding machinery/ equipment 
3 BRES 2019 data. Food manufacturing is combined food production and beverage production 
Page 166 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) • Latest figures show that the rate of claimants for unemployment benefits aged 18-24 
stands at a high of 10.3%, significantly higher than the national rate of 6.5% (NOMIS 
Claimant Count Apr 2021) 
6.11 Located on the south bank of the Humber Estuary, North Lincolnshire’s prime location 
places the area at a distinct advantage to access the European mainland and its main 
trading and commercial centres via the South Humber ports of Killingholme, Immingham 
and Grimsby, which collectively handle over a quarter of the United Kingdom’s imports 
and exports. North Lincolnshire also benefits from excellent transport links, including 
access to the two international airports of Humberside Airport and the nearby Robin 
Hood Airport Doncaster Sheffield, and well-developed motorway, road and rail networks 
connecting the area with the rest of the country and beyond. 
6.12 Due to its location, North Lincolnshire is aligned with two Local Enterprise Partnerships 
(LEPs), the Humber and the Greater Lincolnshire. They are locally-owned partnerships 
between local authorities and businesses, playing a central role in determining local 
economic priorities and undertaking activities to drive economic growth and the creation 
of local jobs. The Humber SEP sets out the Humber LEPs vision for the Humber area. The 
vision aims to maximise the unique natural asset of the Humber Estuary and create the 
establishment of the Estuary, as a prime national base for the development and 
maintenance of the off shore wind industry and supporting the development of other 
renewable energy technologies around the Humber. The Greater Lincolnshire LEP works 
with Government to improve the economic climate across Lincolnshire, North 
Lincolnshire and North East Lincolnshire. Its aim is to improve infrastructure and the 
conditions for doing business. The Humber LEP is a business–led partnership with 
education and four local authorities working together to promote and develop the area 
surrounding the Humber Estuary, and provide strategic economic leadership to create 
jobs and deliver growth. 
Key Challenges 
6.13 It is considered that there are a number of key challenges that the Issues and Options 
Local Plan identified. 
• Ensuring that sufficient employment land is provided in accessible and sustainable 
locations; 
• Improving the quality of the employment land offer; 
• Bringing forward the two major Able UK developments at the South Humber Gateway; 
• Ensuring that new retail development enhances the overall retail provision whilst 
protecting the area’s town and district centres; 
• Providing access to employment/key services, particularly for people without access to a 
car. 
• Promoting and enhancing North Lincolnshire’s tourism offer; 
• Ensuring that local people have the right skills and experience to play a role in driving and 
transforming North Lincolnshire’s economy. 
Identifying and Selecting Employment Land Options 
6.14 Alongside and in conformity with the Plan’s Spatial Strategy priority has therefore been 
given to sites within and adjacent to Scunthorpe, the South Humber Bank and immediate 
area, the Market Towns of Brigg and Barton upon Humber, Humberside Airport, land at 
Sandtoft for a business park and sites at key transport interchanges. 
6.15 North Lincolnshire is fast becoming a major energy capital in terms of energy generation, 
which includes the emerging renewable energy and off-shore wind sectors. Land at the 
South Humber Bank is therefore allocated as a Strategic Employment Site for E(g), B2, 
and B8 Estuary Related uses including energy generation to support these sectors. The 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 167 development of North Killingholme Airfield is seen as an essential and integral part of the 
nearby South Humber Bank proposal and is, therefore, also identified as a Strategic 
Employment Site in order to assist in the deliverability of the South Humber Bank. North 
Killingholme Airfield is to be utilised, but not solely, for land intensive storage and 
distribution uses that would effectively sterilise prime industrial land set adjacent to the 
Humber Estuary. 
6.16 The 55.3ha land allocation at Sandtoft is for a potential logistics park, which maximises 
its proximity to the M180 motorway, subject to satisfactory access arrangements being 
met. Allocations at Humberside Airport are proposed to help bolster airport operations 
and to maximise freight potential. Employment land has also been allocated at the 
Barton upon Humber Interchange to reinforce its role as a key market town. Elsewhere, 
a number of other employment allocations such at Barnetby Top and Junction 2 of the 
M180 have been identified that offer good accessibility to the local highway network. 
6.17 Any proposed development likely to have a significant effect on a wildlife site of 
European or international importance will be subject to a Habitat Regulations 
Assessment (HRA) by the competent authority. North Lincolnshire Council, as the 
competent authority, reserves the right to apply the HRA process on a case by case 
basis. In all cases there is a need to consider avoidance, mitigation then compensation. 
Where it cannot be demonstrated that a development proposal will not have an adverse 
effect on the integrity of a site of European or international importance to nature 
conservation, mitigation measures must be provided as part of development proposals 
that adequately mitigates the effects. 
POLICY EC1: EMPLOYMENT LAND SUPPLY 
1. Over the period 2020 to 2038, provision will be made to deliver at least 131.7 
hectares (Ha) of employment land across North Lincolnshire. 
2. The sites listed below, as identified on the Policies Map, are allocated for employment 
use* and are protected for the employment uses specified. 
3. Development on these sites will be acceptable for the specified use classes and will 
be required to be delivered in accordance with the specific requirements set out, 
together with the requirements of other policies set out elsewhere in this Plan. 
4. The council will consider withdrawing permitted development rights to protect the 
sites for the employment uses proposed. 
5. Within the operational port areas identified on the Policies Map development 
proposals for port and port related use will be supported and, where appropriate, 
approved. 
Page 168 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) ALLOCATED EMPLOYMENT SITES 
Location Site 
Reference Policy Name Use * Allocated site 
area ha 
Scunthorpe EC1-1 Normanby Enterprise Park E(g), B2, B8 38.87 
Scunthorpe EC1-2 Land north of Tesco E(g), B8 39.96 
Kirmington EC1-3 Humberside Airport E(g), B8 12 
Kirmington EC1-4 Humberside Airport E(g), B8 7.8 
Sandtoft EC1-5 Sandtoft Business Park E(g), B8 55.3 
Barton upon Humber EC1-6 Land to the north west of the A15 
Barton Interchange E(g), B2, B8 15 
Barnetby Top EC1-7 Land to the south of Barnetby Top
Interchange and to the west of the
A18 Service Station 
and lorry park 6.14 
Barnetby Top EC1-8 Land to the south of Barnetby Top
Interchange and to the east of the A18 E(g), B2, B8 10 
M180 Junction 2 EC1-9 Land to the south of Crowle gyratory E(g), B8 5 
190.07 
NORMANBY ENTERPRISE PARK 
6.18 Normanby Enterprise Park is situated to the north of Scunthorpe and comprises land that 
formed part of the Normanby Park Steel Works which closed down in 1981. Since then 
it has been subject to progressive restoration by North Lincolnshire Council and Yorkshire 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 169 Forward, with an area to the north west still subject to further remedial work. However, 
it is unlikely that the restoration of this area will be funded by the Council and will be 
reliant on private sector intervention. 
Proposed Development 
6.19 The majority of this previously developed land is currently available for development with 
the adjoining existing employment uses making this a suitable site for further light 
industrial, storage and distribution and office development. 
6.20 Highway access can be achieved via the internal roads that serve the developed part of 
Normanby Enterprise Park which then links to the B1430 Normanby Road. As the site 
develops, contributions from developers may be sought for improvements to Normanby 
Road and the Normanby Road/Mannaberg Way roundabout. 
6.21 The site is within a short distance of nearby residential areas and Scunthorpe Town 
Centre. The Scunthorpe Ridgeway, an off-road pedestrian/cycling facility from 
Burringham Road in the south runs through the site and links the area to the north and 
south. 
6.22 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. As the site measures more than 1 ha a Flood Risk 
Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall level of 
flood risk. 
6.23 The site lies adjacent to a Scheduled Monument and includes a moated site which may 
also be of national importance. An assessment of the impact of proposals upon these 
assets will be required and the scheme will need to demonstrate how those elements 
which contribute to their significance will be conserved. 
6.24 The Phoenix and Phoenix Parkway Local Nature Reserves are located towards the south 
western corner of the site. The southern part of the site also falls within the Slag Banks 
Local Wildlife Site (LWS) which was selected for its acid grassland habitat and as a 
mosaic of other habitats including neutral grassland and wetlands. The Grayling 
butterfly, a UK BAP species, has been recorded next to this site. 
POLICY EC1-1: NORMANBY ENTERPRISE PARK 
1. Land at Normanby Enterprise Park (35.10 ha) is allocated for employment use. The 
site will be developed in accordance to the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial), B2 (General 
Industrial) and B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses. 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be from existing distributor roads that serve the wider 
Enterprise Park. There should be no new accesses directly onto the B1430 Normanby 
Road; the Highway Authority may be seeking contributions from developers for 
improvements to Normanby Road and the Normanby Road/Mannaberg Way 
roundabout. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
d. Footpaths and cycle provision should be provided throughout the site, linking the 
development with, residential areas and the wider rights of way networks. 
Page 170 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement, 
required. is 
f. Biodiversity enhancements to be incorporated into the site design. These should be 
sympathetic to the habitats present within the Local Wildlife Site and the Local Nature 
Reserves. 
g. An Ecology Survey will be required. 
h. Development proposals should not have an adverse impact on the Phoenix and 
Phoenix Parkway Local Nature Reserves or the Slag Banks Local Wildlife Site. 
Ecological compensation and mitigation should be provided in order to off-set the loss 
of any habitats, and any enhancements should result in a net gain in biodiversity. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. Particular regard will need to be 
undertaken of the impact of any proposals upon those elements which contribute to 
the significance of the Scheduled Monument to the west of this allocation and to the 
moated site which lies within this site. Development proposals should ensure that 
those elements which contribute to their significance are conserved. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
Utility and service provision 
k. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon the type/scale of development. 
l. Further restoration/remedial work will be required for the south western area of the site 
before that part can be developed. 
Implementation m. Development of Policy EC1-1 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected to be completed by 2025. 
n. Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 171 LAND NORTH OF DONCASTER ROAD 
6.25 The land north of Doncaster Road is a greenfield site that is currently in arable 
production. It is situated to the west of Scunthorpe and is irregular in shape with broadly 
flat topography. Employment uses lie adjacent to the eastern boundary on the Hebden 
Road Industrial Estate. Gallagher Retail Park and a Tesco Extra supermarket lie to the 
south of the site. Open agricultural land lies to the west beyond the A1077 and north of 
the site. 
Proposed Development 
6.26 The site offers good access to the strategic highway network via the adjacent A1077 
Orbital road. It did benefit from an outline planning consent for housing, which has 
subsequently expired, with the landowner now looking to bring forward a business park 
instead. Subject to satisfying the built and green environmental and access criteria in this 
policy the land would be suitable for E(g) Business/Light Industrial and B2 employment 
related uses 
6.27 A new roundabout on the A1077 will be required. Improvements to Berkeley Circle may 
also be necessary. 
6.28 The site is in close proximity to existing residential development to the east and therefore 
a noise impact assessments will be required. 
6.29 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 2/3(a) tidal. As the site measures more than 1 ha, a 
Flood Risk Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable 
Drainage Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall 
level of flood risk. 
Page 172 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY EC1-2: LAND AT NORTH OF DONCASTER ROAD 
1. Land at North of Doncaster Road (39.96ha) is allocated for employment use. The site 
will be developed in accordance to the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial) and B8 
(Storage and Distribution) uses. 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be from a new roundabout on the A1077 Orbital Road. There 
should be no new accesses from the existing residential and employment areas to the 
east. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
d. Footpaths and cycle provision should be provided throughout the site, linking the 
development with residential areas and the wider rights of way networks. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement and 
habitat creation is required. 
f. Biodiversity enhancements to be incorporated into the site design. 
g. An Ecology Survey will be required. 
Heritage 
h. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
i. A HIA will be required -Archaeological field evaluation comprising geophysical survey 
and trial trenching. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
j. A reliable and robust Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the 
application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water 
drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into 
the development. 
Contamination, noise and odour 
k. A Noise Impact Assessment and Air Quality Assessment is required. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon the type/scale of development. 
Implementation m. Development of Policy EC1-2 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected throughout the plan period and will be completed by 2038. 
n. Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 173 LAND TO THE WEST OF HUMBERSIDE AIRPORT 
6.30 Site EC1-3 is located to the south of the A18 at Kirmington and to the west of the 
existing Airport Business Park. The site is comprised of agricultural land/grass land and 
is currently accessed by means of a private road that runs north/south alongside the 
Airport’s western boundary, which then fronts the A18. Immediately to the east are the 
remaining undeveloped parts of the Airport’s Business Park which was allocated as 
Employment Site HUME-1 in the 2016 Housing and Employment Land Allocations DPD. 
6.31 There are a number of residential properties located to the south eastern corner of the 
site which abut the airport’s western boundary and are accessed by the adjacent private 
road. 
6.32 The airport has established air traffic associated with the off-shore gas production and 
exploration and UK domestic and European flights. In addition there a number of charter 
flights with the number being seasonally influenced. The airport has also been the 
subject of significant investment in recent years. It is currently the second largest 
helicopter base in the UK for the off-shore oil and gas industry in the southern North Sea, 
a role and a market segment which is continuing to grow. Other recent investments 
include a new £5m national training academy for BAE Systems providing up to 60 
apprentice opportunities every year, and a hotel. From 2015, it has been one of the 
country’s 10 bases for Air Sea Search & Rescue operations. Improvements have also be 
taken place to the road network around the airport to provide better access to this key 
location. 
6.33 Currently access into the airport is achieved by one roundabout junction off the A18 
which has recently been improved/upgraded funded by Humber Local Growth Fund. 
Prior to the improvement, the junction was not traffic light controlled and had a central 
right turn lane for traffic heading to the airport from Melton Ross. 
Page 174 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Proposed Development 
6.34 The site is adjacent to Humberside Airport that offers excellent air freight opportunities 
and good strategic access via the A18 and M180. Access would be through the existing 
Airport Business Park from the A18. It forms an ideal site for E(g) (Business/Light 
Industrial), and B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses, particularly those associated with air 
freight or training operations. 
6.35 The site is identified as a second phase for development at the airport, which will be 
brought forward after the remaining undeveloped area of the existing Airport’s Business 
Park has been substantially committed for development. 
6.36 However, the council is mindful that opportunities may arise for this site to be brought 
forward sooner. If specific development proposals cannot be accommodated, on the 
existing Airport’s Business Park, for example due to size requirements, within the existing 
available land of the remaining Business Park they will then be considered under the 
remit of policy EC1-3. 
6.37 The site is to be accessed across the private lane via the existing Airport Business Park’s 
distributor road to the east. Given the secured works to improve the airport’s main access 
it is unlikely that the development of this site will require further short term improvements 
to the main A18 Airport junction. However, the effective operation of the improved A18 
junction will be subject to monitoring by the Highway Authority. 
6.38 Improvements to how the site can be accessed by sustainable modes of transport should 
be considered and reflect the aspirations of the Humberside Airport Surface Access 
Strategy and the Local Transport Plan. 
6.39 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. As the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood Risk 
Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall level of 
flood risk. 
6.40 There is a large and extensive Iron Age and Roman settlement just 300 metres to the 
north east of this area which is designated a Scheduled Monument. Given the close 
proximity of the monument to this allocation, there is a high likelihood of archaeological 
remains within the area covered by EC1-3. 
6.41 A contaminated land survey may be required due to adjacent land forming part of the 
operational area of a former WW2 airfield. 
6.42 A landscaping scheme will be required that effectively screens the small cluster of 
residential properties located to the site’s south eastern corner. 
POLICY EC1-3: LAND TO THE WEST OF HUMBERSIDE AIRPORT 
1. Land to the west of Humberside Airport 12(ha) is allocated for employment use. The 
site will be brought forward for development once the remaining undeveloped part of 
the existing Airport Business Park is substantially committed or when due to size 
restrictions proposed employment uses cannot be physically accommodated. The site 
will be developed in accordance to the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial), and B8 
(Storage and Distribution) uses and ancillary uses which support or are associated 
with the airport functions. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 175 Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be achieved from within the existing airport distributor road 
and will need to be agreed with the Highways Authority. 
c. Improvements to the main A18 access junction may be required. No new accesses will 
be permitted directly onto the A18. 
d. Improvements to how the site can be accessed by sustainable modes of transport 
should be considered and reflect the aspirations of the Humberside Airport Surface 
Access Strategy and the Local Transport Plan. 
e. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
f. An Ecological Survey is required. 
g. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement, is 
required. 
Heritage 
h. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. Particular regard will need to be 
given to the impact of the development on the setting of the extensive Iron Age and 
Roman scheduled monument. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
i. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
j. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon type/scale of development. 
k. Infrastructure upgrade will be required to Kirmington sewage treatment works. 
Implementation l. Development of Policy EC1-3 is to be brought forward by the landowner/developer. 
The delivery of the site is expected to be delivered between 2026-2038 and is phased 
on the substantial commitment of the remaining undeveloped elements of the Airport 
Business Park. 
m. Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
Page 176 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) LAND NORTH OF A18 AT HUMBERSIDE AIRPORT 
6.43 The EC1-4 site is located to the north of the A18 at Kirmington and to the north-west of 
the main existing airport complex. It is comprised of a former quarry that has not been 
worked for a number of years and is under the same ownership as the larger quarry 
works to the north of the adjacent railway line. Beyond the A18 to the southeast of the 
site falls the existing Airport Business Park. 
Proposed Development 
6.44 The site is adjacent to Humberside Airport that offers excellent air freight opportunities 
and good strategic access via the A18 and M180. A business park allocation could also 
assist in safeguarding the airport’s future operation. Access would be via a new junction, 
the standard of which would require agreement with the Highway Authority, onto the 
A18 at the site’s furthermost eastern point. Like site EC1-3, EC1-4 forms an ideal site for 
E(g) (Business/Light Industrial), and B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses particularly those 
associated with air freight or training operations. 
6.45 The site lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. As the site measures more than 1ha, a Flood Risk 
Assessment is required. This should include consideration of Sustainable Drainage 
Systems and how the layout and form of development can reduce the overall level of 
flood risk. 
6.46 A contaminated land survey may be required due to the site’s previous quarrying 
operations and subsequent usage. 
6.47 There is a large and extensive Iron Age and Roman settlement to the north east of this 
area which is designated a Scheduled Monument. 
6.48 The site is both a Local Wildlife Site (LWS) and a Local Geological Site (LGS). Melton Ross 
Quarry was selected as a LWS for its brownfield mosaic and calcareous grassland 
habitats, and as a LGS for the scientific and cultural value of the chalk exposures. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 177 POLICY EC1-4: LAND NORTH OF THE A18 AT HUMBERSIDE AIRPORT 
1. Land north of the A18 at Humberside Airport (7.8ha) is allocated for employment use. 
The site will be developed in accordance to the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial) and B8 
(Storage and Distribution) uses and ancillary uses which support or are associated 
with the airport functions. 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be achieved via a new junction fronting the A18 which will 
need to be agreed with the Highways Authority. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
d. Improvements to how the site can be accessed by sustainable modes of transport 
should be considered and reflect the aspirations of the Humberside Airport Surface 
Access Strategy and the Local Transport Plan. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
e. An Ecology Survey is required. 
f. Any proposal which is likely to have an adverse impact on a Local Wildlife Site or Local 
Geological Site shall not be approved unless it can be clearly demonstrated that there 
are reasons for the proposal, which outweigh the need to safeguard the intrinsic 
nature conservation and geological value of the site. In all cases where development 
is permitted which may cause such damage, the damage shall be kept to a minimum. 
Planning obligations shall be used to ensure the protection and enhancement of each 
site’s nature conservation and geological value. Compensatory measures will be used 
if necessary to off-set the loss of any habitats. Any enhancements should result in a 
net gain in biodiversity. 
g. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement, is 
required. 
h. Development proposals should not have an adverse impact on the Melton Ross 
Quarry Local Wildlife Site or Local Geological Site” and “Biodiversity enhancements to 
be incorporated into the site design. These should be sympathetic to the habitats 
present within the Local Wildlife Site”. 
Heritage 
i. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. Particular regard will need to be 
given to the impact of the development on the setting of the nearby extensive Iron Age 
and Roman scheduled monument. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
j. A Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the application process to 
assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water drainage. Where practical 
Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into the development. 
k. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon type/scale of development. 
l. Infrastructure upgrade will be required to Kirmington sewage treatment works. 
Page 178 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Implementation 
m. Development of Policy EC1-4 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected by 2025. 
n. Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
LAND AT SANDTOFT AIRFIELD 
6.49 The Sandtoft Business Park site is located south of the M180 motorway, east of Sandtoft 
village and north of Belton Road. It forms part of a former World War II airfield which 
mostly comprises agricultural land. There are a number of existing businesses that have 
developed along the Belton Road frontage and in the Sandtoft Industrial Estate, with car 
and van storage being particularly common. 
6.50 Adjacent land uses include the M180 motorway to the north and Belton Road to the 
south. Along Belton Road there are a number of businesses including the Sandtoft 
Tileries site and the Sandtoft Trolley Bus Museum. The wider Sandtoft Airfield contains in 
the region of 40 businesses, as such Sandtoft Airfield represents an existing key 
employment location within the District, fulfilling an important role particularly in relation 
to these firms benefiting from a location near to the strategic road network. The small 
village of Sandtoft is located immediately to the west of the allocation separated by Idle 
Bank Road. 
6.51 Access to the wider strategic road network and ultimately the M180 is currently 
achieved, subject to weight restrictions, via either High Levels Bank to the west or Belton 
Road/Sandtoft Road/Westgate Road to the east. Presently the area is inadequately 
served by public transport with the nearest railway station at Crowle (Ealand) located 
some 4 km to the north. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 179 6.52 The drain to the immediate west of High Levels Bank is identified as a SSSI. In addition, 
there is a known Local Wildlife Site Drain that runs through the centre of the site. 
Proposed Development 
6.53 The site at Sandtoft provides potential for a business park that would maximise its 
proximity to the M180 motorway. A logistics park in this location will support the wider 
growth of North Lincolnshire’s economy and the South Humber Bank ports by providing 
a suitable location for storage and distribution of goods. A Transport Study and Economic 
Viability Study covering the business park proposal have been undertaken, that 
demonstrates that the site can be developed with a number of access options identified. 
6.54 Local access improvements to serve Employment Site EC1-5 will be required, that 
include a roundabout on Belton Road, a roundabout on High Levels Bank Road (C202) 
and a link road through the site. Off-site mitigations measures will be needed which are 
likely to include carriageway widening to the M180 overbridge; widening to Brook 
Corner; improvements to A18/High Levels Bank Junction; improvements to the Crowle 
Gyratory and traffic management works to Westgate Road. These measures will be 
delivered in a phased manner in accordance with a masterplan accompanying any 
planning application(s) to be agreed with North Lincolnshire Council. 
6.55 This area lies within SFRA Flood Zone 2/3a. A Flood Risk Assessment will be required as 
part of the application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface 
water drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated 
into the development. 
6.56 To the immediate west of the site there is a small group of Listed Buildings and a Listed 
bridge. An assessment of the impact of proposals upon these Listed Buildings/structures 
will be required and the scheme will need to demonstrate how those elements which 
contribute to their significance will be conserved. A landscape buffer will need to be 
provided that effectively screens the existing dwellings that front High Levels Bank and 
the development site immediately to the east. 
6.57 The Local Wildlife Site Drain that runs through the centre of the site has been identified 
as a potential wildlife habitat that may be the home or used by a number of protected 
species and should be surveyed and assessed as part of any development proposal. Any 
proposals for the site should, if required, provide mitigation to ensure that they do not 
materially affect the drain. 
POLICY EC1-5: LAND AT SANDTOFT AIRFIELD 
1. Land at Sandtoft Airfield (55.3ha) is allocated for a logistics park. The site will be 
developed in accordance with the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a logistics park of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial), and 
B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses. 
Access and highways 
b. Site access is proposed from both Belton Road and High Levels Bank Road. Access to 
the strategic highway network will be achieved from High Levels Bank Road, via the 
A18 to Junctions 1 and 2 of the M180. A Transport Assessment will need to be 
submitted as part of any planning application(s) for the site. This will assess the 
impact which the development may have on the highway network which would 
include, but would not be limited to, High Levels Bank (including the bridge over the 
M180 and Brook Corner); the A18/High Levels Bank junction; the Double Rivers 
Junction (Crowle Gyratory) and Junctions 1 and 2 of the M180. Any mitigation 
Page 180 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) measures which are deemed to be necessary will be delivered in a phased manner in 
accordance with a masterplan accompanying any planning application(s) which will 
also provide a link road through the site. Off-site highway works will be paid for by 
financial contributions from developer(s). 
c. A Travel Plan will be required as part of the planning application and will be delivered 
through the lifetime of the scheme. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
d. An Ecology Survey is required. 
e. The Local Wildlife Site drain that runs through the site should be surveyed and 
assessed. Any proposals for the site should provide mitigation to ensure that they do 
not affect the ecological value of the drain. 
f. A comprehensive landscaping scheme, including biodiversity enhancement, is 
required. This scheme will need to give due regard in terms of providing a landscape 
buffer to the existing properties that front High Levels Bank and which abut the site. 
g. This site lies immediately adjacent to Hatfield Chase Ditches SSSI. Any proposal for 
this site must include mitigation and buffering to protect and enhance the feature for 
which the SSSI is designated. 
Heritage 
h. A Heritage assessment is required. Such an assessment will need to consider the 
impact of any proposals upon those elements which contribute to the significance of 
the Listed Buildings/structure to the west of this allocation. Development proposals 
should ensure that those elements which contribute to its significance are 
safeguarded. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
i. A Flood Risk Assessment will be required to demonstrate that safe development can 
be achieved on the site without increasing flood risks elsewhere. Development within 
8 metres of the top of the bank or landward toe will be restricted to allow the 
Environment Agency unimpeded access to the watercourse for maintenance 
purposes. 
j. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon type/scale of development. 
Contamination, noise and odour 
k. Negative impact on the landscape, particularly light pollution, should be mitigated. 
Implementation l. Development of Policy EC1-5 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected by 2031. 
m. Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 181 LAND TO THE NORTH WEST OF THE A15 BARTON INTERCHANGE 
6.58 The site is located to the immediate north west of the A15 Barton Interchange and is 
agricultural land bounded by the A1077 to the south, the A15 to the east, Gravel Pit Lane 
to the west and Westfield Road to the north. To the south east is the main A15 Barton 
roundabout and further to the east is the market town of Barton Upon Humber. The land 
falls to the north with a number of residential properties/small holdings fronting Westfield 
Road. 
Proposed Development 
6.59 The site at Barton provides potential for a business park that would maximise its 
proximity to the A15 and the wider area and would support the wider growth of North 
Lincolnshire’s economy and the South Humber Bank ports. 
6.60 Local access improvements to serve Employment Site EC1-5 will be required that include 
a new junction off Gravel Pit Lane and potential improvements to the A1077/Gravel Pit 
Lane junction. These measures will be delivered in a phased manner in accordance with 
a masterplan accompanying any planning application(s) to be agreed with North 
Lincolnshire Council. 
6.61 This area lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. A Flood Risk Assessment will be required as 
part of the application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface 
water drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated 
into the development. 
To the north of the site there are a number of residential properties/small holdings. .A 
comprehensive landscape buffer will need to be provided that effectively screens the 
business park from the surrounding area including the existing properties to the north 
located off Westfield Road. 
Page 182 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY EC1-6: LAND AT NORTH WEST OF THE A15 BARTON 
INTERCHANGE 
1. Land at north west of the A15 Barton Interchange (15ha) is allocated for employment 
use. The site will be developed in accordance to the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial), B2 (General 
Industrial) and (Storage and Distribution) uses 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be from a new junction off Gravel Pit Lane. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
d. A comprehensive landscaping scheme is required. 
e. Biodiversity enhancements including habitat creation to be incorporated into the site 
design. 
f. An Ecology Survey will be required. 
g. Development proposals should not have an adverse impact on the Barton Wolds 
Local Nature Site. 
Heritage 
h. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
i. A HIA will be required -Archaeological field evaluation comprising geophysical survey 
and trial trenching. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
j. A reliable and robust Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the 
application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water 
drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into 
the development. 
Contamination, noise and odour 
k. A Noise Impact Assessment and Air Quality Assessment is required. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon the type/scale of development 
Implementation m. Development of Policy EC1-6 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected to be completed by 2025. 
n. Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 183 LAND TO THE SOUTH OF BARNETBY TOP INTERCHANGE AND TO THE WEST 
OF THE A18 
6.62 The site is comprised of a plot of land immediately south of the Barnetby Top Interchange 
and west of the A18. It is agricultural land bounded by Gallows Wood garage and the 
police storage area to the south west. 
Proposed Development 
6.63 The site offers good access to the strategic road network and is located close to the 
village of Barnetby which offers a railway station and other services. It is considered that 
the site is ideally located adjacent to the strategic highway network and is suitable for a 
lorry park and associated services. 
6.64 Local access improvements to serve Employment Site EC1-6 will be required that include 
a new junction off the A18 but not directly between Barnetby Top Interchange and the 
A18 roundabout to the south. These measures will be delivered in a phased manner in 
accordance with a masterplan accompanying any planning application(s) to be agreed 
with North Lincolnshire Council. 
6.65 This area lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. A Flood Risk Assessment will be required as 
part of the application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface 
water drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated 
into the development. 
6.66 To the south of the site there are a number of commercial properties. A comprehensive 
landscape buffer will need to be provided. that effectively screens the lorry park from the 
surrounding area including the existing properties to the south located off the A18. 
Page 184 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY EC1-7: LAND AT SOUTH OF BARNETBY TOP INTERCHANGE AND 
TO THE WEST OF THE A18 
1. Land at south of Barnetby Top Interchange and to the west of the A18 (6.14ha) is 
allocated for employment use. The site will be developed in accordance to the 
following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a service station and lorry park. 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be from a new junction off the A18 but not directly between 
Barnetby Top Interchange and the A18 roundabout to the south. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
d. A comprehensive landscaping scheme is required. 
e. Biodiversity enhancements including habitat creation to be incorporated into the site 
design. 
Heritage 
f. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
g. A HIA will be required -Archaeological field evaluation comprising geophysical survey 
and trial trenching. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
h. A reliable and robust Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the 
application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water 
drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into 
the development. 
Utility and service provision 
i. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon the type/scale of development. 
Implementation j. Development of Policy EC1-7 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected to be completed by 2025. 
k. Site specific infrastructure requirements identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 185 LAND TO THE SOUTH OF BARNETBY TOP INTERCHANGE AND TO THE EAST 
OF THE A18 
6.67 The site is comprised of a plot of land immediately south of the Barnetby Top Interchange 
and east of the A18. It forms part of a larger agricultural field which slopes downwards 
towards Melton Ross village and has a significant frontage to the A18. 
Proposed Development 
6.68 The site offers good access to the strategic road network and is located close to the 
village of Barnetby which offers a railway station and other services. It is considered that 
the site is ideally located adjacent to the strategic highway network and is suitable for a 
business park. 
6.69 Local access improvements to serve Employment Site EC1-8 will be required that include 
a new junction off the A18 but not directly between Barnetby Top Interchange and the 
A18 roundabout to the south. These measures will be delivered in a phased manner in 
accordance with a masterplan accompanying any planning application(s) to be agreed 
with North Lincolnshire Council. 
6.70 This area lies within SFRA Flood Zone 1. A Flood Risk Assessment will be required as 
part of the application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface 
water drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated 
into the development. 
6.71 A comprehensive landscape buffer will need to be provided that effectively screens the 
business from the surrounding area. 
Page 186 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY EC1-8: LAND AT SOUTH OF BARNETBY TOP INTERCHANGE AND TO 
THE EAST OF THE A18 
1. Land at south of Barnetby Top Interchange and to the east of the A18 (10ha) is 
allocated for employment use. The site will be developed in accordance to the 
following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial), B2 (General 
Industrial) and B8 (Storage and Distribution) uses. 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be from a new junction off the A18 but not directly between 
Barnetby Top Interchange and the A18 roundabout to the south. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
Biodiversity and landscaping 
d. A comprehensive landscaping scheme is required. 
e. Biodiversity enhancements including habitat creation to be incorporated into the site 
design. 
f. An Ecology Survey will be required. 
Heritage 
g. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment 
h. A HIA will be required -Archaeological field evaluation comprising geophysical survey 
and trial trenching. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
i. A reliable and robust Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the 
application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water 
drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into 
the development. 
Utility and service provision 
j. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon the type/scale of development. 
k. An additional 15 hectares of land, immediately to the east of the 10 hectares of land 
allocated as Employment Allocation EC1-8, will be considered favourably for 
development for employment purposes (offices and R&D (Class E(g)), General 
Industrial (B2), and storage and distribution (B8)) in the event of the following: 
• Employment Allocation EC1-8 is substantially committed or, when due to size 
restrictions, the proposed employment uses cannot be physically accommodated 
on the remaining undeveloped elements of EC1-8p; and, 
• There is a proven need for the development or an application is a response to 
operational / end user requirements at this location; and, 
• A Masterplan and Phasing Strategy will be required as part of any planning 
application submitted which extends outside of Employment Allocation EC1-8; and, 
• Development accords with the site specific criteria identified above. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 187 Implementation 
l. Development of Policy EC1-8 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected to be completed by 2030. 
m. Site specific infrastructure requirements, identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule, will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
LAND TO THE SOUTH OF THE CROWLE GYRATORY 
6.72 The site is located to the immediate south of the A18/Ealand junction/gyratory, south of 
the Hatfield Waste Drain and east of the A162 Crowle Road. It is approximately 2km 
from Junction 2 of M180 and is close to Crowle railway station at Ealand. 
Proposed Development 
6.73 The site offers good access to the strategic road network and is located close to the 
village of Ealand and the town of Crowle which offers a railway station and other 
services. It is considered that the site is ideally located adjacent to the strategic highway 
network and is suitable for a business park. 
6.74 Local access improvements to serve Employment Site EC1-9 will be required that include 
a new junction off the A162. These measures will be delivered in a phased manner in 
accordance with a masterplan accompanying any planning application(s) to be agreed 
with North Lincolnshire Council. 
6.75 This area lies within SFRA Flood Zone 2/3(a). A Flood Risk Assessment will be required 
as part of the application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface 
water drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated 
into the development. 
Page 188 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 6.76 A comprehensive landscape buffer will need to be provided that effectively screens the 
business park from the surrounding area. 
6.77 The entire site falls with the wider Isle of Axholme Area of Historic Landscape Interest 
and any proposal would need to demonstrate how it would not have an unduly adverse 
impact on this designation. 
POLICY EC1-9: LAND TO THE SOUTH OF THE CROWLE GYRATORY 
1. Land to the south of the Crowle Gyratory (5ha) is allocated for employment use. The 
site will be developed in accordance to the following site specific criteria: 
a. The site should be developed for a mix of E(g) (Business/Light Industrial) and B8 
(Storage and Distribution) uses. 
Access and highways 
b. Vehicular access should be from a new junction off the A162. 
c. A Transport Assessment and Travel Plan will be required. 
.Biodiversity and landscaping 
d. A comprehensive landscaping scheme is required. 
e. Biodiversity enhancements including habitat creation to be incorporated into the site 
design. 
f. An Ecology Survey will be required. 
g. The entire site falls with the wider Isle of Axholme Area of Historic Landscape Interest 
and any proposal would need to demonstrate how it would not have an unduly 
adverse impact on this designation. 
Heritage 
h. A Heritage Assessment will be required to demonstrate that the development will 
have no adverse impact on the historic environment. 
i. A HIA will be required -Archaeological field evaluation comprising geophysical survey 
and trial trenching. 
Flood, drainage and water management 
j. A reliable and robust Flood Risk Assessment should be prepared as part of the 
application process to assess and mitigate the risk of flooding from surface water 
drainage. Where practical Sustainable Drainage Systems should be incorporated into 
the development. 
Contamination, noise and odour 
k. A Noise Impact Assessment and Air Quality Assessment is required. 
Utility and service provision 
l. Local reinforcements may be required regarding provision of water and disposal of 
waste water and surface water dependent upon the type/scale of development. 
Implementation m. Development of Policy EC1-9 is to be brought forward by the developer. The delivery 
of the site is expected to be completed by 2030. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 189 n. Site specific infrastructure requirements, identified for this site in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule, will be implemented within the timescales agreed by the identified 
lead delivery organisation at the Planning Application stage. 
Existing Employment Areas 
6.78 In addition to undeveloped land allocated for employment uses, there are other existing 
employment areas identified on the Policies Map. These areas are home to many 
successful businesses that contribute to North Lincolnshire's economy. There will 
inevitably be a degree of change within these areas over the plan period as businesses 
form, expand, contract and close. This is a normal process and the Plan accommodates 
this. 
6.79 An approach that safeguards existing employment sites for employment uses provides 
support for existing business sectors that have established in North Lincolnshire. It 
recognises that businesses may need to expand over the plan period, depending on 
market conditions and working practices. 
6.80 It is also recognised that market conditions alter over time and that certain employment 
sites may fall out of employment use. There is no justification for safeguarding sites in the 
long-term where there is no prospect of future employment use. Such an approach is 
considered to be unsustainable and to promote speedy regeneration, Policy EC2 allows 
for development of non-employment uses subject to specific criteria being met. These 
criteria relate to evidence confirming there is no reasonable prospect of re-establishing 
employment use; and checks to ensure that the proposed new use is acceptable and will 
not compromise the existing employment uses in the area. 
POLICY EC2: EXISTING EMPLOYMENT AREAS 
1. Existing employment areas as identified on the Policies Map will be safeguarded for 
employment uses. Proposals which promote development or reuse of vacant sites 
located within existing employment areas for employment use will be supported 
subject to other relevant policies in the Plan. 
2. Proposals for the development of non-employment uses on existing employment sites 
will be permitted where: 
a. there is evidence to show that the site/building has reached the end of its useful 
economic life by: 
i. demonstrating that there is no demand for the reuse of the building/site, following 
a minimum period of 12 months marketing for the existing use with a recognised 
commercial agent at a reasonable price reflecting typical local land values; and 
ii. demonstrating that the physical adaption or reuse of the building is uneconomic 
in commercial terms; and, 
b. the non-employment use would be compatible with the operations of existing 
employment uses nearby. 
Other Employment Proposals 
3. Other employment proposals in locations not covered by the categories above will be 
supported, provided: 
a. there is a clear demonstration that there are no suitable or appropriate sites or 
buildings within allocated sites or within the built up area of the existing settlement; 
Page 190 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) b. the scale of the proposal is commensurate with the scale and character of the existing 
settlement; 
c. there is no significant adverse impact on the character and appearance of the area, 
and/or the amenity of neighbouring occupiers; 
d. there are no significant adverse impacts on the local highway network; 
e. there is no significant adverse impact on the viability of delivering any allocated 
employment site; and 
f. the proposals maximise opportunities for modal shift away from the private car. 
Expansion of Existing Businesses 
4. The expansion of existing businesses which are currently located in areas outside 
allocated employment sites will be supported, provided: 
a. existing buildings are reused where possible; 
b. they do not conflict with neighbouring land uses; 
c. they will not impact unacceptably on the local and/or strategic highway network; and 
d. the proposal would not have an adverse impact on the character and appearance of 
the area. 
Loss of Employment Sites and Buildings to Non-Employment Uses 
5. Conversion and redevelopment of, or change of use from, existing non-allocated 
employment sites and buildings to non-employment uses will be considered on their 
merits taking account of the following: 
a. whether the loss of land or buildings would adversely affect the economic growth and 
employment opportunities in the area the site or building would likely serve; 
b. whether the continued use of the site or building for employment purposes would 
adversely affect the character or appearance of its surroundings, amenities of 
neighbouring land-uses or traffic conditions that would otherwise be significantly 
alleviated by the proposed new use. It should also be shown that any alternative 
employment use at the site would continue to generate similar issues; 
c. whether it is demonstrated that the site is inappropriate or unviable for any 
employment use to continue and no longer capable of providing an acceptable 
location for employment purposes; and 
d. whether the applicant has provided clear documentary evidence that the property has 
been appropriately, but proportionately, marketed without a successful conclusion for 
a period of not less than 6 months, on terms that reflect the lawful use and condition 
of the premises. This evidence will be considered in the context of local market 
conditions and the state of the wider national economy. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 191 TABLE 6.2 EXISTING EMPLOYMENT AREAS 
Settlement Site Location 
Scunthorpe Normanby Enterprise Park 
Scunthorpe Foxhills 
Scunthorpe Sawcliffe Industry Park 
Scunthorpe South Park Industrial Estate 
Scunthorpe Hebden Road Industrial Estate 
Scunthorpe Brigg Road/Midland Road/Grange Lane North/ Kingsway Business Park 
Flixborough Flixborough Industrial Estate 
Elsham Elsham Wolds Industrial Estate 
Barton Upon Humber Humber Bridge Industrial Estate 
Brigg Ancholme Business Park 
Sandtoft Sandtoft Industrial Estate 
New Holland New Holland Industrial Estate 
North Killingholme South Humber Bank 
Ealand Ealand – South of the Railway 
DEFINED INDUSTRIAL BUFFER AREAS 
6.81 It is essential to maintain the separation between industrial and residential areas on 
amenity grounds and because much industrial building and activity can look unsightly. 
6.82 The South Humber Bank Landscape Initiative, identified under policy EC4, covers the 
industrial allocations on land to the east of Skitter Beck, and extends into the North East 
Lincolnshire Council area. On the South Humber Bank there is the potential to create a 
showcase where industry is placed in greater harmony with its surrounding countryside 
landscape character. The initiative aims to achieve individual improvements dovetailing 
with present and future operational needs and providing new habitats and a network of 
grassland, hedges, woodland and water between and around industry. 
6.83 In this way, a more biodiversity enhanced environment can be created and maintained for 
the benefit of everyone concerned, in line with the wider environmental aims of this Plan. 
POLICY EC3: DEFINED INDUSTRIAL BUFFER AREAS 
1. Development, excluding biodiversity enhancement schemes, will not be permitted 
within the defined amenity buffer areas associated with the South Humber Bank, 
North Killingholme Airfield and the former British Sugar Site, Brigg industrial areas. 
Within these areas, schemes for indigenous tree and shrub planting and habitat 
creation will be required. 
Page 192 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) SOUTH HUMBER BANK -LANDSCAPE INITIATIVE 
6.84 One of the key issues raised in this part of North Lincolnshire is the relationship between 
industry and nearby settlements. The environment of local communities is heavily 
dependent not only on the quality of the immediate setting within which the industry lies 
but also on the general character of the countryside which surrounds it. Buffer areas will 
be retained between settlements and industry. To protect important sites of nature 
conservation or amenity value, it is proposed to set up a partnership involving the 
industrial, agricultural communities and other stakeholders to co-ordinate and progress 
schemes of environmental enhancement. 
6.85 The South Humber Bank Landscape Initiative offers good opportunities for industry and 
agriculture to help create a showcase where both are placed in greater harmony with 
their surroundings. In the case of industry, there is a growing public interest in the 
environment and an increasing concern about the effects large-scale industrial 
development can bring. 
6.86 Individual improvements can be planned to dovetail with present and future operational 
needs. In this way a network of grassland, hedgerows, woodland and open water 
between and around industry could be developed. By planning ahead, landscape 
improvements could reach maturity in readiness for new developments to have 
considerable combined effect on the appearance of the whole industrial zone. A better 
environment for industry means a better image, a better workplace and better relations 
with the whole community. In addition, substantial scope exists to increase the 
recreational use of the area. Footpath links through to the Humber Bank can be 
enhanced and provision for many informal pursuits (walking, fishing etc.) can be 
improved for residents, workers and visitors. There is also an opportunity to incorporate 
neutral capital accounting that includes carbon sequestration, flood mitigation, pollution 
mitigation and recreational access through habitat provision. 
POLICY EC4: SOUTH HUMBER BANK -LANDSCAPE INITIATIVE 
1. It is proposed that the following measures will be undertaken throughout the South 
Humber Bank Landscape Initiative area: 
a. softening - provision of stepped-back security fences, fringed with native species 
shrubs and trees; 
b. screening -establishment of mixed native broad-leaf and conifer tree belts; 
c. habitat conservation -maintenance of wet areas and other existing features, such as 
woods and hedges, to provide the core of a nature recovery network for future 
improvements; 
d. habitat creation - introduction of lakes, ponds marshes and appropriate priority 
habitats; 
e. field boundary management – careful management of existing hedges to increase 
height and species diversity; and 
f. tree and hedge planting - new native species rich planting, carefully positioned for 
maximum effect, with minimum impact on farm management industry’s operational 
needs and sites of archaeological importance. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 193 WHARVES 
6.87 The importance of the Rivers Humber and Trent is recognised nationally, regionally and 
locally as strategically important to the economy of the area. The ten existing wharf 
locations have been established for some time. The River Humber wharves are located 
between South Killingholme Haven and Barrow Haven and the River Trent wharves lie 
between Gunness and Burton upon Stather. 
6.88 The area with the greatest potential for new, extended port, wharf and jetty facilities is 
located fronting a deep water channel of the River Humber between South Killingholme 
Haven and North Killingholme Haven and includes that part of the Port of Immingham 
located within North Lincolnshire. 
6.89 New or extended wharves should not be considered in isolation to their surroundings. 
Such developments will be constrained by the criteria listed above, which are covered in 
more detail by other policies in the Plan. In particular, the River Humber and its coastal 
margins and extensive parts of the River Trent have international, national and local nature 
conservation area designations including Ramsar, SPA, SSSI, LNR and SINC. The River 
Trent wharves are generally surrounded by high grade agricultural land. 
6.90 The Environment Agency will need to be satisfied that the integrity of the existing South 
Humber Bank tidal defence system is not compromised and flood risk is not increased by 
further development, as all land behind the flood defences is at risk from flooding (Policy 
DQE6p); and the road network accessing the wharf sites along the Rivers Humber and 
Trent will generally require improvement. It will be necessary to strike a balance between 
any wharf development and its direct or indirect impact on the river corridor landscape, 
coastal margins and the amenity of any settlement. 
POLICY EC5: WHARVES 
1. Proposals for new or extended port, wharf and jetty facilities on the Rivers Humber 
and Trent will be permitted provided that there is no adverse impact on: 
a. designated sites and protected and priority species as well as the need to account for 
measurable biodiversity net gain; 
b. high quality agricultural land; 
c. the landscape of river corridors and coastal margins; 
d. the flood defence system; 
e. the strategic and local road network; and, 
f. the amenity of settlements. 
NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE’S RURAL ECONOMY 
6.91 Outside of Scunthorpe and the market towns North Lincolnshire hosts a wide range of 
rural enterprises that vary in size, usually operating in and around the villages. These 
rural businesses often have strong local connections in terms of origin and a local 
workforce, but also enjoy the attractive rural environment and the connections to a 
number of major centres. 
Page 194 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 6.92 A diversity of rural enterprise is essential for the future of North Lincolnshire’s economy. 
The Local Plan must guide development in a way which ensures that the natural and 
physical environment (infrastructure) remains attractive and a local workforce can be 
provided to service business. 
6.93 In order to support the rural economy, where agricultural buildings are no longer needed 
for agriculture they can be converted to provide employment opportunities. Conversions 
can bring environmental improvements through good sensitive design or general 
improvements to the wider visual appearance of the area. However, it is also important 
to consider whether development is appropriate in its location, so that those attracting 
significant numbers of visitors or employees are located where they can be accessed by 
means other than the car. 
6.94 Local planning policies are required to support farm diversification of agricultural and 
other land-based rural businesses. Farm diversification schemes such as farm shops, 
holiday accommodation, and farm-based processing and packaging can help maintain 
working farms. Enterprise relating to the keeping or breeding of equines are common in 
the rural areas and form an essential part of the rural economy. 
POLICY EC6: SUPPORTING THE RURAL ECONOMY 
1. The council will seek to develop a sustainable rural economy by supporting 
appropriate, small scale rural enterprise. Proposals to diversify the range of economic 
activities on a farm or in a rural area will be supported, where proposals: 
a. benefit the local community and do not adversely affect quality of life or the amenity 
of local residents; 
b. conserve and enhance local character; 
c. are consistent in scale and environmental impact with their rural location; 
d. involve the conversion of an existing building. New build only schemes will be 
considered as an exception; 
e. have no detrimental impact on existing village shops and business; 
f. demonstrate traffic generation can be satisfactorily accommodated by the existing or 
planned local road network, ensuring access arrangements are acceptable to the 
scale and type of development with no adverse effect on highway safety; 
g. have no unacceptable effect on water quality or flooding, watercourses, biodiversity or 
important Wildlife habitats and do not increase the risk of flooding; and 
h. enhance the natural environment through the provision of measurable net gains to 
biodiversity. 
VISITOR ECONOMY 
6.95 The visitor economy is an important and resilient part of North Lincolnshire’s overall economy 
contributing some £167m. It is estimated that over 2,306 local people are employed full-time in 
the industry and in 2015 there were 3 million day visits to North Lincolnshire attractions alone. 
6.96 Many parts of North Lincolnshire have the potential to develop their visitor offer to attract more 
short-stay and long-stay visitors from within the region, as well as from national and 
international locations. Boosting visitor numbers and the amount of money and time they spend 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 195 in the area, will lead to a range of business opportunities as well as supporting investment in the 
area’s natural and historic tourism assets and town centres. Key tourism attractions such as 
Normanby Hall, the Humber Estuary, Thorne and Crowle Moors, the Market Towns and the 
surrounding attractive countryside have a huge role to play in developing and moving forward 
North Lincolnshire’s tourism offer. 
6.97 Planning for tourism should ensure that in maximising North Lincolnshire’s assets we do not 
harm the very character, quality and beauty that make them attractive to residents and visitors. 
It is, therefore, essential that appropriately-scaled facilities and infrastructure are in place that 
support the economic potential that tourism offers whilst protecting the wider environment itself. 
Tourism facts 
• Total visitor numbers to North Lincolnshire stand at 3.46m, a rise of 6.2% since 2009, and an 
increase of 1.8% on 2014. 
• Day visits to North Lincolnshire (3.038m) represent 87.8% of the total visits to North Lincolnshire 
and have grown by 4.5% since 2009, and increased by 1.8% on 2014. Staying visits (423,000) 
represent 12.2% of the total visits to North Lincolnshire and have grown by 20.4% since 2009, 
and increased by 1.3% on 2014. 
• On average, visitors staying in North Lincolnshire spend 2.36 days in the area and spend £9.8 
million on accommodation (3.2% increase). Between 2014 and 2015 the average length of stay 
for all staying visitors rose by 1.1%. 
• Over 4 million Visitor Days and Nights generated in North Lincolnshire in 2015 (2% increase on 
2014). (North Lincolnshire Integrated Strategic Assessment January 2019) 
POLICY EC7: A SUSTAINABLE VISITOR ECONOMY 
1. Development and activities that will deliver high quality sustainable visitor facilities 
such as culture and leisure facilities, sporting attractions and accommodation, 
including proposals for temporary permission in support of the promotion of events 
and festivals, will be supported. Such development and activities should be designed 
so that they: 
a. contribute to the local economy; 
b. benefit both local communities and visitors; 
c. respect the intrinsic natural and built environmental qualities of the area; and 
d. are appropriate for the character of the local environment in scale and nature. 
2. The provision of new visitor attractions or the expansion of existing attractions will be 
permitted provided: 
a. it is located in sustainable and accessible locations or can be made so; 
b. it is appropriate to the site’s location in terms of scale, design, layout and materials; 
c. it does not have an unacceptable adverse impact on the areas valuable natural, built 
or heritage assets and helps to enhance any affected asset; 
d. it can demonstrate the viability of the new attraction or where appropriate helps 
support the viability of an existing attraction; 
e. it enhances and complements existing visitor attractions or priorities in the area and 
supports the development of a year-round visitor economy and/or extends visitor 
stays; and 
f. enhance the natural environment through the provision of measurable net gains to 
biodiversity 
Page 196 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 3. Where a countryside location is necessary the development should: 
a. meet identified visitor needs; 
b. support local employment and community services; 
c. ensure adequate infrastructure; and 
d. relate to an existing tourism asset that is based upon a site specific natural or heritage 
feature. 
Large Scale Development 
4. Comprehensive master planning and a robust business plan to articulate the potential 
impacts, proposed mitigation and economic, social and environmental benefits should 
accompany applications for large scale new or expanding visitor attractions. 
6.98 New visitor attractions will be directed to accessible and sustainable locations in the first 
instance, in order to address the need to develop the visitor offer and encourage visitors to stay 
longer. Where development is not in accessible locations it will be focussed on the conversion of 
existing buildings and developments that contribute to rural diversification, enjoyment of the 
countryside and access to heritage. 
6.99 Planning for tourism should make the most of our assets, enriching them rather than harming the 
very character, quality and beauty that makes them attractive to residents and visitors. This can 
be achieved by ensuring development is appropriately located and levels of visitor activity are not 
likely to significantly affect protected sites and species, particularly those of National and 
European Importance. 
6.100 To encourage a broad range of visitors in addition to day visitors, and to meet the 
accommodation needs of businesses in the area, it is necessary to offer a wide range of visitor 
accommodation including hotels, bed and breakfasts and self-catering facilities. In terms of 
existing provision, Scunthorpe in particular lacks hotel accommodation of the size and quality to 
fully capitalise on the market for accommodating local business visitors. The North Lincolnshire 
area as a whole acts, as both a visitor attraction in itself and as a touring base for the wider 
Lincolnshire and North Humber Bank area, and as such, offers wide opportunities for expanding 
accommodation. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 197 7 Prosperous Town Centres 
7.1 The NPPF indicates that planning policies should promote competitive town centre 
environments and set out policies for their management and growth; recognising the 
important role of centres as the heart of their communities for which policies to support 
their viability and vitality should be pursued. Town centres provide a range of functions, 
infrastructure and services that attract users and investors. While town centres continue 
to play a vital role in providing a focus for economic activity, transport and civic functions, 
it is important to recognise that their traditional role is changing, particularly in relation to 
retailing. If Scunthorpe Town Centre is to remain vibrant, it is important to establish a 
clear direction for its future prosperity. 
7.2 The NPPF states that planning policies should require applications for main town centre 
uses to be located in town centres, then in edge of centre locations and only if suitable 
sites are not available, should out of centre sites be considered. When considering edge 
of centre and out of centre proposals, preference should be given to accessible sites that 
are well connected to the town centre. Applicants and local planning authorities should 
demonstrate flexibility on issues such as format and scale. The NPPF also states that 
this sequential approach should not be applied to small scale rural offices or other small 
scale rural development. 
7.3 Having access to a range of shops, cultural and leisure facilities that meet local needs is 
essential to creating sustainable communities and a successful and vibrant economy. 
This Plan’s approach is to identify, protect and enhance North Lincolnshire’s town, district 
and local centres with the current retail hierarchy being: 
• Scunthorpe town centre; 
• Principal town / local service centres of Barton upon Humber, Brigg, Crowle and Epworth; 
• District centres of Kirton in Lindsey and Winterton; 
• District centres of Ashby High Street and Frodingham Road; and 
• Local centres/corner shops. 
7.4 Town centre boundaries provide a useful planning tool and help to provide increased 
certainty concerning where town centre policies will apply. The identification of a ‘town 
centre’ can help ensure that retail and other commercial development (‘town centre 
uses’) are located in the most appropriate areas which should also help to increase the 
vitality and viability of the centre. 
7.5 Town centre boundaries can also be important in the process of planning for any new 
retail development with the NPPF requiring that, wherever possible, such development 
should be provided in town centre locations. Where suitable sites for such development 
are not available, it is then necessary to use a sequential test in order to identify the most 
suitable alternative site, which should be as close to the defined town centre as possible. 
7.6 Scunthorpe is the main retail and service destination in the area with the principal town 
/local service centres and district centres providing a range of services and facilities to 
meet the needs of their own and surrounding communities. The NPPF seeks to ensure 
town centres remain vibrant, diverse and healthy; performing as the heart of 
communities. This existing hierarchy has been assessed to ensure its continuing 
appropriateness in the light of changing retail trends, particularly the growth of internet 
shopping. It is likely that there will be continuing pressure for out-of-centre retail 
proposals, which could undermine the retail function of the town centres, particularly 
Scunthorpe. This, by itself, will be a key consideration in the preparation of the Local Plan. 
Page 198 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 7.7 Balanced against the growing convenience of accessing services and shopping through 
the internet, the Local Plan must ensure a flexible approach to planning for the 
development of Scunthorpe Town Centre. Such an approach must ensure advantage can 
be taken of key assets that will make the Town Centre remain a destination where people 
continue to want to visit, enjoy and spend their time and money in. 
7.8 The council has recently revealed ambitious plans for Scunthorpe Town Centre via a 
£60m+ investment to transform the town that should be completed by 2022 and will 
create more than 200 jobs, around 1,500 student places, plus inject £1.5m into the local 
economy. The transformation project aims to increase the number of people and 
businesses and create a family friendly evening environment in the town (in particular the 
Church Square area) and includes: 
• £5.8m headquarters building for Ongo Homes (completed); 
• £5.7m Church Square House extension providing space for 600 council workers and 
creating 45 construction jobs (completed); 
• Around £15m for a new University Centre; 
• £3.9m private sector investment to provide up to 60 one-bed and two-bed homes on 
Lindum Street; 
• £14.7m new 200-unit facility for NHS employees (including five commercial units below); 
• £1m library refurbishment (completed); and 
• £4m improvements to make the town look more attractive and road and pedestrian 
improvements to create better access. 
7.9 A town centre board made up of representatives from leading local institutions and 
developers has been established to oversee the projects and ensure they are delivered 
on time and within budget. 
7.10 To bring forward an evolving Town Centre a draft Scunthorpe Town Centre Masterplan 
has been produced which provides a framework for the redevelopment of Scunthorpe 
Town Centre. It delivers a vision on how the town centre could evolve over the next ten 
years whilst providing a co-ordinated approach that will ensure the town centre can 
compete effectively with other destinations and delivers the council’s wider objectives for 
the improvement of the environment and local economy. 
7.11 The projects put forward within the draft Scunthorpe Town Centre Masterplan will deliver 
transformational change by supporting sustainable growth, attracting inward 
investment and informing development management decisions, and creating new and 
improved public realm to benefit all. By encompassing a comprehensive implementation 
plan that is achievable it is anticipated that the Town Centre’s economic growth can be 
sustained and expanded. The draft Masterplan sets five key objectives on the type of 
town we want to create by fulfilling the council’s ambition ‘to be the best place for our 
residents’. 
7.12 The Scunthorpe Town Centre Masterplan has been used to help form the evidence base 
for policies within the new North Lincolnshire Local Plan and is capable of being used as 
a material consideration when making decisions on planning applications. In particular, 
it will assist with the implementation of Local Plan policy TC1. 
7.13 Primary shopping frontages have been identified in Scunthorpe Town Centre and are the 
most important retail frontages with the greatest pedestrian flows and greatest 
concentration of shops for comparison goods. Policies for primary shopping frontages 
restrict the amount of non-shopping uses permitted and seek to retain and enhance the 
shopping function of the frontage. Primary Shopping Frontages contain the greatest 
concentration of shops (Use Class E), attract the greatest number of customers and 
underpin the vitality and viability of the town centre. Retail should remain the principal 
and dominant land use within these areas. The Council will not support uses that do not 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 199 complement or support their predominantly retail character and will seek to retain retail 
uses (Use Class E) and maintain a continuous ground floor retail frontage with a limited 
range of associated uses such as cafes, banks, and pubs (E and Sui Generis use classes). 
7.14 Some local authorities also identify secondary shopping frontages, in close proximity to 
the primary frontage, which are generally occupied by a lower proportion of retail uses 
and provide greater opportunities for a diversity of uses. The use of primary shopping 
frontages has been supported by this council both within the 2003 Local Plan and in the 
more recent Housing and Employment Land Allocations DPD. 
7.15 The retention of local centres and village shops provides a valuable role in meeting local 
community needs. Providing facilities close to homes reduces the need to travel by 
private car and creates more desirable and socially inclusive neighbourhoods. Local 
centres include a range of small shops of a local nature, serving a small catchment. 
Typically, local centres might include, for example, shops, a small supermarket, a 
newsagent, a sub-post office and a pharmacy. 
7.16 Scunthorpe Town Centre suffers from weaknesses in the range of leisure and social 
facilities and a limited evening economy offer, which are below what would be expected 
for a centre of its status. It is therefore important that development which widens the 
town centre offer is encouraged to ensure the town remains strong and vibrant. The Plan 
seeks to support the continued role of Scunthorpe as a sub-regional centre, and as such 
the Plan will seek to support the widening of the town's offer and protection from 
inappropriate out-of-centre development. 
7.17 A key aspect of maintaining a healthy and vibrant town centre is ensuring that provision 
is made to accommodate anticipated growth. The NPPF (paragraph 23) requires that 
local plans should identify the scale of development which needs to be accommodated, 
advising that: "Local planning authorities should therefore undertake an assessment of 
the need to expand town centres to ensure a sufficient supply of suitable sites". 
7.18 The Local Plan looks at North Lincolnshire’s requirements for future retail development 
and the town centre boundaries of Scunthorpe, Brigg, Barton upon Humber, Crowle, 
Epworth and district shopping at Ashby High Street and Frodingham Road in Scunthorpe 
as well as at Kirton in Lindsey and Winterton. Town and District boundaries are shown 
on the relevant Inset Plan for that Town and in the case of Scunthorpe Town Centre, 
Primary Shopping Frontages are also indicated. 
7.19 NPPF advocates town centres as the principal locations for new retail, leisure, tourism 
and cultural facilities. The key objective is to promote their vitality and viability. Key to this 
is developing a hierarchy of centres with each performing an appropriate role to meet the 
needs of the residents and businesses in its catchment area. It also sets out how the 
need for retail and leisure development can be provided and establishes the sequential 
approach for new development. 
7.20 Scunthorpe is North Lincolnshire’s main retail and service centre and as such provides 
the bulk of the area’s housing, employment, education and leisure facilities. Recent years 
have seen significant investment in Scunthorpe town centre with the opening of the 
multi-million pound Parishes retail complex, which has improved the range and type of 
shops on offer and provided a new multi-screen cinema. However, much still needs to be 
done to improve the retail offer and improve the town centre’s environment. The 
improvement of Scunthorpe town centre is a priority for the Local Plan. 
Page 200 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY TC1: RETAIL HIERARCHY AND TOWN CENTRE AND DISTRICT 
CENTRE DEVELOPMENT 
Retail Hierarchy 
1. The Council will protect and enhance the following hierarchy of Sub Regional, Town 
and District Centres: 
a. Sub Regional Centre – Scunthorpe, 
b. Town Centres -Brigg, Barton Upon Humber, Crowle and Epworth, 
c. District Centres - Kirton in Lindsey, Winterton, Frodingham Road and Ashby High 
Street. 
2. Within the defined town centre boundaries of the sub-regional town of Scunthorpe, 
as shown on the Scunthorpe Town Centre Inset Plan the following uses will be 
permitted: 
a. Town Centre Uses (E Class) including, but not limited to, shops, offices, restaurants, 
financial and professional services, and indoor sport and leisure activities 
b. Residential (C3) at upper levels 
c. Drinking Establishments (Sui Generis) 
d. Hot Food Takeaways (Sui Generis) 
e. Hotels (C1) 
f. Learning and Non-Residential Institutions (F1) 
g. Leisure Facilities (F2) 
h. Taxi Businesses (Sui Generis) 
i. Student halls of residence 
j. Theatres, cinemas, or other similar leisure uses or visitor attractions (Sui generis) 
3. Within the defined Primary Shopping Frontages for Scunthorpe Town Centre, as 
shown on the Scunthorpe Town Centre Inset Plan proposals for non-shopping uses 
will be permitted provided they: 
a. are a recognised main town centre use under E Use Class; 
b. would not result in the over concentration of non-retail uses or ‘dead’ frontages that 
would undermine the primary shopping area's overall retail function and character. 
This is defined as 20% of the total metreage of the defined frontage or any continuous 
frontage of non-shopping uses that would exceed 18m. 
c. would have no demonstrable impact on the vitality and viability of the centre as a 
whole 
d. are of high quality design, responding to their surroundings and contributing positively 
to the streetscene and character of the Town Centre; and 
e. enhance connectivity within, through and around the Town Centre wherever possible 
4. Proposals for commercial, business and service Class E uses will be permitted within 
the defined town centre boundaries of Brigg, Barton Upon Humber, Crowle and 
Epworth. Other Town Centre uses as specified above in criteria (ii) – (x) will be 
permitted provided they do not detract from the centre’s shopping function. Proposals 
will be considered having regard to the existing character and function of the 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 201 shopping street, the contribution which the proposal would make to the vitality and 
viability of the shopping street and the resulting proportion of non-shopping uses. 
5. Proposals for the development of additional commercial, business and service Class 
E uses within the District Centres of Kirton in Lindsey, Winterton, Frodingham Road 
and Ashby High Street, will be permitted provided they are of a size and scale and 
compatible with the needs and character of the settlement/area. Development will 
only be permitted if it is required to meet the needs of the area served by the centre in 
a sustainable way. It must also be of a scale appropriate to the centre, and that will 
not adversely impact upon the vitality or viability of other nearby town and district 
centres. Proposals will be considered having regard to the existing character and 
function of the shopping street and the resulting proportion of non-shopping uses. 
6. Proposals for hot food takeaways (Sui Generis) need to demonstrate that account has 
been taken of: 
a. the impact on the amenity of nearby residents; and, 
b. the impact on highway safety; and, 
c. the relationship with any school located within 400m of the proposed Sui Generis use; 
and, 
d. whether the proposal would result in an unacceptable concentration of Sui Generis 
uses in the centre; and 
e. that appropriate measures to prevent the discharge of Fats, Oil and Grease to the 
sewerage network have been implemented and will be maintained in perpetuity. 
Evening Economy 
7. Proposals that would positively contribute to the evening economy will be supported 
provided they contribute to the vitality and viability of town centres and accord with 
this and other relevant policies in the Plan. 
PLACEMAKING AND GOOD URBAN DESIGN 
7.21 Good placemaking is the key driver of this local plan. A Local Plan is a spatial planning 
policy, but spatial planning and the overall planning and making of 'place' are 
inseparable. Successful placemaking is a creative, practical, and continual process. It is 
underpinned by a holistic approach to community wellbeing that embraces health, 
economy, culture, and the environment. It requires leadership combined with clear and 
widely owned policy and practice developed in partnership between a local authority 
and all of its stakeholders. It is typified by strong and ongoing community engagement, 
as well as professional involvement, in the planning, design and management of new 
and regenerated places. North Lincolnshire’s towns and villages are unique places with 
special character. History has created one part of this character, and the area's historic 
built and historic environment is of outstanding quality. 
7.22 North Lincolnshire’s special characteristics are key benchmarks when considering the 
quality of future development and the contribution it will make to the area’s social, 
economic, environmental and cultural wellbeing. Development proposals should be of 
high design standards at all scales, from masterplanning to individual building and open 
space design. To complement this legacy, these developments should not attempt to ape 
the past but instead should simply be based on good design. Good design should be fit 
for purpose, sustainable, efficient, coherent, flexible, responsive to context, attractive and 
a clear expression of the requirement of a particular brief. It should seek to add to the 
area’s overall cultural quality as a place, and enhance its cultural capacity, its ability to 
create opportunities for cultural creation, expression, learning, sharing, and enjoyment. 
Good design can be demonstrated through engagement in peer-review design panels 
and meaningful public engagement and this will be encouraged and supported. 
Page 202 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 7.23 Good placemaking and design and the cultural identity that arises from them, starts with 
a clear understanding of what makes the area and its settlements. There are a number 
of existing studies that will assist the process of analysing character and significance, 
and they should always be used to guide development proposals. 
7.24 These include Conservation Area Character Appraisals and Statements. Further studies 
may need to be considered as appropriate in the future. Reference should also be made 
to the background studies referred to in Policy DQE12 Green Infrastructure Network and, 
where relevant, neighbourhood plans. 
POLICY TC2: PLACEMAKING & GOOD URBAN DESIGN 
1. Development proposals will be supported where they improve poor existing urban 
and natural environments, enhance special qualities of North Lincolnshire’s 
settlements and better reveal the significances of the historic environment. 
Development proposals that fail to take account of special qualities, fail to make a 
positive design contribution, or cause damage to the character and quality of an area 
will be refused. 
2. Development proposals should adhere to the following detailed design points: 
Urban Structure and Grain 
a. enhance, respect and complement the historic arrangement of street blocks, plots and 
buildings, where possible restoring old patterns of urban grain where these have been 
damaged or obscured. 
b. enhance and complement the character and appearance of landscape, parks, 
landforms, open space, planting and boundary treatment. 
Density and Massing 
c. demonstrate that the resultant density of a development proposal will be appropriate 
for its proposed use and neighbouring context. 
d. demonstrate that the combined effect of development does not dominate other 
buildings and spaces, paying particular attention to adjacent buildings or parks of 
architectural or historic significance. 
Streets and Spaces 
e. promote ease of public pedestrian and cyclist movement and establish natural 
patterns of connectivity. Spaces and routes must be attractive, safe, and uncluttered 
and clearly prioritise pedestrians and cyclists over vehicles. 
f. promote legibility through development by providing recognisable routes, hierarchy of 
routes, intersections, incidental spaces and landmarks. 
g. are designed to improve the quality of the public realm and the wider environment for 
all. 
h. provide a pattern of continuity and enclosure, dependent on circumstances, to reflect 
the need for different types of space for different types of activity including clearly 
defining private from public space, and mediate between the two. 
i. designed to reduce crime and the fear of crime and promote public safety throughout 
the day and night. 
Building Heights and Views 
j. respect and enhance views of landmark buildings and important vistas. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 203 Character and Design Standards 
k. ensure appropriate building materials are used. 
l. meet the highest standards of accessibility and inclusion. 
m. demonstrate the use of best practice in contemporary urban design and place 
making. 
n. integrate car parking and servicing within the design of development so as not to 
dominate the street scene. 
o. create active frontages to public streets, spaces and waterways. 
p. create buildings and spaces that are fit for purpose but are also adaptable to respond 
to change. 
q. create places that feel true to their intended purpose. 
r. maximise sustainability potential. 
Urban Structure and Grain 
7.25 Where development is proposed outside of a clearly defined pre-existing urban context 
a less obvious but equally important context still exists. Existing landscape features such 
as topology or field boundaries can provide a framework for the grain and urban 
structure of new development plots-often a process of intensification of existing patterns 
of movement and connectivity. The study of adjacent settlements and/or patterns of 
habitation in the area should be undertaken. This is particularly important as the scale of 
new development increases and completely new ‘places’ are created. For these, national 
best practice for contemporary placemaking for new settlements or urban extensions 
must be considered. 
Density and Massing 
7.26 It is important to communicate the suitability of density proposals in a way that is most 
easily understood. This can often be difficult for large developments where flexibility is 
sought at a masterplanning stage. Applications will be encouraged that communicate 
this through graphical representation (in addition to standard accepted numerical 
methodologies) through potential plots studies and precedent images. 
7.27 Overall, density should not be applied in an overly uniform way. It should comprise a 
variety of spatial types. The intensity of development should generally follow the existing 
pattern of density, but within it should be open amenity spaces. (In particular, 
conversions into flats or houses should provide satisfactory levels of amenity for future 
occupiers). Conversely higher density spots to aid wayfinding and the readability of 
spaces might be desirable. This should be interpreted together with Building Height and 
Views section below. Whilst zoning is a useful illustrative concept, density should not be 
overly use-zoned and should demonstrate a suitable mix of uses, albeit that there is likely 
to be a predominant use for each different area. 
Streets and Spaces 
7.28 Development proposals that provide opportunities to promote the enhancement of, or 
creation of, public space will be supported. 
7.29 The use and enjoyment of streets and spaces are affected by how empowered people 
feel to engage in these spaces, through cultural, every leisure and economic activity. 
Private spaces should feel completely private places they can relax in. Public spaces 
should feel like genuine public spaces that are welcoming and belong to everyone. Semi-
Page 204 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) private space, especially in housing developments, needs extreme care in design so 
immediate neighbours can have a sense of their collective ownership and even 
stewardship. Consideration should be given to Secured by Design principles whilst 
balancing the need of urban design principles such as attractive connected streets and 
spaces. 
Building Height and Views 
7.30 Development should demonstrate a detailed evidence based understanding of 
landscape setting including key views so that development proposals respond positively 
to local building height and massing character and landscape context. Designs should 
also integrate rooftop plant into the overall building design avoiding visually detracting 
roof top plant. Reference should be made to the key views as defined in Conservation 
Area Appraisals. Opportunities for creating or revealing new public views should also be 
considered. For new landmarks and buildings that stand higher than the surrounding 
townscape to be considered acceptable they will normally be expected to have a 
particular high cultural significance or common value. In addition, the taller and more 
prominent a building, the higher will be the council’s expectations over its quality. 
Character 
7.31 A proposal should demonstrate an understanding of rhythm and/or balance of 
compositional design. Suitable building materials should be carefully chosen for their 
texture, colour, pattern, source and durability, and durable construction techniques and 
elements of detailing should be chosen. For larger scale developments, where 
development is at a high level masterplan stage, there should be a clear vision of the type 
of place it aspires to become, in sufficient detail to guide the direction of future plot build 
out proposals use of a design code setting out parameters may be required, whilst 
providing enough flexibility for uncertain future conditions. The way a building will be 
used should be considered, so as to locate commercial servicing in less sensitive places 
within a development and to prevent parked cars from dominating the street scene. This 
needs to be balanced to prevent unrealistic expectations leading to abuse, and the 
development should physically prevent unplanned, undesirable use through subtle good 
design measures. Buildings should also be adaptable so as to facilitate retention. Large 
scale developments should not inherently prevent their adaptability; the creation of 
development blocks and open streets are proven durable formats and will be supported. 
Design Standards 
7.32 As part of its commitment to good place making, the Council is committed to and expects 
design excellence. There are many UK guides to best practice. The publication of these 
guides will be ongoing over the course of the Local Plan period. However, they are often 
still relevant, several years after publication and only superseded where directly stated 
by future publications. Design proposals should be based on best practice and where this 
can be demonstrated it will support the desirability of the proposal. Current examples are 
Lifetime Neighbourhoods (DCLG); Building for Life Principles (Design Council); Urban 
Design Compendium (English Partnerships and The Housing Corporation); By Design 
(DETR & CABE); Conservation Principles Policies and Guidance (English Heritage) to 
name a few. On culture and the arts, the Town and Country Planning Association's 
'Practical Guide 6. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 205 8 Supporting Sustainable
Development in NorthLincolnshire’s Countryside 
8.1 North Lincolnshire is characterised by its high quality landscape and scattered flourishing 
communities. This character makes North Lincolnshire a safe and attractive place for 
residents and visitors. Consequently, these rural areas are often subject to significant 
pressure for development. Whilst the scale of change in rural North Lincolnshire is 
unlikely to be widespread, the vibrancy of the countryside depends on getting the right 
balance between developments and protecting the intrinsic rural character of North 
Lincolnshire. 
8.2 Outside of the settlements identified in Policy SS2, there are a wide range of smaller 
settlements, farmsteads and rural enterprises. These places have their own particular 
needs, which the Local Plan seeks to respond to and ensure their continued 
sustainability. In those settlements with basic services, appropriate development offers 
opportunities for rural settlements to grow organically. Elsewhere, the Local Plan does 
not seek to preserve the countryside in aspic, instead it recognises that a working, living, 
flourishing and attractive countryside means adapting to changing needs and enhancing 
what is already present. 
8.3 Policy RD1 lists those types of land uses that are most relevant to North Lincolnshire. 
Proposals not listed in the policy would have to demonstrate why they require a rural 
location. In all instances, proposals are expected to be of an appropriate scale for their 
rural location. Therefore, consideration will be given to how the proposal relates to the 
built and landscape character of the surrounding area and the impact that the 
development would have on the local road network. Proposals involving the re-use of 
previously developed land will also be expected to be in an appropriate location, which 
avoids the use of land that is of high environmental value and would not be subject to 
significant risks from flooding or other hazards. 
POLICY RD1: SUPPORTING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN THE 
COUNTRYSIDE 
1. Outside settlement development limits land will be regarded as the countryside and 
the following forms of development supported, where proposals respect the intrinsic 
character of their surroundings: 
a. Conversion of buildings for employment related development (including work-live 
units), tourism or community uses; 
b. Conversion of buildings for new housing will be supported where the preservation of 
the building would enhance the immediate setting and where it: 
i. Would represent the optimal viable use of a heritage asset or would be 
appropriate enabling development to secure the future of a heritage asset; or 
ii. Would re-use a redundant or dis-used building without significant alteration or 
significant extension. 
c. Replacement dwellings where their design and character reflects the surrounding 
area and results in an increase of less than 50% of the volume of the dwelling which 
it is to replace; 
Page 206 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) d. New dwellings of exceptional quality or of truly outstanding innovative design; 
e. Affordable housing for local people (Exceptions Sites); 
f. Agricultural, forestry or other rural based occupational dwellings subject to 
demonstrating a functional need. Such dwellings will be subject to an occupancy 
condition; 
g. Employment uses where it is an appropriate scale to its location and it respects the 
character of the surrounding landscape. Proposals should: 
i. Be within or adjacent to an existing industrial estate or business park; or 
ii. Involve the expansion of an existing business; or 
iii. Involve the conversion of an existing building; or 
iv. Have a functional need to be in that particular location that cannot be met either 
on a nearby allocation, or on a site that satisfies any of the above criteria. 
h. Agricultural, horticultural and forestry uses; 
i. New and enhanced infrastructure; 
j. Sports, equine, recreation, community facilities and tourism development; 
k. Intensive livestock units where it can be demonstrated that (individually or 
cumulatively) the proposal will not result in an unacceptable environmental impact on 
its surroundings; and 
l. Mineral extraction in accordance with Policy MIN3. 
2. Development will be expected to protect the best and most versatile agricultural land. 
Areas of lower quality agricultural land should be used where the proposals result in 
the significant development of agricultural land in preference to the best and most 
versatile agricultural land. 
3. All development proposals should demonstrate that soil resources will be managed 
and conserved in a viable condition and used sustainably in line with accepted best 
practice and only permitted where it safeguards and enhances the natural 
environment and considers biodiversity through the provision of measurable net gains 
to biodiversity and links to coherent ecological networks. 
8.4 It is important that the Local Plan plays a role in maintaining and enhancing a sustainable 
countryside, whilst protecting and enhancing biodiversity, as the area’s natural 
environment is one of its key assets. To do this we need to balance the potentially 
conflicting demands on rural areas. This policy seeks to support the diversification and 
strengthening of the rural economy and revitalisation of villages and to improve the range 
and quality of local services available to rural communities. This however must not be at 
the expense of maintaining the character and quality of North Lincolnshire’s prosperous 
and safe environment and its high quality natural environment. 
8.5 The conversion of rural buildings will be supported where they help to create more 
vibrant rural communities, offering employment, tourism or residential opportunities. As 
well as the types of uses supported through the Town and Country Planning (General 
Permitted Development) (England) Order 2015 (as amended) Policy RD1 provides a 
positive framework for bringing buildings back in to use. 
8.6 In order to be considered suitable for conversion to residential use, an existing building 
must be structurally sound and capable of re-use without significant rebuilding, 
alteration or substantial extensions. Permitted development rights will normally be 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 207 removed when conversions are approved. Where the proposal involves the use of a 
listed building, it will need to be assessed against Policy HE1. 
8.7 Permanent dwellings for agricultural and forestry workers, or for other people involved in 
rural based enterprises, will be supported where it is justified and commensurate with 
the size of the holding. This will include demonstrating: 
• A clear functional need for the dwelling, relating to a full time worker(s) employed on the 
unit; 
• The existing rural activity has been established for at least three years, has been 
profitable for at least one and is currently financially sound; and 
• That the need for the dwelling cannot be provided by an existing dwelling, which is 
suitable and available for occupation by the worker concerned. 
8.8 Some types of infrastructure may be required in the countryside to support the 
achievement of the Plan's objectives. Examples include water management schemes, 
energy development and infrastructure, transport schemes and telecommunications 
infrastructure. These will be supported where they require a countryside location for 
operational reasons. 
8.9 Policy RD1 is supportive of intensive livestock units but designed to limit the 
environmental impacts of proposals to an acceptable level. Conflict can arise when new 
schemes take place next to residential areas and this results in complaints about the unit 
itself. 
8.10 Agriculture is the predominant land use in North Lincolnshire, and land quality varies 
from place to place. The Agricultural Land Classification (ALC) system provides a method 
for assessing the quality of agricultural land, with Grades 1, 2 and 3a considered the best 
and most versatile agricultural land. The majority of North Lincolnshire’s best and most 
versatile land is located in the Isle of Axholme, adjoining the River Trent and River 
Ancholme, the Ancholme Valley and the North Lincolnshire Wolds. It is not currently 
possible to differentiate between Grade 3a and 3b as a comprehensive survey of Grade 
3 land is not available. Where land is identified as Grade 3 on the ALC maps and an 
agricultural land classification statement is not provided, the council will consider the land 
to be best and most versatile land unless it is proven otherwise. All proposals over 1 
hectare that would have the potential to involve the loss of best and most versatile 
agricultural land will be expected to be accompanied by an agricultural land classification 
statement. 
Page 208 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 9 Delivering a Quality Environment 
LANDSCAPE PROTECTION 
The Local Landscape 
9.1 North Lincolnshire is a predominantly rural landscape interspersed by Scunthorpe, 
principal towns, large service centres and smaller settlements. The Lincolnshire Wolds 
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) is a nationally designated area, currently 
with its northern limit near Caistor in West Lindsey. A proposed AONB extension will 
protect a further area within North Lincolnshire to conserve and enhance its natural 
beauty. In addition to the Lincolnshire Wolds, the Plan aims to protect and enhance the 
other National Character Areas, which are the Humberhead Levels, Humber Estuary, 
Lincolnshire Coast and Marshes, Central Lincolnshire Vale and Northern Lincolnshire 
Edge with Coversands. 
9.2 Landscape plays an important role in defining the character and appearance of the 
environment and, importantly, the setting of new development within the environment. It 
is important that new development is located and designed to recognise existing 
landscape character. Where appropriate, this should be through a specific landscape 
appraisal. 
9.3 North Lincolnshire Council is committed to ensuring that the intrinsic value of our 
landscape is protected and, wherever possible, enhanced, whilst enabling strategic, 
sustainable growth which is necessary for the area’s communities and economies to 
thrive. Key views within the landscape and in to and out of settlements are valued by the 
local community and can also define the local identity of a place and, therefore, will be 
maintained and enhanced. 
9.4 One of the core principles of the NPPF is that planning should recognise the intrinsic 
character and beauty of the countryside. Local plans should include strategic policies for 
the conservation and enhancement of the natural environment, including landscape. This 
not only includes designated landscapes such as the Lincolnshire Wolds Area of 
Outstanding Natural Beauty but also the non-designated wider countryside. The 
Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) designation will provide 
the same level of protection as that afforded to National Parks. 
POLICY DQE1: PROTECTION OF LANDSCAPE, TOWNSCAPE AND VIEWS 
Landscape Protection 
1. Development proposals that would cause unacceptable harm and do not respect and 
protect the distinctive character and quality of the landscape or important features or 
views will not be permitted. Proposals should have regard to the North Lincolnshire 
Landscape Character Assessment and should contribute to the conservation or 
enhancement of the local landscape and establish coherent ecological networks, 
where possible. 
Character and setting 
2. Proposals should have particular regard to maintaining and responding positively to 
any natural and man-made features within the landscape and townscape which 
positively contribute to the character of the area. These may include but are not limited 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 209 to historic buildings and monuments, other landmark buildings, topography, trees and 
woodland, hedgerows, walls, water features, field patterns, and the intervisibility 
between historic rural settlements. 
3. Development proposals should: 
a. relate well to local topography and the built form and be of an appropriate scale, siting, 
layout, design, density and use of materials to minimise the impact on the landscape 
character of the site and its surroundings; 
b. include provisions for the long-term management and maintenance of any existing 
and proposed landscaping, woodlands and trees; 
c. avoid detrimental effects on, or the loss of, features that make a significant 
contribution to the particular landscape character type; 
d. aim to conserve, enhance or restore important natural and historic landscape features, 
including those relating to rivers, streams and the coast, and provide measurable net 
gains to biodiversity particularly where they contribute to Nature Recovery Networks; 
e. maintain and extend tree cover, where practicable and appropriate, through the 
retention of important trees, replacement of trees to be lost, and new planting to 
support green infrastructure, with respect to habitat priorities within the Biodiversity 
Opportunity Mapping and/or Local Nature Recovery Strategy; 
f. not have an unacceptable visual impact on skylines, key views and roofscapes and 
undertake measures, such as landscaping, to reduce those impacts where 
appropriate; 
g. be supported by a landscaping scheme that includes new landscaping measures that 
positively integrate the development into the landscape character of the area; and, 
h. be supported by a landscape analysis and management plan in appropriate cases. 
This should take account of, as a minimum, the most up to date Lincolnshire 
Landscape Character Assessment and information obtained from the North 
Lincolnshire Historic Environment Record. 
4. Where a proposal may result in significant harm it may, exceptionally, be permitted if 
the overriding benefits of the development demonstrably outweigh the harm. In such 
circumstances, the harm should be minimised and mitigated. 
Create and protect views 
5. All development proposals should take account of views in to, out of, and within 
development areas. Schemes should be designed to preserve or enhance key local 
views and vistas and create new public views, where possible by utilising considerate 
development, layout and design. Particular consideration should be given to views of 
significant buildings and views within landscapes, which are more sensitive to 
change due to their open, exposed character and extensive intervisibility from various 
viewpoints. 
Cumulative impacts 
6. In considering the impacts of a proposal, both the cumulative impacts and individual 
impacts will be considered. Developers should complete a site-specific landscape 
appraisal, proportionate to the anticipated scale and impact of the proposal. This 
appraisal should assess the character and appearance of the site, respond to 
landscape character, climate change and flood alleviation, where appropriate, and 
propose improvements to levels of amenity, incorporating biodiversity net gain 
measures identified through ecological assessment. 
Page 210 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Proposed Extension to the Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
(AONB) 
7. Priority will be given to the protection and enhancement of the landscape character, 
natural beauty and setting of the proposed extension to the Lincolnshire Wolds Area 
of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). The considerations set out in this policy are 
particularly important when determining proposals which have the potential to 
impact upon the proposed extension to the Lincolnshire Wolds AONB. 
Areas of High Landscape Value 
8. Areas of High Landscape Value are considered to be of high landscape quality with 
strong distinctive characteristics which make them particularly sensitive to 
development. A review of Areas of High Landscape Value has been undertaken in the 
latest North Lincolnshire Landscape Character Assessment. In light of this review, it is 
proposed that the following Areas of High Landscape Value should be protected: 
a. Lincoln Edge Woodland and Heathland areas east of Scunthorpe, extending south to 
Kirton in Lindsey; 
b. Lincoln Edge Cliff between Whitton and Flixborough; 
c. Flat Valley Bottom Farmland, Vale of Ancholme; 
d. Heathy Woodland near Wrawby Moor; 
e. Wolds Villages Scarp Slope; and 
f. Deepdale. 
9. The considerations set out in this policy are particularly important when determining 
proposals which have the potential to impact upon Areas of High Landscape Value, 
as identified on the Proposals Map. 
* Reference should also be made to the requirements of Policy DQE2: Landscape Enhancement and Policy DQE3: 
Biodiversity and Geodiversity in this Plan. 
9.5 The Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) designation will 
provide the same level of protection as that afforded to National Parks. A management 
plan has been prepared for the existing AONB identifying the value and special qualities 
of the designation. The management plan does not carry the same planning weight as 
the Local Plan but does establish key principles. For developments within the boundaries 
of the proposed Lincolnshire Wolds AONB extension, the management plan will be 
deemed to apply and will be a material consideration. 
9.6 For many years there has been a desire amongst a partnership of organisations in North 
Lincolnshire (including the council) and Lincolnshire County Council to extend the existing 
Lincolnshire Wolds AONB boundary into North Lincolnshire, primarily to include the 
northern Wolds area up to the River Humber and Ancholme valley. The Council are 
engaging Natural England to prepare a case for the boundary extension. The formal 
process will include an assessment to determine if the area meets the statutory criteria 
of an AONB and, if designated, the area would be conserved for the nation as a special 
place. It would not necessarily mean the end of development or new farming practices 
but would ensure that all development in the area meets the AONB criteria. Indeed, the 
proposed extension will properly and correctly reflect the requirements of the National 
Park and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 (as amended). 
9.7 When considering landscape character and designing landscape schemes, it is 
important to recognise the wider role that landscape performs. Whilst complementing 
the character and appearance of the site, landscape elements can provide wider 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 211 functional purposes. For example, trees and hedges can provide important shade, aid 
drainage, and provide important habitat for wildlife. Broader landscape areas can 
provide a mechanism for responding to climate change and flood alleviation, and 
landscaping can be beneficial to air quality and the atmosphere. Good landscaping can 
also instil a sense of wellbeing, which can promote healthy living. 
9.8 The desire to extend the AONB to the northern Wold and Ancholme valley may also 
bring the need for landscape enhancement in that area, particularly around visual 
detractors such as Elsham Wold Industrial Estate. 
POLICY DQE2: LANDSCAPE ENHANCEMENT 
1. The following landscape enhancement schemes are proposed: 
Scunthorpe and Bottesford Urban Area 
a. North West Escarpment 
b. Bottesford Beck 
c. Land North of Rowland Road 
d. Lakeside 
e. Land North of Doncaster Road 
f. Ridgewalk/Sustrans route 
Barton upon Humber 
g. Barton East 
h. Barton West 
i. Waters’ Edge 
Brigg 
j. River Ancholme 
k. Wrawby Road Approach 
l. Brigg North 
Large service centres 
m. Winterton North West 
n. Messingham South 
o. Broughton North 
p. Broughton South 
q. Epworth East 
Larger rural settlements 
r. Burton upon Stather East 
s. New Holland Industrial Estate 
t. New Holland Mere 
Page 212 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Northern Wold and Ancholme Valley 
u. Elsham Wold Industrial Estate 
Ironstone Gullets to the north-east of Scunthorpe 
v. Lincoln Edge Scarp Slope 
Industrial landscape 
w. South Humber Bank* 
2. Development will only be permitted where it provides opportunities for landscape 
enhancement or creation. 
3. Development will recognise and reflect the wider role and functional purposes that 
landscape can perform. 
4. A variety of enhancement schemes will be supported including, but not exclusive to, 
trees and hedges. Such schemes will be expected to deliver multiple benefits for the 
environment and local communities in order to, for example, provide shade and 
habitat for wildlife and aid drainage, air quality and the atmosphere. 
5. Reference should also be made to the requirements of Policy DQE1: Protection of 
Landscape, Townscape and Views in this Plan. 
* Reference should also be made to the requirements of Policy EC4: South Humber Bank -Landscape Initiative 
in this Plan 
9.9 The landscape enhancement schemes under policy DQE2 - Landscape Enhancement 
are shown on the Policies Map in an indicative manner. It is expected that each scheme 
will be defined by a process of negotiation. Where the provision of an allocated 
landscaping scheme is a prerequisite for achieving development of a site, the 
implementation and maintenance of allocated landscaping schemes will be achieved 
through the use of planning conditions and agreements. In other cases, the Council will 
undertake or secure funding for the implementation and maintenance of the allocated 
landscaping proposals. Such improvements will, in the majority of cases, need to be 
secured through management agreements. Table 9.1 below indicates what is required 
at each named site, together with the extent of each site’s overlap with biodiversity 
opportunities mapping (BOM). The Table sets out suitable options in terms of soils and 
the relationship with the existing landscape and habitat networks. 
9.10 The Ironstone Gullets are distinctive and valuable features of the landscape to the north-
east of Scunthorpe. Whilst parts of the area require protection as features of the 
landscape and for their nature conservation value, there remain significant opportunities 
for landscape enhancement throughout this area. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 213 TABLE 9.1 LANDSCAPE ENHANCEMENT REQUIREMENTS BY SITE 
Landscape 
Enhancement Scheme Overlap with 
Biodiversity Opportunities Mapping (BOM) Enhancements Required 
DQE2: 1a
North West Escarpment Complete Management as Open Mosaic Habitats. 
DQE2: 1b
Bottesford Beck Complete Restoration of species-rich grassland.
Planting of small blocks of native broadleaved woodland. 
DQE2: 1c
Land North of Rowland 
Road Complete Restoration of species-rich grassland.
Specimen trees. 
DQE2: 1d
Lakeside Complete Management as Open Mosaic Habitats.
Management of wildflower meadow.
Enhancement of ditches for aquatic life.
Management of scrub and wet woodland. 
DQE2: 1e
Land north of Doncaster 
Road Partial Creation of mixed broadleaved woodland buffer. 
Enhancement of ditches for aquatic life. 
DQE2: 1f
Ridgewalk/Sustrans route Majority Mixed broadleaved woodland creation. 
Enhanced woodland management.
Enhanced acid and neutral grassland management.
Management as Open Mosaic Habitats. 
DQE2: 1g
Barton East None Mixed broadleaved woodland creation. 
DQE2: 1h
Barton West Partial Enhanced woodland management.
Enhanced neutral and calcareous grassland management. 
DQE2: 1i
Waters’ Edge Complete Enhanced woodland and scrub management.
Enhanced neutral grassland management.
Enhanced management of ditches, ponds, reedbeds and open water. 
DQE2: 1j
River Ancholme Complete Mixed broadleaved woodland and wet woodland creation. 
Creation of wetlands and reedbeds. 
DQE2: 1k
Wrawby Road Approach None Creation of mixed broadleaved woodland buffer. 
DQE2: 1l
Brigg North Partial Creation of mixed broadleaved woodland buffer. 
Enhancement of ditches for aquatic life. 
DQE2: 1m
Winterton North West None Creation of mixed broadleaved woodland buffer. 
DQE2: 1n
Messingham South None Mixed broadleaved woodland creation. 
Enhanced acid and neutral grassland management. 
DQE2: 1o
Broughton North Complete Mixed broadleaved woodland creation. 
Enhanced acid and neutral grassland management. 
DQE2: 1p
Broughton South None Mixed broadleaved woodland creation. 
Enhanced acid and neutral grassland management. 
DQE2: 1q
Epworth East None Traditional strip farming. 
DQE2: 1r
Burton upon Stather East None Creation of mixed broadleaved woodland buffer. 
DQE2: 1s
New Holland Industrial 
Estate Partial Enhanced woodland management. 
DQE2: 1t
New Holland Mere Complete Mixed broadleaved woodland creation. 
Enhanced wetland management. 
DQE2: 1u
Elsham Wold Industrial 
Estate None Creation of mixed broadleaved woodland buffer. 
Beech clumps.
Farmland bird habitat. 
DQE2: 1v
Lincoln Edge Scarp Slope Majority Mixed broadleaved woodland creation. 
Enhanced woodland and scrub management.
Enhanced acid, neutral and calcareous grassland management.
Enhanced wetland management.
Management as Open Mosaic Habitats. 
DQE2: 1w
South Humber Bank Majority Refer to the requirements of Policy EC4: South Humber Bank -
Landscape Initiative in this Plan 
Page 214 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) BIODIVERSITY & GEODIVERSITY 
9.11 ‘Biodiversity’ is shorthand for biological diversity. It is a term commonly used to describe 
the variety of life in a particular area including plants, animals and other living organisms. 
There are many different definitions of biodiversity among which the one used under the 
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) is one of the most frequently cited: "the 
variability among living organisms from all sources including terrestrial, marine and other 
aquatic ecosystems, and the ecological complexes of which they are part, this includes 
diversity within species, between species and of ecosystems". 
9.12 ‘Geodiversity’ is shorthand for geological diversity. It is a term which is commonly used to 
describe the variety of earth materials, forms and processes that constitute and shape 
the Earth. This includes a variety of rocks, minerals, fossils and other geological features. 
9.13 North Lincolnshire has many areas which are noted for their natural beauty and 
biodiversity value. These areas also support a wide variety of species and habitats and 
form an important part of the network of biodiversity sites within the wider environment. 
Wildlife sites and habitats that are recognised as being of national, regional and local 
importance, within or partly within North Lincolnshire, include almost 30 Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest, over 250 Local Wildlife Sites, almost 40 Local Geological Sites, and 
nearly 20 Local Nature Reserves. These sites support important natural assets, such as 
ancient woodland, heathland, acid grassland and wetland. 
9.14 Crowle Moor is part of Thorne Moor Special Area for Conservation (SAC), designated for 
degraded peat bog capable of regeneration. It is also part of the Thorne and Hatfield 
Moors Special Protection Area (SPA), designated for its breeding population of nightjars. 
The Humber Estuary is an internationally important wetland and is designated as an 
SAC, SPA and Ramsar site. 
9.15 Sites that lie outside designated areas are not statutorily protected but can also provide 
valuable spaces and corridors for protected habitats and species. For example, 
waterways, can be valuable for biodiversity, providing green and blue corridors that link 
habitats and wildlife sites. Maintaining and enhancing a network of habitats, species and 
wildlife sites, and linkages between them is important to achieving the vision and aims 
of the Lincolnshire Biodiversity Action Plan (revised 2015) (to be replaced by Local Nature 
Recovery Strategy). 
9.16 The Nature Recovery Network is a major commitment in the UK Government’s 25-Year 
Environment Plan and intends to improve, expand and connect habitats to address 
wildlife decline and provide wider environmental benefits for people. This will build on the 
success of previous initiatives such as Nature Improvement Areas (NIAs). NIAs are 
landscape-scale initiatives that aim to ensure land is used sustainably to achieve 
multiple benefits for people, wildlife and the local economy, alongside establishing 
coherent ecological networks that are more resilient to current and future pressures. The 
Humberhead Levels is a nationally selected NIA. 
9.17 A Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping Study has been prepared for North Lincolnshire 
alongside the Greater Lincolnshire Nature Partnership and partners. The study map 
identifies the known areas of opportunity for local landscape-scale habitat improvement 
within North Lincolnshire, and as such represent strategic areas for biodiversity. It 
indicates where it is considered most important and feasible to target habitat protection, 
restoration and creation, including for heathland, grassland, woodland and wetlands. 
Major development should adopt an ecosystem approach, whilst large-scale major 
development schemes should adopt a landscape-scale approach in any masterplanning 
work that reflects the opportunities identified in the Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping 
Study (or any subsequent replacement). Taking a strategic landscape-scale approach to 
the planning, design and management of connected Green Infrastructure assets 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 215 provides the framework within which species migration can more readily occur in 
response to environmental pressures such as climate change. 
9.18 The baseline data on habitats and species, that underpin local biodiversity strategy, will 
be kept up to date by the Greater Lincolnshire Nature Partnership (GLNP) through the 
maintenance and management of any appropriate evidence documents published and 
hosted on their website. 
9.19 In March 2019, the Government confirmed that new developments must deliver an 
overall increase in biodiversity. Following the consultation on mandating biodiversity net 
gain in development in 2018 the Chancellor confirmed that the government will use the 
Environment Bill to mandate ‘biodiversity net gain’. This will mean the delivery of much-
needed infrastructure and housing is not at the expense of vital biodiversity. 
9.20 North Lincolnshire Council will, through the Greater Lincolnshire Nature Partnership, 
work to establish a robust approach to biodiversity offsetting calculations and delivery 
that will apply across Greater Lincolnshire. This will incorporate any recommendations 
from the consultation and the 30-year perpetuity period defined by the Environment Bill 
(Part 6, 91(2)(b). In biodiversity opportunity areas (as shown on the Biodiversity 
Opportunity Mapping) landowners will be encouraged to come forward with habitat 
creation and restoration proposals that can be used for offsite gains. Developers may 
also opt to bring their own proposals forward. Where suitable compensatory habitats 
are not available locally, then investment in national or regional conservation priorities 
may take place through a tariff. 
9.21 Target habitat networks are illustrated on the Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping (BOM). 
This is a living document that will be updated regularly in conjunction with the Greater 
Lincolnshire Nature Partnership to reflect improved recording and mapping of existing 
priority habitats. (Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act (2006) Section 41 
habitats of principal importance) and priority species (Natural Environment and Rural 
Communities Act (2006) Section 41 species of principal importance). The Section 41 list 
of habitats and species is published by the Secretary of State. 
9.22 In time, the BOM will be used to establish Nature Recovery Networks as part of a Local 
Nature Recovery Strategy. Biodiversity net gain requirements will incentivise 
enhancement of networks identified on the BOM and subsequently the Nature Recovery 
Networks. 
9.23 Biodiversity net gain requires developers to ensure habitats for wildlife are enhanced and 
left in a measurably better state than they were pre-development. Developers must 
assess the type of habitat and its condition before submitting plans, and then 
demonstrate how they are improving biodiversity – for example, through the creation of 
green corridors, planting more trees, or forming local nature spaces. The Council’s 
biodiversity net gain target and the mechanisms that will ensure net gain is 
demonstrated, secured and implemented, will be addressed in the Biodiversity 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) to accompany the Local Plan. The SPD should 
be read alongside the policies within this Plan. Its purpose is to provide supporting 
information and guidance on how to approach development proposals relating to the 
natural environment in a way that will facilitate sustainable planning decisions to be 
made. This will contribute to the production of high quality, sustainable development with 
a focus on achieving a significant percentage of ‘net gain’ in biodiversity and discharging 
Habitat Regulation Assessment (HRA) obligations, although it is intended that 
biodiversity net gain will not be used to negate assessment under the Habitats 
Regulations. 
9.24 The application of a mitigation hierarchy will provide a means by which development 
that impacts on biodiversity (habitats, species and ecological networks) will be 
accounted for and avoided, mitigated, or, as a final resort, compensated. It will also 
Page 216 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) ensure that the most valuable ecological features of a site are protected and harm to 
biodiversity is minimised. 
9.25 A minimum 10% biodiversity net gain will be required unless national standards increase 
this in the future. In order to properly inform applications, surveys will be required in line 
with the latest British Standard or its replacement (currently British Standard for 
Biodiversity Net Gain BS 8683). The standard applies to development and land 
management and can be used in project specifications, procurement and planning 
conditions. 
9.26 Off-site biodiversity enhancement utilising the DEFRA biodiversity Metric 2.0 will be 
required where a biodiversity net gain cannot be secured as part of a development 
proposal, utilising the DEFRA biodiversity metric. Use of the metric rewards schemes, 
that minimise their impacts, but also gives options to developers in terms of whether 
necessary mitigation is delivered on- or off-site. Using the latest DEFRA biodiversity 
metric (or any subsequent standard that supersedes Metric 2.0) is an effective way of 
accounting for the impacts of a proposal on biodiversity and demonstrating that a net 
gain will be delivered. It also provides flexibility and encourages projects to consider 
biodiversity from the outset. However, the metric only considers habitats and not species 
so that protected species surveys will still be required, along with details of any specific 
avoidance, mitigation or compensation that may be required for those. 
9.27 Planning Circular 06/2005 states that “It is essential that the presence or otherwise of 
protected species, and the extent that they may be affected by the proposed 
development, is established before the planning permission is granted, otherwise all 
relevant material considerations may not have been addressed in making the decision. 
The need to ensure ecological surveys are carried out should therefore only be left to 
coverage under planning conditions in exceptional circumstances, with the result that the 
surveys are carried out after planning permission has been granted”. 
9.28 North Lincolnshire Council will seek biodiversity net gain (BNG) through the restoration of 
mineral sites. Whilst there may be some very temporary uses where BNG would not be 
appropriate, for most cases it should be applied. The nature of commercial arrangements 
between developers and landowners will need to be amended to reflect this. 
9.29 Natural capital describes our natural assets including forests, rivers, land, minerals and 
oceans. Natural capital is the ‘stock’ of resources upon which society depends, whilst the 
conservation of Natural Capital is intended to secure those assets so they can provide a 
sustainable ‘flow’ of benefits including ecosystem services. North Lincolnshire Council is 
committed to adopting the Natural Capital Workbook approach, either alone or with 
partners, to quantify our natural assets, describe the ecosystem services that flow from 
them (functions and products from nature that can be turned into benefits with varying 
degrees of human input), and set out a framework for protection and sustainable use. It 
is hoped that the results will underpin policies on habitats, species, soils, water, minerals, 
etc. 
9.30 Green on-site improvements are encouraged, but in circumstances where they are not 
possible developers will need to pay a levy for habitat creation or improvement 
elsewhere. This approach will improve habitats for wildlife and create healthier places to 
live and work and is central to the ambition to leave the environment in a better state for 
future generations. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 217 POLICY DQE3: BIODIVERSITY AND GEODIVERSITY 
1. All development schemes shall, as appropriate to their nature and scale: 
a. protect, manage and enhance natural capital, the network of habitats, species and 
sites of international, national and local importance (statutory and non-statutory), 
including sites that meet the criteria for selection as a Local Site* unless the reasons for 
the scheme clearly outweigh the nature conservation value of the site itself; and 
b. minimise, mitigate and compensate against impacts on natural capital, ecosystem 
services, biodiversity and geodiversity where adverse effects are unavoidable; and, 
c. use the DEFRA biodiversity metric to demonstrate that a proposal will deliver a 
minimum 10% net gain for biodiversity (unless national standards increase this in the 
future); and 
d. retain and enhance existing landscape and natural features (e.g. trees, hedges, 
riverbanks, watercourses, water bodies and important habitats); or 
e. ensure an alternative corridor can be provided to ensure equivalent ecological 
connectivity is maintained; and 
f. include provisions for the long-term management and monitoring of habitats created; 
and, 
g. require sufficient ecological surveys prior to decision-making to identify impact 
avoidance, mitigation, compensation and enhancement measures for protected and 
priority species and habitats and threats from invasive non-native species. Where 
appropriate, sufficient information to support site-specific or strategic species 
licensing decisions should be provided. 
2. Proposals which may affect an SPA, SAC or Ramsar site will be assessed according 
to their implications for the site’s conservation objectives. Proposals not directly 
connected with, or necessary for, the management of the site and which are likely to 
have a significant effect on the site, either individually or in combination with other 
plans or projects, shall be subject to an Appropriate Assessment. Where it is not 
possible to demonstrate that development will not adversely affect the integrity of a 
European Site, the development will not be permitted unless it can be conclusively 
demonstrated that: 
a. there is no alternative solution; and, 
b. there are imperative reasons of overriding public interest for the development. 
3. Development proposals which are likely to have an adverse effect on a Site of Special 
Scientific Interest (SSSI) or National Nature Reserve (NNR) will not be permitted unless 
the reasons for the development clearly outweigh the national nature conservation 
value of the site itself and the national policy to safeguard the network of such sites. 
4. Sites with local designations including Local Sites*, sites that meet the criteria for 
designation as a Local Site, and Local Nature Reserves should be protected from 
significant adverse effects, unless the reasons for the development clearly outweigh 
the local nature conservation value of the site. 
5. Where adverse effects on SSSIs, NNRs or sites with local designations are likely 
permission will only be granted where it can be demonstrated that the effects can be 
avoided and/or minimised to an acceptable level or, as a last resort, appropriate 
compensatory measures provided. 
6. Development resulting in the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats, such as 
ancient woodland and aged or veteran trees, will be refused unless there are wholly 
exceptional reasons** and a suitable compensation strategy exists. 
Page 218 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 7. Wherever possible, harm to natural capital, ecosystem services, biodiversity and 
geodiversity should be avoided. In all cases where development is permitted which 
may damage the nature conservation value of the site, such damage shall be kept to 
a minimum. Developers will be required to ensure that impacts are appropriately 
mitigated with compensation measures towards loss of habitat used only as a last 
resort where there is no alternative. Where any mitigation and compensation 
measures are required, they should be in place before development activities start 
that may disturb protected or important habitats and species. The use of conditions or 
planning obligations to ensure the protection and enhancement of the site’s nature 
conservation value will be required, together with monitoring and remedial measures, 
if appropriate and practicable or to enable major development. If significant harm to 
biodiversity resulting from a development cannot be avoided, mitigated or 
compensated for, planning permission will be refused. 
8. All schemes shall, as appropriate to their nature and scale, use the DEFRA biodiversity 
metric to demonstrate that a proposal will deliver a minimum 10% net gain for 
biodiversity, subject to any exemptions or thresholds identified in national policy. 
Measures required to deliver a net gain for biodiversity shall be additional to any 
mitigation or compensation measures required as a consequence of identified 
impacts. Designated sites, protected species and irreplaceable habitat impacts need 
to be addressed separately, in accordance with criteria 1-5 in this Policy. Where 
possible, biodiversity units should be delivered on site. Those that cannot viably be 
delivered on site should be delivered locally, according to a local plan or strategy***. 
Where suitable compensatory habitats are not available locally then investment in 
national conservation priorities may take place through a tariff. 
9. Development intended to conserve or enhance biodiversity shall be supported. 
Provision will be made for the creation of new wildlife habitats in both rural and urban 
areas. In granting planning permission, the creation of such areas will be required for 
the following types of development: 
a. in association with the reclamation of former mineral workings and waste disposal 
sites; 
b. in association with schemes for derelict land clearance; 
c. on land which is no longer required for long-term agricultural use; and 
d. where habitat creation is required in order to achieve mandatory biodiversity net gain. 
* a Local Site is Local Wildlife Site or Local Geological Site 
** for example, infrastructure projects (including nationally significant infrastructure projects, orders under the 
Transport and Works Act and Hybrid Bills), where the public benefit would clearly outweigh the loss or 
deterioration of habitat. 
*** at the time of writing appropriate plans or strategies would include the Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping, 
Local Plan Policies reflecting the Lincolnshire Lakes or the South Humber Bank Landscape Initiative, for example. 
Subsequent additional or replacement plans or strategies, such as a Local Habitat Map, Local Nature Strategy or 
Local Nature Recovery Network should also be taken into account. 
9.31 The components of the ecological network within North Lincolnshire have been mapped 
and are available to view on the North Lincolnshire Council website on the interactive 
map. This will be updated annually incorporating data supplied by the GLNP. 
9.32 Development proposals should ensure opportunities are taken to retain, protect and 
enhance biodiversity and geodiversity features proportionate to their scale, through site 
layout, design of new buildings and proposals for existing buildings and landscaping 
schemes, including consideration of the multiple benefits of features such as SuDs. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 219 9.33 Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity sets out a strategic approach which positively 
plans for the creation, protection, enhancement and management of sites of biodiversity 
and geodiversity. It acknowledges the hierarchy of international, national and locally 
designated sites and refers specifically to the designation process for local sites, linked to 
processes of monitoring and review, undertaken in partnership with the Greater 
Lincolnshire Nature Partnership. 
9.34 The NPPF emphasises that if harm resulting from development cannot be avoided, 
(through locating development on an alternative site with less harmful impacts), 
adequately mitigated or, as a last resort, compensated for, then planning permission 
should be refused. 
9.35 The Humber Estuary SSSI, SPA and Ramsar sites cover water bodies to both the east 
and to the west of the Humber Bridge where quiet, relatively informal recreation such as 
fishing and nature study are seen as appropriate uses. However, it is not merely noise 
disturbance which may be detrimental to nature conservation and cause demonstrable 
harm in recreational areas. Even though fishing may be a quiet activity in itself, poorly 
managed fisheries can have a significant impact on water quality and the sustainability 
of a healthy wetland ecosystem and should, therefore, be considered against both the 
requirements of this policy and the Habitats Regulations. 
9.36 Applicants are encouraged to contact North Lincolnshire Council prior to submitting a 
planning application if it is suspected the proposals may have an impact on priority 
habitats and protected species. To protect and enhance North Lincolnshire's natural 
environment, biodiversity and geodiversity, developers will be expected to submit an 
ecological survey where there is a reasonable likelihood of the presence of important 
habitats or species. 
9.37 In relation to the protected sites that are referred to in this Plan, and for the avoidance of doubt: 
• Internationally important sites are Special Areas of Conservation (SAC), Special 
Protection Areas (SPA), and Ramsar sites (collectively known as European Sites); 
• potential SPAs, possible SACs, proposed Ramsar sites and sites identified, or required, as 
compensatory measures for adverse effects on internationally important sites are 
themselves treated as internationally important; 
• Nationally important sites are Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), and National 
Nature Reserves (NNR); 
• Locally important sites are Local Nature Reserves (LNR), and Local Sites, Local Wildlife 
Sites (LWS) and Local Geological Sites (LGS); and 
• Local Sites are selected by expert panels applying criteria developed and maintained by 
the Greater Lincolnshire Nature Partnership. 
LOCAL NATURE RESERVES 
9.38 Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) are a statutory designation made under Section 21 of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 by principal local authorities. 
Parish and town councils can also declare LNRs, but they must have the powers to do so 
delegated to them by a principal local authority. LNRs are for people and wildlife and are 
places with wildlife or geological features that are of special interest locally. They offer 
people opportunities to study or learn about nature or simply to enjoy the area. Local 
Nature Reserves will generally be declared by North Lincolnshire Council in accordance 
with published selection criteria. They will be managed by the Council or by third parties 
through a management agreement. 
Page 220 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY DQE4: LOCAL NATURE RESERVES 
Currently Declared Local Nature Reserves 
1. It is proposed that the following Currently Declared Local Nature Reserves are 
protected: 
a. Ashbyville 
b. Atkinson’s Warren 
c. Axholme Line, Haxey 
d. Barton Wolds 
e. Belshaw Heath 
f. Brumby Wood 
g. Conesby 
h. Elsham Chalk Quarry 
i. Far Ings 
j. Frodingham 
k. Kingsway 
l. Owston Ferry Castle 
m. Phoenix 
n. Phoenix Parkway 
o. Sawcliffe Hill 
p. Silica Park 
q. Waters’ Edge 
2. The Council currently has a target to declare and manage 2 hectares of Local Nature 
Reserve for every 1,000 people. Future LNRs will be selected by prioritising sites with 
high wildlife value, public accessibility and the ability to enter into management 
agreements. 
3. Any development or land use change which is likely to have an adverse impact on a 
Local Nature Reserve will not be approved unless it can be clearly demonstrated that 
there are reasons for the proposal which outweigh the need to safeguard the intrinsic 
nature conservation value of the site or feature. 
4. In all cases where development is permitted which may damage the nature 
conservation value of the site, such damage shall be kept to a minimum. Where 
development is permitted the use of conditions or planning obligations to ensure the 
protection and enhancement of the site’s nature conservation value and other 
appropriate compensatory measures will be considered. 
9.39 North Lincolnshire Council will prioritise sites which would contribute to a Nature 
Recovery Network, as highlighted by the Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping, by updating 
our LNR selection criteria. Table 9.2 outlines how many hectares are still required and 
how this will change over the life of the Plan. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 221 TABLE 9.2 PROPOSED LOCAL NATURE RESERVE REQUIREMENT IN NORTH
LINCOLNSHIRE OVER THE LIFE OF THE PLAN 
Year Projected Population of North 
Lincolnshire Area of LNR required (2ha per 
1,000 people) 
2016 (Local Plan Baseline) 170,786 341.6 
2026 174,900 349.8 
2039 178,537 357.1 
NB: Actual Area of LNR in 2016 = 310 hectares 
MANAGING FLOOD RISK & SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
Flood Risk 
9.40 NPPF (2021) requires a risk-based sequential approach to flood risk to avoid high risk 
areas and steer development to areas at lower risk. As well as minimising risk to the 
development itself, development should not increase flood risk elsewhere and 
opportunities should be taken to reduce risk downstream, such as by reducing runoff 
rates. 
9.41 The Environment Agency (EA) publishes the Flood Map for Planning which identifies 
areas at low, medium and high annual probability of flooding, known as flood zones 1, 2 
and 3 respectively. The map does not take account of existing flood defences but shows 
where they are present. The definitions of the flood zones are as set out in the Planning 
Practice Guidance, Flood Risk and Coastal Change. The SFRA provides more detailed 
information on flood risk from all sources in North Lincolnshire, including the projected 
impacts of climate change, the presence of defences and residual risk behind these 
defences. 
9.42 Flood risk is a significant issue in North Lincolnshire with approximately 50% of land 
being located within flood zone 3; indeed, the Humber Estuary, Rivers Trent and 
Ancholme and the Isle of Axholme are all set in a low-lying landscape. The sources of 
flooding in North Lincolnshire include tidal (from the sea and tidal rivers/estuaries), fluvial 
(from rivers), pluvial (from surface water runoff following rainfall), and groundwater (as 
has been seen in recent years in the Barrow upon Humber/Barton upon Humber area). 
Surface water flooding has become an increasing concern because of more intensive 
rainfall events, and climate change is likely to increase the frequency and severity of 
extreme weather events and the likelihood of surface water and fluvial flooding. 
9.43 However, tidal flooding is of particular concern due to the potential consequences to the 
coastal areas should the defences breach or be overtopped; the likelihood of such events 
occurring will also increase with climate change. During the next 100 years North Sea 
tidal surges (as seen, for example, in December 2013) will become more frequent and, 
unless coastal and tidal defences are improved as sea level rises, breaches and 
overtopping will become increasingly likely. Such events will impact industry and the 
North Lincolnshire economy unless an appropriate flood risk management strategy is in 
place. 
9.44 The resultant need for flood resilience in new development, including infrastructure, will 
be vital in line with the EA National Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management 
Strategy https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-flood-and-coastal-
erosion-risk-management-strategy-for-england--2. Humber 2100+ is looking at risk 
management in the broader sense of resilience, and this is likely to be a combination of 
improved defences (in some locations), increased managed water on land, and other 
resilience measures to ensure that when flooding happens there is less damage and 
recovery is quicker. 
Page 222 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 9.45 Where flood risk is a significant issue, Local Plans must be supported by Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessments (SFRAs) and develop policies to manage flood risk from all sources. 
North Lincolnshire has a SFRA (2011) in place that is currently being updated as 
evidence for this new Local Plan. Alongside this, the Environment Agency is developing, 
in partnership with 12 Local Authorities (including North Lincolnshire Council and the 
Humber LEP), a new tidal flood risk management strategy for the Humber known as 
‘Humber 2100+’. Its aim is wider than managing tidal flood risk and includes supporting 
sustainable development and a prosperous Humber. Consequently, Humber 2100+ is a 
key strategy for the future of North Lincolnshire and, indeed, the wider Humber. This is 
due to be submitted to Defra for approval at the end of 2023. When H2100+ is adopted 
it will be important for the Local Plan to reflect the aspirations of this strategy as it will 
have a key role to play in delivering flood risk management into the future. This could 
involve safeguarding areas of land for future flood risk management infrastructure, or 
securing long-term managed adaptive approaches (MAA), such as that agreed for the 
Lincolnshire Lakes area. 
9.46 North Lincolnshire Council (NLC) is the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) and is 
responsible for managing flood risk from ordinary watercourses, ground water and 
surface water. The LLFA is a statutory consultee for the local plan and planning 
application process, as part of these roles they provide advice on the emerging policies 
and evidence document to ensure future growth is safe without increasing flood risk to 
the third parties. 
9.47 As the Lead Flood Authority North Lincolnshire Council have produced the North 
Lincolnshire Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (LFRMS) was published August 
2016. The Strategy sets out the objectives for North Lincolnshire Council as Lead Local 
Flood Authority to work in partnership with all stakeholders to understand more 
comprehensively, mitigate, manage and prepare for flood events. 
9.48 A key measure within the LFRMS is to ensure robust application of flood risk policy for 
new development to avoid increased flood risk. In accordance with National Planning 
Policy Framework, North Lincolnshire Council will seek to ensure planning applications 
demonstrate: 
• All flooding issues have been taken into account. 
• Most vulnerable development is located in areas of lowest flood risk. 
• Development is appropriately flood resilient and resistant. 
• Any residual flood risk can be safely managed by the responsible authority. 
9.49 The NPPF states that local plans should apply a sequential risked-based approach to the 
location of development, taking into account the current and future impacts of climate 
change, to avoid, where possible, flood risk to people and property. It is only in truly 
exceptional circumstances, such as those relating to the Lincolnshire Lakes development, 
that it may be appropriate to develop land at risk of flooding for sustainability reasons or 
to avoid economic and social blight in an area. If it is not possible for particular 
development to be located in zones with a lower risk of flooding (taking into account 
wider sustainability objectives), the exception test may have to be applied. This depends 
on the vulnerability of the proposed use as set out in Planning Practice Guidance . The 
sequential test for the site allocations for the Local Plan has been undertaken. 
• If it is not possible for development to be located in zones with a lower risk of flooding 
certain types of development, as outlined in Planning Practice Guidance, will then need 
to pass the exception test. The exception test seeks to ensure that such development: 
• would provide wider sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh flood risk; 
and 
• will be safe for its lifetime taking account of the vulnerability of its users without 
increasing flood risk elsewhere and, where possible, will reduce flood risk overall. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 223 9.50 All planning applications in flood zones 2 and 3 must be accompanied by a site-specific 
flood risk assessment and the above tests applied, where necessary, as set out in the 
Planning Practice Guidance. In flood zone 1 a site-specific flood risk assessment will be 
required for: sites of 1 hectare or more; land identified in the strategic flood risk 
assessment as being at increased flood risk in future; or sites that may be subject to other 
sources of flooding where its development would introduce a more vulnerable use. 
9.51 Where the Council is satisfied that development is exceptionally necessary in areas of 
high flood risk it will be particularly important to integrate water management into the 
area, with people’s safety being the top priority. This will involve a number of measures 
including: 
• locating the most vulnerable types of development in areas of lowest flood risk; 
• raising floor and/or land levels; 
• designing and constructing buildings to be resilient and resistant to the effects of flooding 
and safe for human occupation 
• providing safe flow paths within and outside development and safe routes for people; 
• improving capacity and effectiveness of drainage infrastructure; 
• providing, enhancing and maintaining flood defences and flood warning systems; and 
• ensuring there will be no resulting increase in flood risk to existing development or 
occupants. 
9.52 Those proposing development should refer to the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2020, 
for further guidance on managing flood risk. 
POLICY DQE5: MANAGING FLOOD RISK 
1. The risk and impact of flooding will be minimised through: 
a. directing new development to areas with the lowest probability of flooding; 
b. ensuring that all new development addresses the effective management of all sources 
of flood risk; 
c. ensuring that development does not increase the risk of flooding elsewhere; and 
d. ensuring wider environmental benefits of development in relation to flood risk. 
A site-specific flood risk assessment (FRA) should be provided for all development in 
Flood Zone 2 and 3. In Flood Zone 1 a FRA should accompany all proposals for 
development of sites of 1 hectare or more or land which has been identified by the 
Local Lead Flood Authority as having critical drainage problems or land that may be 
subject to other sources of flooding where development would introduce a more 
vulnerable use. 
2. The Council will support development proposals within areas at risk of flooding (flood 
zones 2 and 3 or at risk as shown on the flood hazard maps in the Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment), where it meets the following prerequisites: 
a. it can be demonstrated that there are no other sites available at a lower risk of flooding 
(i.e. that the sequential test is passed). The sequential test will be based on a district-
wide area of alternative sites unless local circumstances relating to the catchment 
area for the development justify a reduced search area, i.e. there is a specific need for 
the development in that location. The sequential test is not required for sites allocated 
in the Local Plan, for minor development (as defined in Planning Practice Guidance, 
paragraph 046 (Reference ID:7-046-20140306) or for change of use (except for a 
change of use to a caravan, camping or chalet site, or to a mobile home or park home 
site); 
Page 224 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) b. it can be demonstrated that the development provides wider sustainability benefits 
to the community and the area, that outweigh flood risk; 
c. a flood risk assessment has demonstrated that the development will be safe for its 
lifetime, taking into account the latest guidance and allowances for climate change, 
without increasing flood risk elsewhere, has integrated water management 
methods into the development, and incorporated mitigation measures in line with 
the Standing Advice set out in the SFRA, which has been agreed between the 
Council and the Environment Agency; 
3. All development proposals, including proposals in flood zone 1, will be permitted 
providing it is demonstrated that: 
a. the peak rate of runoff over the lifetime of the development, allowing for climate 
change, is no greater for the developed site than it was for the undeveloped site; 
b. the post-development volume of runoff, allowing for climate change over the 
development lifetime, is no greater than it would have been for the undeveloped 
site. If this cannot be achieved, then the maximum discharge from the site should 
not exceed the calculated greenfield runoff rate for all rainfall events, up to and 
including the 1% annual probability event plus allowance for climate change; 
c. the development incorporates appropriate mitigation so that flooding of property in 
and adjacent to the development would not occur for 1% annual probability event, 
with appropriate allowance for climate change, and exceedance flood flow paths 
are taken into account; 
d. the proposals in the first instance consider water re-use measures to encourage the 
conservation of water before infiltration to manage surface water, wherever this is 
feasible; 
e. The proposal should consider the full separation of foul and surface water flows 
within the development. 
f. the final discharge locations have the capacity to receive all foul and surface water 
flows from the development into water bodies and into sewers, including discharge 
by infiltration. Where capacity is not currently available within the public sewer 
network and/or receiving wastewater treatment facility it can be demonstrated that 
it can be made available in time to serve the development; 
g. there is a management and maintenance plan for drainage and flood risk 
management infrastructure (where appropriate) for the lifetime of the development, 
which includes the implementation arrangements for adoption by any public 
authority, statutory undertaker or management company and any other 
arrangements to secure the operation and mitigation measures of the scheme 
throughout its lifetime; the final destination of the discharge complies with the 
following priority order to: 
water re-use at point of run-off; 
i. ground via infiltration; 
ii. a water body;surface water sewer. 
h. where appropriate, SuDS have been included in line with the requirements of Policy 
DQE6 Sustainable Drainage Systems of this Plan. 
4. Development within the Lincolnshire Lakes area will be required to comply with the 
flood management principles set out in the Lincolnshire Lakes Flood Risk 
Assessment and Drainage Strategy. Any additional or alternative flood 
management proposals will have to be agreed by both the Council and the 
Environment Agency. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 225 9.53 If it is not possible for development to be located in zones with a lower risk of flooding, 
certain types of development, as outlined in Planning Practice Guidance (paragraph 
067), will then need to pass the exception test. The exception test seeks to ensure that 
such development: 
• would provide wider sustainability benefits to the community that outweigh flood risk; 
and 
• will be safe for its lifetime taking account of the vulnerability of its users, without 
increasing flood risk elsewhere, and, where possible, will reduce flood risk overall. 
9.54 All planning applications in flood zones 2 and 3 must be accompanied by a site specific 
flood risk assessment and the above tests applied, where necessary, as set out in the 
Planning Practice Guidance. In flood zone 1 a site specific flood risk assessment will be 
required for: sites of 1 hectare or more; land identified in the strategic flood risk 
assessment as being at increased flood risk in future; or land that may be subject to other 
sources of flooding where its development would introduce a more vulnerable use. 
9.55 Where the Council is satisfied that development is exceptionally necessary in areas of 
high flood risk, it will be particularly important to integrate water management into the 
area or site, with people’s safety being the top priority. This will involve a number of 
measures, including: 
• locating the most vulnerable types of development in areas of lowest flood risk; 
• raising floor and/or land levels; 
• designing and constructing buildings to be resilient and resistant to the effects of flooding 
and safe for human occupation; 
• providing safe flow paths within and outside development and safe routes for people; 
• improving the capacity and effectiveness of drainage infrastructure, SuDS, highway 
drainage, sewers and watercourses, etc.; 
• providing, enhancing and maintaining flood defences and flood warning systems; and 
• ensuring there will be no resulting increase in flood risk to existing development or 
occupants. 
SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
9.56 Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) are drainage systems which aim to holistically 
manage water runoff on site, to reduce the quantity and increase the quality of surface 
water that drains into sewers from a development. They can take the form of, for 
example, ponds, permeable paving, green roofs, swales or wetlands. They are, in effect, 
a collection of water management techniques or practices that aim to align modern 
drainage systems with a natural water process. SuDS help to make urban drainage 
systems more compatible with components of the natural water cycle, such as storm 
surge overflows. They have become popular recently due to a better understanding of 
how urban development can affect natural environments, alongside an increased 
concern for issues relating to climate change and sustainability. 
9.57 Well planned and well-designed surface water management infrastructure is necessary 
for the creation and ongoing maintenance of sustainable communities. It provides a flood 
risk management function alongside benefits for amenity and biodiversity and can be 
linked to a network of green (and blue) open spaces. It can also utilise, for example, 
information gathered from the ecological surveys to ensure maximum benefits. 
Furthermore, it can conserve water resources and help improve the quality of water as it 
passes through the system. All these aspects make a significant contribution to climate 
change adaption. 
Page 226 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 9.58 The Government is committed to protecting people and property from flood risk and 
expects that SuDS will be provided in new developments wherever this is appropriate. 
However, there is still a risk that SuDS are seen as later additions to development, and 
do not fully realise their potential multifunctional benefits. They should be considered 
from the beginning of the design and masterplanning process, taking account of all 
opportunities and constraints, including heritage and wildlife assets. 
9.59 The provision of sustainable drainage within new development became a material 
consideration in planning decisions from April 2015. North Lincolnshire Council is the 
Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) for the North Lincolnshire and as such they are the 
statutory consultee in the planning process to oversee the provision of SuDS for major 
development within the District. The LLFA provides technical advice and guidance on the 
surface water drainage strategies, designs and maintenance arrangements proposed by 
developers for any new major development. 
9.60 There are a wide range of measures that can be implemented to find suitable solutions 
for all sites. Detailed guidance on developing proposals that include the use of SuDS that 
effectively manage water, are aesthetically pleasing, conserve, accommodate and 
enhance biodiversity, and provide amenity for local residents, is provided in the SuDS and 
Flood Risk Guidance Document. This provides practical guidance on what type of SuDS 
are appropriate to the development, depending on the size and location. Developers 
should consult and refer to this guidance and any future updates, when preparing 
applications incorporating SuDs schemes to new developments. All applications 
incorporating a SuDs scheme will also need to include details of a robust maintenance 
scheme to be agreed with the appropriate authority. 
POLICY DQE6: SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
1. Development proposals should in the first instance (before infiltration) consider water 
re-use measures to encourage the conservation of water to manage surface water, 
wherever feasible. 
2. Development of Major Sites (of 10 dwellings or more) or equivalent non-residential or 
mixed development must incorporate appropriate sustainable surface water drainage 
systems (SuDS) appropriate to the nature of the site, unless clearly demonstrated to 
be inappropriate. 
3. Development proposals will be required to demonstrate that: 
a. surface water drainage schemes comply with the Sustainable Drainage Systems and 
Flood Risk Guidance Document, or successor documents; 
b. opportunities have been taken to integrate sustainable drainage with the 
development, create amenity, enhance biodiversity, and contribute to a network of 
green (and blue) open space; 
c. surface water is managed close to its source and on the surface where it is practicable 
to do so; 
d. maximum use has been made of low land take drainage measures, such as rainwater 
recycling, storm water recycling, green roofs, permeable surfaces and water butts; 
e. the condition of brownfield sites has been adequately investigated and the surface 
water drainage systems designed to avoid any mobilisation of existing contamination; 
f. appropriate pollution control measures have been incorporated, including multiple 
component treatment trains; and, 
g. arrangements have been established for the whole life management and 
maintenance of surface water drainage systems. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 227 h. Approval of the design and measures to be implemented for the long term 
maintenance of SuDS will be required prior to the development being permitted. 
4. When redeveloping brownfield sites or proposing development including potentially 
contaminating uses, drainage systems must be designed to ensure there is no 
adverse impact on ground or surface waters. 
CLIMATE CHANGE & LOW CARBON LIVING 
9.61 Meeting the challenge of climate change is a key role for the planning system by 
contributing to the delivery of the most sustainable development and by shaping 
communities that are resilient to the unavoidable consequences of a changing climate. 
9.62 It is widely recognised that mankind’s use of fossil fuels is contributing to climate change. 
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions is a key part of limiting climate change and will 
require action from the global to the local level. 
9.63 ‘Low carbon living’ means reducing our carbon footprint through changing lifestyles, both 
directly (such as not travelling by car), and indirectly (such as purchasing local grown 
food), and will require wide ranging changes across society and the economy to protect 
the environment. Spatial planning has an important role to play in meeting the climate 
change challenge through increasing the resilience of communities and infrastructure, 
through influencing the location and design of development. 
9.64 In 2008, the UK became the first country to introduce a long-term, legally binding framework to 
reduce its impact on climate change, when it set a target that required greenhouse gas 
emissions to be reduced by at least 80% by 2050 compared to 1990 levels. The Climate 
Change Act 2008 (2050 Target Amendment) Order 2019 amends the above target from 
at least 80% to 100%. Otherwise known as ‘net zero’ this constitutes a legally binding 
commitment to end the UK’s contribution to climate change. 
9.65 One of the key themes within the NPPF is to support the transition to a low carbon future in a 
changing climate and encourage the use of renewable and low carbon energy resources. The 
revised 2021 NPPF retains a link between local planning policy and the Climate Change Act 
2008. As stated above, the Government introduced a target for a 100% reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions in the UK by 2050. The North Lincolnshire Carbon 
Management Strategy 2017-2022 sets out the council’s strategy and action plan for 
reducing carbon emissions and associated energy costs over the five years. 
9.66 Whilst it is felt that a local reduction of 25% by 2022 is appropriate, to achieve a local net 
zero by 2050 is an ambitious local reduction. However, to reduce carbon emissions by 
50% by 2038 is considered to be both practicable and achievable. Increasing the amount 
of energy from renewable and low carbon technologies will also help to make sure the UK has a 
secure energy supply, reduce greenhouse gas emission to slow down climate change, and 
stimulate investment in new jobs and businesses. 
9.67 Current Building Regulations set out requirements concerning the conservation of fuel and 
power in buildings. However, to support the transition to a low carbon economy and achieve the 
NPPF aim of moving to a low carbon future and zero carbon development, it is also necessary to 
encourage the greater use of renewable and low carbon energy in new development. 
9.68 The Environment Agency is responsible for managing water resources in England. They 
seek to make sure there is enough water for people (public water supply, industry and 
agriculture), and a healthy environment. The EA controls how much water is taken with 
a permitting system via the regulation of existing licences and the granting of new ones. 
To do this they use: 
Page 228 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) • the catchment abstraction management strategy (CAMS) process; and 
• abstraction licensing strategies. 
9.69 There are three Abstraction Licensing Strategies (ALSs) relevant to North Lincolnshire: 
Grimsby & Ancholme; Idle & Thorne; and Lower Trent & Erewash. A link to these 
Strategies can be found here: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/water-
abstraction-licensing-strategies-cams-process 
9.70 Climate change is already affecting water access for people around the world, causing 
more severe droughts and floods. Increasing global temperature is one of the main 
contributors to this problem, and climate change impacts the water cycle by influencing 
when, where, and how much precipitation falls. To contribute to meeting the climate change 
challenge and achieve our national and local carbon reduction targets, North Lincolnshire is 
seeking to cut carbon emissions locally. Policy DQE7: Climate Change & Low Carbon Living 
sets out how development proposals should contribute to tackling climate change through 
mitigation and resilience measures, in addition to other policies contained within this plan. 
POLICY DQE7: CLIMATE CHANGE & LOW CARBON LIVING 
1. Proposals for development should be designed to mitigate the impacts of climate 
change and minimise carbon emissions to meet the climate change challenge. 
2. All development proposals should be resilient to climate change and decrease the 
negative impacts of climate change on neighbouring areas by: 
a. incorporating design features and measures to support water recycling and the 
conservation of water resources, including measures such as rainwater recycling, 
stormwater recycling and grey water recycling, wherever practicable; 
b. meeting the Building Regulations optional higher water efficiency standard of 110 
litres per person per day (as set out in Part G2) or any higher national water efficiency 
standard that applies at the time of the application; 
c. through their location, taking into account the risk of flooding from all sources of 
flooding; 
d. incorporating the use of sustainable drainage systems, wherever practicable, to 
minimise and control surface water run-off and provide environmental and community 
benefits; and 
e. incorporating, where feasible, multi-functional green infrastructure which can help 
species adapt to climate change through preventing fragmentation or isolation of 
habitats, reducing the heating of the urban environment, and managing flooding. 
3. All development proposals should promote low carbon living through the reduction of 
carbon emissions by: 
a. through their location, layout and pattern of development, reducing the need to travel 
for both people and goods, and promoting the use of sustainable modes of transport; 
b. being designed to reduce energy consumption through methods such as high 
standards of insulation, avoiding development in areas subject to significant effects 
from shadow, wind and frost, using natural lighting and ventilation and capturing the 
sun’s heat, where appropriate; 
c. utilising decentralised, renewable and low carbon energy; 
d. maximising the reuse or recycling of materials in new construction and making the 
best use of existing building and infrastructure; 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 229 e. incorporating multi-functional green infrastructure which can provide carbon storage 
and provide environments that encourage walking and cycling; 
f. protecting and enhancing habitats that provide important carbon sinks, including peat 
habitats and woodland; and, 
g. incorporating electric vehicle charging facilities. 
4. Current Building Regulations set out requirements concerning the conservation of fuel 
and power in buildings. However, to support the transition to a low carbon economy 
in order to support the NPPF aim of moving to a low carbon future and zero carbon 
development, it is also necessary to encourage the greater use of renewable and low 
carbon energy in new development. 
5. Proposals for major development should ensure that: 
a. residential development containing 11 dwellings or more will meet at least 10% of 
their energy needs from renewable and/or other low carbon energy source(s); 
b. non-domestic development of 1,000 square metres of floor space and above will 
provide 20% of their expected energy demand from on-site renewable energy, where 
viable and feasible; 
c. large-scale schemes that would generate a significant source or demand for heat 
should be supported by evidence considering the feasibility of serving the 
development by means of a district heating system. 
6. Proposals which address one or more of the principles outlined in Paragraph 5 above 
(whether in relation to an existing development or as part of a wider new 
development scheme) which are poorly designed and/or located and which have a 
detrimental impact on the landscape, the amenity of residents, or the natural and built 
environment, will be refused. 
7. In order to promote natural solutions to climate change, reference should also be 
made to the requirements of Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity in this Plan. 
9.71 This policy aims to reduce the size of North Lincolnshire’s carbon footprint and mitigate 
the effects of climate change. It promotes resilience and efficiency measures for both 
construction and use which are often the most cost-efficient and effective means of 
achieving carbon reduction. In turn, this should bring about energy cost savings for future 
occupiers. 
9.72 Technologies and best practice within the sustainable construction industry are moving 
at a fast pace. It is anticipated that during the life of the plan there will be changes to how 
optimal building performance is achieved. The Council will publish supplementary 
guidance to support the implementation of the policies in this chapter. This will be 
updated regularly to reflect these improvements. It will provide the latest guidance to 
support the national and regional direction towards a low carbon and climate resilient 
North Lincolnshire and should include a strong focus on the role of natural solutions to 
climate change including, but not limited to, the creation and management of tree and 
woodland planting, heathland and peatland, saltmarsh, wetlands, and permanent 
grasslands. 
9.73 Moreover, the Clean Growth Strategy 2018 sets out fundamental changes to 
Government Energy policy that will also impact on policies set out in the Local Plan. 
Supplementary guidance will have to reflect the following key Government policies: 
• the UK will phase out the installation of fossil fuel heating, such as gas, in buildings from 
2025; 
• supporting the building and extension of heat networks across the country; 
Page 230 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) • converting the gas grid to a Hydrogen Grid by 2050 through the ‘Hydrogen Pathway’; 
and 
• ending the sale of new petrol and diesel cars by 2030 and developing ‘one of the best 
electric vehicles charging networks in the World’. 
9.74 The Northern Forest is the government’s 25-year vision to plant 50 million trees across 
the North of England stretching from Liverpool to Hull. This is set out in the 25-year 
Environment Plan and will be delivered through Community Forests in urban areas and 
the Woodland Trust in rural areas. The initiative will involve landowners, farmers and key 
forestry stakeholders and will balance the various environmental, social and economic 
benefits of forestry, including for agroforestry and bio-energy production purposes. North 
Lincolnshire Council supports the Northern Forest and initially aims to carry out tree 
planting on Council-owned sites in Scunthorpe in the winter of 2020-21. 
9.75 Decentralised energy is generated close to where it will be used rather than, for example, 
at an industrial plant and sent through the national grid. Decentralised systems typically 
use renewable energy sources including small hydro, combined heat and power (CHP), 
biomass, solar and wind power. A decentralised energy system can increase security of 
supply, reduce transmission losses, and lower carbon emissions. 
RENEWABLE ENERGY PROPOSALS 
9.76 Policy DQE8: Renewable Energy Proposals provides a positive framework for delivering 
sustainable energy supplies and will ensure that North Lincolnshire contributes to 
achieving national renewable energy generation. The policy applies to proposals for all 
types of renewable and low carbon energy infrastructure, including biomass and biofuels 
technologies, energy from waste to be utilised locally (in accordance with Chapter 13 
Sustainable Waste Management), carbon capture/re-use, solar, geothermal energy, 
wind turbines (onshore and onshore facilities required for the manufacture, 
commissioning, installation and servicing of offshore windfarms) hydro-power and 
micro-generation. 
9.77 The deployment of larger-scale renewable energy schemes can have a range of positive 
or negative effects on nearby communities. They can provide landowners with the 
opportunity for rural diversification, deliver local jobs and opportunities for community 
based schemes and benefits. However, proposals can have a range of impacts that will 
vary depending on the scale of development, type of area where the development is 
proposed, and type of low carbon and renewable energy technology deployed. 
9.78 When considering planning applications for renewable energy schemes, an assessment 
will need to take account of the impacts on landscape, townscape, natural, historical and 
cultural features, biodiversity, soil, flood risk and areas of nature conservation interests. 
Proposals should also ensure that high quality design features are used to minimise the 
impacts on the amenity of the area in respect of visual intrusion, noise, dust and odour 
and traffic generation. 
9.79 In determining the character and sensitivity of the landscape to accommodate 
development, the impact of the development on the historic character, sense of place, 
tranquillity and remoteness of the landscape should be considered. Energy development 
can occasionally appear to be ‘industrial’ in nature, and where there are proposals in rural 
areas it will be important to ensure that any cumulative effects do not lead to a 
perception of industrialisation, either within a particular landscape or in the wider area. 
In assessing the capacity of the landscape to accept energy development, it will be 
important to consider ‘Policy DQE1 -Protection of Landscape, Townscape and Views’ in 
conjunction with the most up to date North Lincolnshire Landscape Character 
Assessment. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 231 9.80 Wind farms and turbines can individually and cumulatively have a significant impact on 
the area’s high quality landscape and will be strictly controlled in this local plan. In recent 
years, North Lincolnshire's lack of national landscape designations has resulted in the 
area being targeted by wind farm operators. This has resulted in schemes that have 
damaged our important landscapes. 
9.81 Development can impact on biodiversity at construction, operation and decommissioning 
stages. This can be due to emissions, waste products and physical alterations to the 
environment arising from the development's footprint/structure and impacts on soil, 
hydrology and water quality. Proposals should, therefore, also be considered against 
Policy DQE3 - Biodiversity and Geodiversity and, where possible, mitigation measures 
should be used to compensate and improve biodiversity. 
9.82 The Council will give particular consideration to the potential for any proposal to disturb 
or displace SPA birds caused by the loss of suitable feeding, roosting and loafing sites or 
have the potential for damage or distance to the Humber Estuary Special Area of 
Conservation (SAC). 
POLICY DQE8: RENEWABLE ENERGY PROPOSALS 
1. North Lincolnshire Council will support opportunities to maximise renewable energy 
capacity within North Lincolnshire. Support will be provided to community-led 
initiatives for renewable and local carbon energy and those brought forward in 
neighbourhood plans. 
2. Proposals for renewable energy development will be supported where any significant 
adverse impacts are satisfactorily minimised, and the residual harm is outweighed by 
the public benefits of the proposal. Development and their associated infrastructure 
will be assessed on their merits and subject to the following impact considerations, 
taking account of individual and cumulative effects: 
a. the scale and nature of the impacts on landscape and townscape, particularly having 
regard to the most up to date North Lincolnshire Landscape Character Assessment 
and impact on the setting and scenic beauty of the Proposed Extension to the 
Lincolnshire Wolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB); 
b. local amenity including noise, air quality, traffic, vibration, dust and visual impact; 
c. ecology, geology or hydrology, including impacts of the development on deep peat 
areas, nature conservation features, biodiversity and geodiversity including habitats 
and species; 
d. the historic environment, including individual and groups of heritage assets; 
e. telecommunications and other networks including the need for additional cabling to 
connect to the National Grid, electromagnetic production and interference, and 
aeronautical impacts such as on radar systems; 
f. Public Rights of Way including access tracks through the site, of supporting 
infrastructure, associated cables and operational equipment; 
g. highway safety and network capacity; 
h. the risk of flooding; 
i. land stability, contamination, soils resources, and loss of agricultural land; and 
j. only allow development of areas of poorer agricultural land quality, protecting the best 
and most versatile land (1, 2 and 3a) from development. 
Page 232 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 3. Where a development proposal would have a landscape impact the planning 
application should be accompanied by a detailed Landscape Impact Assessment 
undertaken by a suitably qualified and experienced person. 
4. Where appropriate, proposals should include provision for decommissioning at the 
end of their operational life. Where decommissioning is necessary, the site should be 
restored with minimal adverse impact on amenity, landscape and biodiversity, and 
opportunities should be taken to enhance these features. 
5. Proposals for wind and solar energy development will be permitted if: 
a. it is located in an area that is identified as potentially suitable for wind or solar energy 
development in an adopted neighbourhood plan or the Council is satisfied that local 
communities are supportive of the proposal; and, 
b. the development is a renewable energy proposal associated with an existing 
operational water/sewage treatment site. 
6. Proposals for small-scale rural-based sustainable renewable energy development, 
which would support the rural economy and economic diversification, will be viewed 
positively subject to assessment against the requirements of this policy. 
7. Reference should also be made to the requirements of Policy DQE1: Protection of 
Landscape, Townscape and Views and Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity 
Policy DQE11: Green Infrastructure Network, and Policy DQE12: Protection of Trees, 
Woodland and Hedgerows in this Plan. 
9.83 The energy sector in North Lincolnshire is not only important to both the UK and local 
economy, but also plays a significant role in ensuring the UK’s fuel security. The presence 
of the South Humber Bank ports, combined with North Lincolnshire's infrastructure 
network associated with a long history of industry and energy production, provides 
excellent foundations for a range of onshore renewable energy technologies that comply 
with the requirements of this Policy to continue to be developed. 
9.84 Renewable energy technologies such as biomass energy generation, biogas generation, 
solar/photovoltaics and heat pumps are expected to become more affordable and 
popular over the plan period, and community schemes have the potential to play an 
increasing role in delivering renewable energy. 
LOCAL GREEN SPACE 
9.85 Local Green Space is a national designation as referenced in the NPPF. It aims to protect 
green areas or spaces which are demonstrably special to a local community and hold a 
particular local significance. Local Green Space designation can be used where the green 
space is: 
• in reasonably close proximity to the community it serves; and 
• demonstrably special to a local community and holds a particular local significance, for 
example because of its beauty, historic significance, recreational value (including playing 
fields), tranquillity or richness of its wildlife; and 
• local in character and is not an extensive tract of land. 
9.86 The NPPF provides ccommunities with a means of identifying green spaces of particular 
local significance for special protection. This local significance can be because of the 
green space’s beauty, historic importance, recreational value, tranquillity or richness of its 
wildlife. The designation of land as Local Green Space through local and neighbourhood 
plans, allows communities to identify and protect green areas of particular importance to 
them. This could further strengthen the existing green space network and potentially 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 233 deliver significant benefits for the environment and local communities. All designated 
Local Green Space sites are shown on the Policies Map. 
POLICY DQE9: LOCAL GREEN SPACE 
1. Local Green Spaces identified on the Policies Map will be protected from development 
in line with NPPF. This will exclude any new development on these sites other than in 
very special circumstances. Only proposals that will protect and enhance Local Green 
Spaces and are demonstrably supported by the local community will be permitted. 
2. North Lincolnshire Council will encourage local communities to promote Local Green 
Spaces through the development of a neighbourhood plan, where appropriate. 
3. Development of flood resilience schemes within local green spaces will be supported, 
provided the schemes do not adversely impact the primary function of the green 
space. 
9.87 Local Green Spaces identify areas of particular importance and should be protected. 
Development proposals will be permitted only where these areas will not be adversely 
affected, and planning permission will only be granted for development proposals in very 
special circumstances. These exceptions are set out in the NPPF. 
9.88 Account should be taken of the intrinsic character and beauty of the area and the need 
to support thriving rural communities within it, in the context of a presumption in favour 
of sustainable development. Development that detracts from the unique nature of the 
local landscape will not be supported. 
IMPORTANT OPEN SPACE 
9.89 In addition to Local Green Space designations, this Local Plan also protects other existing 
Important Open Spaces (IOS). These open spaces are different from Local Green Spaces 
in that Local Green Spaces have been identified by local communities, whereas 
Important Open Spaces have been identified by North Lincolnshire Council as spaces 
important to the settlement in which they are located. 
9.90 North Lincolnshire has a wide variety of IOS which performs a range of functions and 
delivers a wealth of benefits to local people and wildlife. Parks and gardens, amenity 
space, play space for children/teenagers, outdoor sports facilities and allotments are all 
examples of publicly accessible IOS. Valued for their recreational and social functions, 
IOS also contribute to the visual amenity and character of a settlement, providing relief 
from the built up area. 
9.91 It is important to note that public or private open spaces with limited or no public access 
can also perform an important role in contributing to the local community and quality of 
life. Open, undeveloped spaces within a settlement can be as important as the built 
environment in giving a settlement its unique character and form. Some open spaces, 
especially towards the edge of a settlement, are important in preserving the setting of 
that settlement. Other open spaces, including those not publicly accessible, provide 
breaks in the street scene and may allow views of the surrounding countryside to be 
enjoyed from within the settlement. 
9.92 There are numerous important amenity areas within North Lincolnshire. Such areas 
include not only public open space and recreational land, but also a multitude of areas in 
private ownership. Many areas are accessible for enjoyment by the public, but others are 
Page 234 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) identified purely for landscape or nature conservation reasons. These areas help to 
improve the image of North Lincolnshire and contribute to our local distinctiveness. They 
also assist greatly in promoting the health and welfare of the community and can include, 
for example, orchards or groups of heritage varieties of fruit trees, ridge and furrow 
grassland, semi-improved grassland, informal play areas, and areas with historic 
associations (parish pump, Haxey Hood Field, etc.). 
POLICY DQE10: IMPORTANT OPEN SPACE 
1. An area identified as Important Open Space on the Policies Map will be safeguarded 
from development unless it can be demonstrated that: 
a. in the case of publicly accessible open space there is an identified over-provision of 
that particular type of open space in the community area; 
b. in the case of publicly accessible open space, the site is not required for alternative 
recreational uses or suitable alternative open space can be provided on a replacement 
site or by enhancing existing open space serving the community area; 
c. there are no significant detrimental impacts on the character and appearance of the 
surrounding area, ecology, and any heritage assets; 
d. the proposal is for appropriate recreational, community and nature conservation uses 
where any building and structures do not undermine the fundamental purpose and 
nature of the open space concerned; and, 
e. the proposal would make a positive contribution and the area would be enhanced for 
the recreational, amenity, biodiversity or other benefits it provides. 
2. Development on an area of Important Open Space will only be permitted where it 
would not adversely affect its open character, visual amenity or wildlife value or 
compromise the gap between conflicting land uses. 
3. Where development is permitted, measures shall be taken to minimise its impact or, 
where necessary, make a positive contribution to such areas. 
4. North Lincolnshire Council will encourage local communities to promote Important Open 
Spaces through the development of a neighbourhood plan, where appropriate. 
5. Reference should also be made to the requirements of Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity in this Plan. 
9.93 There are many areas of landscape which make a significant contribution to the 
character and amenity of settlements. In larger settlements they provide breaks between 
built up areas and often serve as important buffers between conflicting land uses such 
as housing and industry. They are not necessarily open to public access and can, for 
example, create a ‘green lung’ within what would otherwise be a predominantly built-up 
area. This can contribute to the proactive approach that North Lincolnshire Council is taking to 
mitigate and adapt to climate change locally. Within settlements Important Open Spaces 
can also provide valuable havens and corridors for the establishment and movement of 
a variety of wildlife. 
9.94 Within smaller settlements they provide open areas important to their character and 
setting and may also contain interesting plants and animals. These important amenity 
areas are defined on the Policies Map and should be protected from development which 
would adversely affect them. It is, therefore, essential that such areas are retained and 
enhanced, wherever possible. This could be promoted via the development of 
neighbourhood plans, parish appraisals, etc. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 235 PROVISION OF GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE 
9.95 Green Infrastructure (or ‘GI’ as it is often referred) is a strategic network of multifunctional 
green and blue spaces and the connections between them in both urban and rural areas. 
Green infrastructure is capable of delivering a range of environmental, economic, health 
and quality of life benefits for local communities, and the GI network may comprise of 
spaces in public or private ownership, with or without public access. The elements that 
make up green infrastructure include parks, playing fields, gardens, agricultural fields, 
footpaths, road verges, wildlife corridors and woodlands. Blue infrastructure includes, for 
example, the estuary and wetlands, the field drainage network, water bodies, rivers, 
streams, and sustainable drainage systems. 
9.96 Historically, green and blue spaces have generally been valued for single uses; for 
example, for recreation and ecological value or simply for their aesthetic appeal. In reality, 
though, these spaces can deliver a number of different functions. Where applicable and 
where possible, development should seek to ‘daylight’ culverted watercourses enabling 
surface water to naturally return to the watercourse, rather than being directed towards 
sewers. 
9.97 Green infrastructure offers a range of direct and indirect benefits, including addressing 
climate change adaptation and mitigation, improving quality of place, improving physical 
and mental health and social wellbeing, sustaining economic growth and investment, 
protecting and enhancing biodiversity, providing opportunities for local food production, 
and protecting and enhancing landscape character and the setting of heritage assets. 
These benefits have been termed 'ecosystem services'. North Lincolnshire Council is 
committed to adopting the Natural Capital Workbook approach in the future, either alone 
or with partners, to quantify our natural assets, describe the ecosystem services that 
flow from them, and set out a framework for protection and sustainable use. 
9.98 Applying a green infrastructure approach (using the term to encompass both green and 
blue space), can recognise different functions and, importantly, can meet numerous 
wider objectives. The NPPF states that green infrastructure is: “a network of multi-
functional green space, urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of 
environmental and quality of life benefits for local communities”. 
9.99 Individual elements of the green infrastructure network can serve a useful purpose 
without being connected. However, connectivity between different green infrastructure 
assets can maximise the benefits they generate. For example, well-connected green 
infrastructure assets can create a network that allows and encourages movement by 
people and wildlife, helping to maximise their benefits and support adaptation and 
resilience to a changing climate, such as potentially dramatic increases in rainfall. 
9.100 In 2019, the Council and GLNP produced a Green Infrastructure Network and Biodiversity 
Opportunities Mapping, in partnership with local wildlife organisations. This highlights 
areas of existing habitats and areas where there are deficiencies in green infrastructure 
at the strategic level across North Lincolnshire and will identify opportunities to enhance 
the network. 
9.101 The GI network is likely to come under increasing pressure from new development as 
part of North Lincolnshire’s planned growth, particularly within and around the main 
urban settlements. However, exciting new development across that area also brings 
opportunities to enhance the GI network and deliver new green infrastructure that will 
benefit everyone in North Lincolnshire. 
9.102 New development should contribute to the extension of the green infrastructure network 
and by doing so help to address deficiencies in its provision and provide good quality 
connections to the network and throughout the development. Green infrastructure should 
Page 236 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) be designed and managed as a multifunctional resource capable of delivering a wide 
range of environmental and quality of life benefits for local communities. 
9.103 The North Lincolnshire Biodiversity Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) should be 
read alongside the policies within this Plan. Its purpose is to provide supporting 
information and guidance on how to approach development proposals, relating to the 
natural environment, in a way that will facilitate sustainable planning decisions to be 
made. This will contribute to the production of high quality, sustainable development with 
a focus on achieving a ‘net gain’ in biodiversity and discharging Habitat Regulation 
Assessment (HRA) obligations. 
POLICY DQE11: GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE NETWORK 
1. The Council aims to maintain and improve the green infrastructure network by 
enhancing, creating and managing multifunctional green space within and around 
settlements that are well connected to each other and the wider countryside and 
contribute to a Nature Recovery Network. 
2. Development proposals which are consistent with and assist delivery of the 
opportunities, priorities, and initiatives identified in the latest North Lincolnshire Green 
Infrastructure Network and Biodiversity Opportunities Mapping will be supported. 
3. Proposals that cause loss or harm to this network will not be permitted unless the 
need for and benefits of the development demonstrably outweigh any adverse 
impacts. Where adverse impacts on green infrastructure are unavoidable, 
development will only be permitted if suitable mitigation measures for the network are 
provided. 
4. Development proposals should ensure that existing and new green infrastructure is 
considered and integrated into scheme design from the outset. Where new green 
infrastructure is proposed, the design should maximise the delivery of ecosystem 
services and support healthy and active lifestyles. 
5. Development proposals must protect the linear features of the green infrastructure 
network that provide connectivity between green infrastructure assets, including 
public rights of way, bridleways, cycleways and waterways, and take opportunities to 
improve such features. Adequate buffers must be secured to valuable habitats. 
6. Contributions will be expected from new development towards the establishment, 
enhancement and ongoing management of green infrastructure by contributing to the 
development of the existing green infrastructure network in accordance with the 
Biodiversity SPD. Any contributions should be proportionate to the scale and nature 
of the proposal, including whether there is a need for recreational access. 
7. All references to Green Infrastructure should also be taken to include open water and 
wetland habitats (sometimes known as ‘blue infrastructure’). 
8. Reference should also be made to the requirements of Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and 
Geodiversity in this Plan. 
9.104 Policy DQE11 acknowledges the value of promoting a green infrastructure network, 
providing accessible green corridors, forming healthy traffic-free links, connecting formal 
and informal green space, softening development edges, and maintaining the 
independent status and character of individual settlements. 
9.105 In order to identify opportunities for protecting, enhancing and connecting green 
infrastructure assets as part of new development, the green infrastructure network 
should be viewed and considered alongside other relevant policies in this Local Plan, with 
special reference made to Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 237 TREES, WOODLAND AND HEDGEROWS 
9.106 North Lincolnshire’s trees and woodlands are of particular importance in contributing to 
the character of the countryside. Similarly, hedgerows are important to the character of 
the area -including historic character -particularly in relation to the scale and pattern of 
the landscape and as a wildlife resource. Indeed, trees, woodland and hedgerows can 
play an important role in wider ecosystem services in terms of, for example, carbon 
sequestration, natural flood management, increased habitat, increased rainwater 
control, and improved air quality. In order to maintain and enhance North Lincolnshire’s 
attractiveness and character, these features should be protected through the control of 
development. 
9.107 The England Tree Strategy will set out the Government’s forestry policy to 2050, 
replacing the 2013 Forestry Policy Statement. The strategy will set out priorities to deliver 
the tree planting programme. It will focus on expanding, protecting and improving our 
woodlands and explain how trees and woodlands can connect people to nature, support 
the economy, combat climate change and recover biodiversity. This will ensure that trees 
are established and managed for the many benefits they provide for people, the 
economy, the climate and nature itself. 
9.108 Canopy cover within urban areas can provide a range of ecosystem services including 
biodiversity and climate change benefits. It can also improve the design quality, amenity 
value and sense of place of an area. In most cases, trees will be the optimum solution for 
increasing canopy cover but alternatives such as green roofs and green walls will have 
an important role to play in more constrained sites, especially in urban locations. 
9.109 Tree canopy cover targets could help local authorities to value trees as green assets and 
set out achievable ambitions to plant and protect more trees. At present, there are no 
canopy cover targets in place in North Lincolnshire. However, developers will be 
expected to meet any targets set in, for example, the England Tree Strategy and/or in any 
future North Lincolnshire Council-produced tree planting strategy. 
POLICY DQE12: PROTECTION OF TREES, WOODLAND AND HEDGEROWS 
1. Proposals for all new development will, wherever possible, ensure the retention of 
trees, woodland and hedgerows. Particular regard will be given to protecting their 
amenity value within and adjacent to settlements. 
2. Development resulting in the loss or deterioration of irreplaceable habitats such as 
ancient woodlands, aged or veteran trees, and historic hedgerows should be refused 
unless there are wholly exceptional reasons* and a suitable compensation strategy 
exists. 
3. Where trees which contribute to local amenity or local landscape character are at risk 
the Council will be proactive in protecting such features through the use of Tree 
Preservation Orders or other applications of its powers. 
4. Landscaping and tree and hedgerow planting schemes will be required to 
accompany applications for new development, having regard to the Biodiversity 
Opportunity Mapping and contributing towards Nature Recovery Networks. 
Developers will be encouraged to maximise on-site tree canopy cover in line with local 
and/or national canopy cover targets**. 
5. Reference should also be made to the requirements of Policy DQE2: Landscape 
Enhancement, Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity, and Policy DQE11: Green 
Infrastructure Network in this Plan. 
* For example, infrastructure projects (including nationally significant infrastructure projects, orders under the 
Transport and Works Act and Hybrid Bills), where the public benefit would clearly outweigh the loss or 
deterioration of habitat. 
** Especially by planting trees that have the potential to ‘grow large’. 
Page 238 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 9.110 It is expected that new hedgerow planting should be native and species-rich, and tree 
and shrub planting should utilise native species of local provenance. A proportion of 
species suited to, or sourced from, more southerly areas will be permitted to allow for 
projected climate change, where this also fits with local landscape character. 
Development applications will be encouraged to secure adequate and appropriate 
buffers to valuable habitats. It is also hoped that all sites will achieve an appropriate 
future canopy cover. Developers should provide space for trees that have the potential to 
‘grow large’ (for example, oak, beech, small-leaved lime, sweet chestnut, etc.), and not 
just small ornamental trees (for example, rowan, cherry, etc). Larger trees will ultimately 
provide much greater benefit in terms of, for example, amenity, place-making and 
temperature regulation than smaller trees. 
9.111 Farmers and landowners should be encouraged to increase tree and hedgerow planting, 
where appropriate to the local landscape character, and improve the management of 
such valuable features, including the retention of older trees where these are not 
prejudicial to public safety. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 239 10 Managing Our Historic
Environment 
INTRODUCTION 
10.1 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) emphasises that local plans should set 
out a positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment of the historic environment. 
This includes heritage assets most at risk through neglect, decay and other threats. In 
doing so, careful consideration should be given to: 
• the desirability of sustaining and enhancing the significance of heritage assets and 
putting them to viable uses, consistent with their conservation; 
• the wider social, cultural, economic and environmental benefits that conservation of the 
historic environment can bring; 
• the desirability of new development making a positive contribution to local character and 
distinctiveness; and 
• opportunities to draw on the contribution made by the historic environment to the 
character of a place. 
THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
10.2 North Lincolnshire has a rich and distinctive natural and historic environment that is 
valued and enjoyed by those who live here. This needs to be understood and taken fully 
into account as developments are being planned, designed and implemented. National 
policy set out in the NPPF and associated guidance outlines core principles in respect of 
the natural and historic environment. The condition of the surrounding natural and 
historic environment, including many heritage assets and their settings, are critical to 
North Lincolnshire’s image, having a significant impact on the quality of life, as well as 
bringing both social and economic benefits to its communities. 
10.3 Environmental considerations are, therefore, fundamental to all planning policy area’s 
whilst achieving the council’s ambition and outcomes where everyone is safe, well, 
prosperous and connected. They are also central to creating a cleaner, greener and safer 
place. 
10.4 Within North Lincolnshire there are currently (January 2019): 39 Grade I Listed Buildings; 
36 Grade II* Listed Buildings; and 837 Grade II Listed Buildings, together with 17 
Conservation Areas. There are also 46 Scheduled Monuments. The Conservation Area 
Appraisals also include a number of buildings, whilst not listed on the National Heritage 
List, are considered important local buildings of townscape merit. A large area of the Isle 
of Axholme is designated as historic landscape of special interest for its ancient open 
strip field character and turbaries (peat reserve). There is also a sliver of land within North 
Lincolnshire that is a part of the Registered Park at Brocklesby (the only one in relation to 
North Lincolnshire). 
HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT RECORD (HER) 
10.5 Heritage assets are recorded on the council’s Historic Environment Record (HER). The 
records include several thousand archaeological sites, monuments and buildings, as well 
Page 240 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) as historic places and landscapes. Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas and Scheduled 
Monuments are also included. 
10.6 The North Lincolnshire Historic Environment Record database contains up to date 
evidence about the historic environment in the area and is used to: 
a. assess the significance of heritage assets and the contribution they make to the 
environment; including their settings and 
b. predict the likelihood that currently unidentified heritage assets, particularly buried sites 
of historic and archaeological interest, will be discovered in the future. 
10.7 Several projects have been completed in North Lincolnshire, or are ongoing, that will 
produce further evidence for the HER which include: 
• Heritage at Risk (national register issued annually by Historic England covering 
Scheduled Monuments, LB grade 1 & II*, Conservation Areas) 
• Lincolnshire Heritage at Risk (LBs grade II, archaeological earthworks) 
• Lincolnshire Farmsteads Assessment Framework 
• Lincolnshire Extensive Urban Survey Characterisation 
• Lincolnshire Historic Landscape Characterisation 
• East Midlands Archaeological Research Agenda and Strategy 
• Countryside Commission report for The Isle of Axholme Historic Landscape 
Characterisation Project (Miller, 1997). 
10.8 An up to date register of nationally protected heritage buildings and sites can be found 
on the National Heritage List for England website. Those sites designated up to early 
2020 are shown on the Policy Map. Non-designated heritage assets recorded on the 
HER database are numerous and subject to frequent addition, these assets have not 
been identified on the Policy Map. 
HERITAGE ASSETS 
10.9 The NPPF advises that applicants seeking planning approval should be required to 
describe the significance of any heritage assets affected by the development proposals, 
including any contribution made by their setting. The NPPF also provides guidance 
regarding consideration of harm and of viability. 
10.10 A Heritage Asset is defined within the NPPF as a building, monument, site, place, area or 
landscape identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in 
planning decisions, because of its heritage interest. It includes designated heritage 
assets and assets identified by the local planning authority (including local listing). 
10.11 NPPF applies different tests to ‘designated’ and ‘non-designated’ heritage assets. A 
designated Heritage Asset is A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed 
Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or 
Conservation Area designated under the relevant legislation. 
10.12 Local planning authorities may identify non-designated heritage assets. These are 
buildings, monuments, sites, places, areas or landscapes identified as having a degree of 
significance meriting consideration in planning decisions because of heritage interest but 
which are not formally designated heritage assets. Heritage interest may be 
archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic. In some areas, local authorities identify 
some non-designated heritage assets as ‘locally listed’. The council does not have a ‘local 
list’. Non-designated heritage assets are included in the North Lincolnshire Historic 
Environment Record. The record is updated as and when new heritage assets are 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 241 identified, including through the consideration of development proposals. Neighbourhood 
Plans may also identify non-designated heritage assets. 
10.13 North Lincolnshire’s heritage assets, including the significant historic building stock and 
archaeological resource, are irreplaceable and require careful management as the area 
evolves and undergoes growth and regeneration. 
10.14 The opportunities to retain, enhance and improve North Lincolnshire’s historic 
environment include: 
• Using the income generated from the growing local tourism economy to invest in the 
maintenance and upkeep of historic assets. 
• Ensuring new development schemes enhance the setting of heritage assets and do not 
detract from their character and the appearance of the area. 
SCHEDULED MONUMENTS 
10.15 A Scheduled Monument (SM) is a historic building and/or site that is included in the 
Schedule of Monuments compiled by the Secretary of State for Digital, Culture, Media 
and Sports. They have statutory protection under the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act 1979(1). These are monuments of national importance and 
their preservation from the effects of development is extremely important. It is an offence 
to damage these sites. Consent is required from the Secretary of State before any works 
are carried out on these sites. Applications to schedule or deschedule a monument are 
administered by Historic England, who will carry out an assessment and make a 
recommendation to the Secretary of State. 
10.16 The Schedule of Monuments includes sites such as Roman remains, burial mounds, 
castles, bridges, earthworks, the remains of deserted villages and industrial sites. 
Monuments are not graded, but all are, by definition, considered to be of national 
importance. The Schedule can be viewed online on the National Heritage List for 
England. Scheduled Monuments may also appear on the local Historic Environment 
Record. 
10.17 Owners of SMs, or developers, should consult with Historic England on any proposals 
prior to applying for the relevant planning permission. The 46 SMs entries in North 
Lincolnshire are included on the Council’s Historic Environment Record. These represent 
the scheduled sites known at the time of plan preparation. Policy HE1p will apply to all 
Scheduled Monuments whether or not depicted on the proposal maps. It should be noted 
that not all nationally important remains meriting preservation will necessarily be 
scheduled. 
CONSERVATION AREAS 
10.18 Conservation Areas are areas of special architectural or historical interest, the character 
or appearance of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance. To date, seventeen 
conservation areas have been designated in North Lincolnshire. These are: 
• Alkborough 
• Appleby 
• Barrow upon Humber 
• Barton upon Humber 
• Brigg 
• Burton upon Stather 
Page 242 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) • Crowle 
• Epworth 
• Kirton in Lindsey 
• Normanby 
• Redbourne 
• Saxby all Saints 
• Scawby 
• Old Crosby, Scunthorpe 
• New Frodingham, Scunthorpe 
• Winteringham 
• Winterton 
10.19 Conservation area appraisals were prepared for all 17 conservation areas in North 
Lincolnshire between 2001 and 2005. The conservation area appraisals define and 
record what makes these places “areas of special architectural or historic interest”. They 
identify their special character and qualities, and provide a clear definition of what makes 
them special. They also set out what it is important to retain. 
10.20 A review of the character of the Council's Conservation Areas has taken place to fulfil the 
council’s overarching responsibility to preserve and enhance its conservation area. A 
Conservation Area Appraisal document for each conservation area has been adopted by 
the council to inform the development process as it affects these Conservation Areas and 
as guidance document for Town Planning Purposes. 
10.21 The Conservation Area Appraisal documents provide statements of an area’s character 
and say things about better management of conservation areas. 
10.22 The effect of a proposed development on the character or appearance of a Conservation 
Area is always a material consideration in the determination of planning applications. All 
development should preserve or enhance that character or appearance. Where they add 
to its character it is also important that the spaces around and within the conservation 
area are retained. 
10.23 Demolition within a Conservation Area should only be allowed in exceptional 
circumstances, and will normally be permitted only if the council is satisfied that the 
proposal for redevelopment is acceptable and there is an undertaking to implement it 
within a specified period. The NPPF has more details in this regard. 
10.24 Development within Conservation Areas must respect the local character and be 
carefully designed to respect the setting, through consideration of scale, height, massing, 
alignment, and use of appropriate materials. Keeping valued historic buildings in active 
and viable use is important for both the maintenance of the building concerned and the 
overall character of the conservation area. Proposals to change the use of a building 
might therefore be supported, where features essential to the special interest of the 
individual building are not lost or altered to facilitate the change of use. 
LISTED BUILDINGS 
10.25 Listing a building or structure means that it has been recognised as nationally important. 
When buildings are listed they are placed on statutory lists of buildings of ‘special 
architectural or historic interest’. The Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport is 
responsible for compiling the lists. Historic England provides expert advice on which 
buildings meet the criteria for listing, and for administering the process.The National 
Heritage List for England (NHLE) is the only official, up to date, register of all nationally 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 243 protected historic buildings and sites in England -listed buildings, scheduled monuments, 
protected wrecks, registered parks and gardens, and battlefields. 
10.26 Buildings are judged according to a set of standards. The main criteria used to select 
listed buildings are-Architectural interest, Historic interest and Group value. 
10.27 The older and rarer a building is, the more likely it is to be listed. All buildings built before 
1700 that survive in anything like their original condition are listed, as are most built 
between 1700 and 1840. After that date, the criteria become tighter, because of the 
much larger numbers that have survived. Post-1945 buildings have to be exceptionally 
important to be listed. 
10.28 The buildings are classified in grades to show their relative importance as follows: 
• Grade I – These are buildings of exceptional interest (only about 2 per cent of listed 
buildings are in this grade). 
• Grade II* – These are particularly important buildings of more than special interest (some 
four per cent of listed buildings). 
• Grade II – These are buildings of special interest. Every effort should be made to preserve 
them. 
10.29 There are 914 listings in North Lincolnshire at present. You can search the Historic 
England List for England or contact the North Lincolnshire Historic Environment Record 
to get details of these buildings. 
10.30 The council will use its powers to ensure that listed buildings do not fall into an 
unacceptable state of disrepair. This may involve the use of Urgent Repair Notices, 
Repair Notices, Building Preservation Notices, and listed building enforcement measures. 
The council will maintain a register of historic buildings at risk and will, where necessary, 
exercise its powers under the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 
1990 to secure the proper preservation of listed buildings. 
10.31 It is important that listed buildings are regularly maintained and kept in a good state of 
repair. This will involve using appropriate materials and skills. Technical advice is 
available from Historic England or from the officers of the council. 
10.32 Listed building consent is required for works affecting the character of the listed building. 
Those seeking to undertake work that may affect the character of the building are 
advised to contact officers of the Council at an early stage so that the need for an 
application can be resolved. 
10.33 Alterations and additions should not adversely affect the essential character of the 
building, should be in keeping with its architectural style and features and should 
harmonise with its surroundings. In particular such development will have to be of a high 
standard of design. The external appearance and materials will be expected to match, 
as near as possible, those of the existing building in kind and in detail. 
10.34 The setting of a building of special architectural or historic interest often contributes to its 
character. The setting could be its garden, grounds, open space or the general street 
scene. Developers are advised to contact the council at an early stage to discuss the 
nature and extent of the setting. It is therefore important to consider the impacts of 
development and other proposals within the vicinity of listed buildings. Control over the 
quality of design of new development in close proximity to a heritage asset will be 
necessary to protect its setting. 
10.35 Conditions may need to be imposed on such development to achieve the quality required. 
The best way of preserving the character and appearance of buildings of architectural or 
historic importance will be to keep them in their original use. Some listed buildings are no 
Page 244 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) longer required for their original use and there is a danger that they could lie empty and 
fall into disrepair, causing an eyesore and increasing pressure for them to be demolished. 
Therefore, there is a need to be flexible in considering alternative uses for such buildings 
if that use holds the key to a building’s preservation. For such a change of use to be 
acceptable, it should maintain the integrity of the building in terms of its appearance and 
character. This might include retaining the original interior layout and important 
architectural features. 
10.36 Before demolition can take place on Grade II listed buildings, or demolition or part 
demolition takes place on Grade II, Grade II* or Grade I listed buildings, listed building 
consent must be given which entails consultation with the Secretary of State for the 
Environment who makes the final decision. Other interested organisations are also 
consulted. These include Historic England, the Council for British Archaeology, the 
Ancient Monuments Society, the Georgian Group and the Victorian Society and the 
Society of the Protection of Ancient Buildings. 
10.37 Listed buildings are of recognised architectural or historic interest and their loss through 
demolition would be detrimental to the character and appearance of the surrounding 
area and to the overall heritage of North Lincolnshire. Demolition will therefore only be 
allowed in the most exceptional circumstances and only if this is the last feasible option. 
Following demolition of the listed building, the site may be of archaeological interest and 
Policy HE1p will apply. 
10.38 It is appreciated that companies wish to identify and advertise their premises. However, 
special care is needed to ensure that any advertisement displayed on, or close to, a listed 
building does not detract from the integrity of the building’s design, historical character or 
structure, and does not spoil or compromise its setting. 
10.39 Most advertisements on listed buildings will constitute an alteration to the building and 
will, therefore, also require listed building consent. 
ARCHAEOLOGY 
10.40 Archaeological remains are a finite and non-renewable resource and form an important 
part of our national heritage, valuable for their own sake and for their role in education 
and tourism. They contain irreplaceable information about the past and are highly 
vulnerable to damage and destruction. 
10.41 Local Planning Authorities may require developers to assess the potential impacts of 
their proposal on archaeological remains in order to reach a decision on a development 
proposal. Where archaeological impacts are indicated, developers are expected to work 
with the local planning authority to devise a scheme for mitigating such impacts, which 
may form part of a planning condition or a planning obligation. Such conditions are 
designed to ensure that such remains are either preserved in situ or recorded. All 
archaeological work should be based on a thorough understanding of the available 
evidence, and of the local, regional and national contribution it makes. 
10.42 In accordance with the NPPF, the planning authority will require sufficient information 
from applicants to assess the potential impact of their proposals on any archaeological 
remains and their settings. This will enable informed planning decisions to be taken. In 
some cases, an archaeological assessment will be required which may comprise a desk-
based study, or fieldwork, such as an auger or geophysical survey, and limited trial 
trenching. To avoid potential delays in determining planning applications, developers are 
strongly recommended to include, as part of site feasibility research, an initial 
investigation to establish whether the site in question is known to contain, or likely to 
contain archaeological remains. HER staff check all planning applications against the 
record in order to determine their potential effect on Scheduled Monuments or sites of 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 245 known or potential archaeological importance and will advise the planning authority of 
the appropriate course of action. 
10.43 The Council in collaboration with other members of the North East, Yorkshire and Humber 
Association of Local Government Archaeological Officers (ALGAO) have produced a 
Regional Statement of Good Practice For Archaeology In The Development Process (rev 
2019). The purpose of this guidance is to promote regional consistency and good 
practice for developments affecting all heritage assets with archaeological interest. The 
guidance also covers what information should be submitted to the Local Planning 
Authority when applying for planning permission and professional standards for 
archaeological fieldwork. 
10.44 Developers are therefore advised to consult the HER at an early stage when considering 
development proposals to discuss the potential archaeological implications. Developers 
may wish to commission a professional archaeological consultant or contractor to 
undertake this consultation on their behalf. This early liaison allows developers to make 
adequate financial and timescale provision for any archaeological requirements. 
10.45 Where development sites are shown to contain significant archaeological remains, 
which would be adversely affected, the planning authority will need to be satisfied that 
adequate mitigation measures will be implemented. The preferred option for important 
archaeological remains is preservation in situ; this may be achieved by modifications of 
proposals, where appropriate, for example changes in site layout or redesign of 
foundation construction. 
10.46 Where the preservation of the archaeological remains in situ is not possible or desirable, 
evidence in the form of a written scheme of investigation, or specification, will be required 
in advance of a determination of a planning application to demonstrate that the 
developer has made appropriate and satisfactory provision for the recording of the 
remains. The written scheme of investigation should be prepared in consultation with the 
HER officer who will advise the planning authority. Preservation by record can take place 
either in advance of or during development and may involve full excavation followed by 
post-excavation assessment and analysis, and publication of results. The site archive 
should be deposited with an appropriate recognised repository, usually North 
Lincolnshire Museum Service and the Archaeological Data Service, within an agreed 
timescale. Planning conditions or more rarely, legal agreements, will used to secure the 
implementation of the agreed written scheme of investigation. 
POLICY HE1: CONSERVING AND ENHANCING THE HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT 
Heritage Protection 
1. Development proposals must value, protect, conserve and seek opportunities to 
enhance the historic environment of North Lincolnshire. Proposals that would result in 
unacceptable harm to heritage assets and their settings, will not be permitted. 
Proposals may exceptionally, be permitted if the need for, and overriding public 
benefits of the development demonstrably outweigh the harm. In the case of heritage 
assets of the highest significance this would be wholly exceptional. In all cases, harm 
to heritage assets should be minimised and mitigated. 
Heritage Assets 
2. Where a development proposal would affect the significance of a heritage asset 
(whether designated or non-designated), including any contribution made to its 
setting, it must be informed by proportionate historic environment assessments and 
evaluations (such as heritage impact assessments, desk based appraisals, field 
evaluation and historic building reports) that: 
Page 246 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) a. identify all heritage assets likely to be affected by the proposal, applications must 
consult the North Lincolnshire Historic Environment Record as a minimum 
requirement; 
b. explain the nature and degree of any effect on elements that contribute to their 
significance and demonstrating how, in order of preference, any harm will be avoided, 
minimised or mitigated; 
c. provide a clear explanation and justification for the proposal in order for the harm to be 
weighed against public benefits; and, 
d. demonstrate that all reasonable efforts have been made to sustain the existing use, 
find new uses, or mitigate the extent of the harm to the significance of the asset; and 
whether the works proposed are the minimum required to secure the long-term use of 
the asset. 
e. In considering any applications to remove or alter a historic statue, plaque, memorial 
or monument (whether listed or not), local planning authorities should have regard to 
the importance of their retention in situ and, where appropriate, of explaining their 
historic and social context rather than removal. 
3. Development proposals will be supported where they: 
a. Protect the significance of designated heritage assets (including their setting) by 
protecting and enhancing architectural and historic character, historical associations, 
landscape and townscape features and through consideration of scale, design, 
materials, siting, layout, mass, use, and views and vistas both from and towards the 
asset; 
b. Sustain and enhance non designated heritage assets and their setting; Take into 
account the desirability of sustaining and enhancing non-designated heritage assets 
and their setting; 
c. Make appropriate provision to record, and where possible and appropriate, preserve 
in situ features of archaeological significance; and, 
d. Promotes and captures opportunities to increase knowledge and access to local 
heritage assets and better reveal their significance. 
4. The change of use of heritage assets will be supported where the proposed use is 
considered to be the optimum viable use that is compatible with the fabric, interior, 
character, appearance and setting of the building, and where such a change of use 
will demonstrably assist in the maintenance or enhancement of the building, provided 
features essential to the special interest of the individual building are not lost or 
altered to facilitate the change of use. 
Conservation Areas 
5. Development within, affecting the setting of, or affecting views into and out of, a 
Conservation Area should preserve, and wherever possible enhance, features that 
contribute positively to the area’s character, appearance and setting. Proposals 
should: 
a. Retain buildings/groups of buildings, existing street patterns, historic building lines and 
ground surfaces. 
b. Retain architectural details that contribute to the character and appearance of the 
area. 
c. Where relevant and practical, remove features which are incompatible with the 
Conservation Area. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 247 d. Retain and reinforce local distinctiveness with reference to height, massing, scale, 
form, materials and lot widths of the existing built environment. 
e. Assess, and mitigate against, any negative impact the proposal might have on the 
townscape, roofscape, skyline and landscape. 
f. Aim to protect trees, or where losses are proposed, demonstrate how such losses are 
appropriately mitigated against. 
Archaeology 
6. Development proposals affecting archaeological remains, whether known or 
potential, designated or undesignated, should take every practical and reasonable 
step to protect and, where possible, enhance their significance. 
7. Planning applications for such development must be accompanied by an appropriate 
and proportionate desk based assessment to understand the potential for and 
significance of remains, and the impact of development upon them. If a desk based 
assessment does not provide sufficient information, developers will be required to 
undertake field evaluation in advance of determination of the application. This may 
include a range of techniques for both intrusive and non-intrusive evaluation, as 
appropriate to the site. All archaeological work should be undertaken by a suitably 
qualified party in accordance with professional standards and guidance published by 
Historic England and the Chartered Institute for Archaeology. 
8. Wherever possible and appropriate, mitigation strategies should ensure that 
important archaeology is retained in-situ to allow for expert investigation at some 
future time. Where it is possible to achieve this, for example within an area of open 
space, a management plan may be required that secures effective long-term 
conservation. Developers may be required to provide access to heritage assets and 
make financial contributions towards their on-going maintenance, and appropriate 
display and interpretative materials. 
9. Where such preservation is either not possible or not desirable, the developer will be 
required to make adequate provision for preservation by record according to a written 
scheme of investigation submitted by the developer and approved by the planning 
authority. 
10. Any work undertaken as part of the planning process must be appropriately archived 
in a way agreed with the local planning authority. The written scheme of investigation 
should be submitted in advance of determination of the application and its 
implementation will be secured by condition. 
Managing the Historic Environment 
11. The council will promote the effective management of North Lincolnshire’s heritage 
assets through: 
a. Seeking to update existing Conservation Area Appraisals to identify the qualities and 
interests of each area and management guidelines to guide future development; 
b. Safeguarding the nationally significant ancient landscapes of the Isle of Axholme 
(notably the historic landscape character and turbaries) and supporting initiatives 
which seek to realise the potential of these areas as a tourist, educational and 
environmental resource; 
c. Ensuring the wider social, cultural, economic and environmental benefits that 
conservation of the historic environment can bring; 
d. Preserving and enhancing the rich archaeological heritage of North Lincolnshire; 
e. Ensuring that development within Epworth (including schemes needed to exploit the 
economic potential of the Wesley’s or manage visitors) safeguards and, where 
possible, improves the setting of buildings associated with its Methodist heritage; 
Page 248 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) f. Ensuring that development within North Lincolnshire’s Market Towns safeguards their 
distinctive character and landscape setting, especially Barton upon Humber, Crowle, 
Kirton in Lindsey and Epworth; and, 
g. Seeking opportunities to enhance and provide access to heritage assets, including in 
combination with natural environment, public health, tourism and other relevant 
initiatives, and through planning conditions or obligations including S106 Agreements 
and Community Infrastructure Levy where appropriate. 
10.47 The aim of this policy is to ensure that North Lincolnshire’s important sites and areas of 
historic and built heritage value are protected, conserved and enhanced in order that 
they continue to make an important contribution to the area’s scene and the quality of life 
for local people. The Policy sets out a clear approach providing guidance to developers 
on how to safeguard and respond to the historic environment, recognising designated 
and non-designated heritage assets. 
10.48 This includes understanding, safeguarding and where possible enhancing, the character, 
appearance, setting and integrity of identified heritage assets. It explains what 
supporting information will need to be submitted with applications and details how the 
council will make appropriate judgements. 
10.49 Heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource. Therefore, proposals for development 
should be informed by, and will be determined in line with, statutory requirements, 
national policy and specific relevant guidance, principles and best practice. 
10.50 The determination of planning applications will be based on the assessment of the 
potential harmful impact. The council will take into account the desirability of not only 
sustaining the asset's significance, but also enhancing that significance and the positive 
contribution both conservation and well-informed new design can make to sustainability, 
local character and distinctiveness. 
10.51 The significance of a heritage asset can be harmed or lost through alteration or 
destruction of the asset or development within its setting. Any harm or loss, including 
cumulative impacts leading to less than substantial harm, will require clear and 
convincing justification to allow the harm to be balanced against any public benefits of 
the proposal. 
10.52 The more important the asset, the greater the presumption against harm; proposals 
leading to substantial harm of the most important assets would have to be wholly 
exceptional, and will have to demonstrate a lack of viable alternative schemes or uses, 
and the most substantial overriding public benefits. 
10.53 The same expectations for proportionate assessment and the need for justification 
through overriding public benefits apply to other designated assets and all non-
designated assets, as appropriate to their significance. Non-designated assets could be 
buildings, Monuments, archaeological sites, places, areas of landscapes positively 
identified (in the Historic Environment Record, Conservation Area Appraisals or 
Neighbourhood Plans, or equivalent, or through assessment within the planning 
processes) as having a degree of significance meriting consideration in planning 
decisions. 
AREA OF SPECIAL HISTORIC LANDSCAPE INTEREST 
10.54 The Isle of Axholme has been the subject of an intensive study of landscape character 
commissioned by the Countryside Commission. The study has identified significant areas 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 249 of ancient open strip fields and turbaries, both of which are of considerable national 
importance. These attributes together with enclosed land and the overall settlement 
pattern of the area make it unique in the country. The Lincolnshire Historic Landscape 
Characterisation Project, 2011, also recognised this landscape as nationally important. It 
is essential therefore that future development is not allowed to adversely impact on this 
valuable historic resource. This is particularly so in relation to the character of settlements 
and to individual buildings or overall groups of buildings in the open countryside. 
10.55 The landscape of the Isle is a heritage asset of historic interest as defined in the NPPF. 
The policy area incorporates various historic landscape character types that the 
Countryside Commission report describes and maps. These historic landscape character 
zones are also mapped on the North Lincolnshire HER GIS maps and applicants can 
obtain this spatial data by commissioning a search of the HER. 
10.56 Within the policy area the Ancient Open Strip Fields (AOSF) form the historic character 
core of the Isle of Axholme special historic landscape. The Early Enclosed Land created 
from piece-meal enclosure of blocks of former strips into small irregular fields, buffers the 
AOSF together with the Recent Enclosed Land on the low-lying former wetlands. These 
three historic landscape character zones encompass the majority of the policy area, 
together with other discrete character areas such as the important Turbaries and 
Moorland Allotments, Designed Landscape (Parkland), and the Settlement and Building 
Types.‘ 
10.57 The historic landscape character of the Isle of Axholme is the sum of these historic 
landscape character types. The policy area includes all the character types within the 
designated area and seeks to protect the character, appearance and setting of the 
historic landscape as a whole. 
10.58 The essential character and appearance of the AOSF historic landscape type is of open 
unenclosed agricultural land and the lack of any physical boundary features including 
hedgerows and fences; other characteristics of this landscape include the roads, 
common ways and access tracks known locally as meres; a general absence of farms in 
the open fields, these being located in the built up settlement areas; and the presence of 
visual reference points such as church, mill and water towers that afford legibility to the 
core historic landscape and form part of its setting. 
10.59 Developers should submit a Heritage Statement for development proposals within this 
policy area. The Statement should identify and describe the significance of the historic 
landscape and the Countryside Commission report historic landscape character zones 
that the development may affect. Consideration of the effects of the proposals on the 
significance including the contribution made by the setting and legibility of the landscape 
characteristics should be included. 
10.60 Proposals should ensure that the nature, location, scale, mass, and visual impact of 
development does not harm the character, setting or legibility of this special historic 
landscape, taking into account any ability of the landscape to absorb change, including 
cumulative change, without adverse effects. There are few opportunities for screening 
developments within this policy area, in particular within and around the AOSF character 
zone, as physical boundaries and tree planting are not characteristic of the open, 
unenclosed landscape. 
10.61 Developers should identify in their Heritage Statement schemes to improve, restore or 
manage the historic landscape that can be assessed to mitigate or off-set the harmful 
effects of development. Where such schemes are acceptable, developers will be 
required to pay for their implementation and operation through appropriate mechanisms 
such as S106 agreements. 
Page 250 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY HE2: AREA OF SPECIAL HISTORIC LANDSCAPE INTEREST 
1. The Isle of Axholme is designated as an area of Special Historic Landscape Interest. 
2. Within this area, development will not be permitted which would destroy, damage or 
adversely affect the character, appearance or setting of the historic landscape, or any 
of its features. 
3. Development required to meet the social and economic needs of rural communities 
and small scale tourist and outdoor sport and recreational development will be 
permitted provided such development is related to the historic landscape and its 
features. 
4. A high standard of design and siting in new development will be required reflecting 
the traditional character of buildings in the area and the character of the historic 
landscape, and using materials sympathetic to the locality. 
5. Schemes to improve, restore or manage the historic landscape will be sought in 
connection with, and be appropriate with the scale of, any new development affecting 
the area of Special Historic Landscape Interest. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 251 11 Creating Sustainable Communities
and Better Places 
INTRODUCTION 
11.1 The vital role that planning plays in creating and supporting strong, vibrant communities 
where people can live healthy lives is well recognised and is a key element in delivering 
sustainable development. Planning can also play a key role in reducing health 
inequalities. A healthy community is as a good place to grow up and grow old in. It is a 
place, which supports healthy behaviours, social connectedness and mental wellbeing. 
11.2 The link between planning and health has been set out in the NPPF and PPG. It 
recommends that local plans should aim to achieve health objectives through the quality 
of new places. This includes securing healthy, inclusive and safe places and access to 
open space and sport and recreation facilities, which can make an important contribution 
to the health of communities and can help in tackling obesity. Active Travel is seen as key 
to this plan; ensuring that pedestrians, cyclists and other road users travel safely to and 
from home. The Government also attaches great importance to ensure that a sufficient 
choice of school places is available to meet the needs of existing and new communities. 
11.3 Health and wellbeing is a cross cutting theme, policies on inclusive design, greenspace, 
active travel, transport and housing in subsequent chapters will play a key role in 
reducing health inequalities and encouraging healthy lifestyle choices. Social isolation 
describes the state of being deprived of social relationships that provide positive 
feedback and are meaningful to the individual (PHE, 2015). Reducing social isolation and 
improving social contact and connections improves mental wellbeing. Our communities 
and individuals will flourish and thrive and be more resilient if they are integrated, 
enabled and connected to education, employment, social, cultural and wellbeing 
opportunities. Connected and flourishing communities also gives us an opportunity to 
grow a network of local mental wellbeing champions. Social isolation is not exclusive to 
older people. It is multi-faceted and complex, operating at an individual, community and 
societal level. 
11.4 The built and the natural environments are major influences on health and wellbeing and 
delivering sustainable communities is at the heart of the planning system. This means 
ensuring that alongside homes, jobs and transport infrastructure, all local people have 
ready access to those services and facilities they need for their everyday lives and that 
contribute positively to the health and wellbeing of the community. 
11.5 Integrating public health and spatial planning enables us to deliver local neighbourhoods 
that promote healthy lifestyles, which in turn can prevent ill health, and thereby relieve 
the pressure on healthcare services and reducing health inequalities. 
11.6 This chapter includes policies to deliver the Plans vision to improve health and wellbeing 
and to promote healthy and safe communities. 
LOCAL CONTEXT 
11.7 The North Lincolnshire Council Plan 2018/19 has several outcomes including safer 
communities, safer environments, safer spaces, cleaner and greener spaces, good health 
Page 252 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) and wellbeing, vibrant leisure and culture, improved quality of life, improved skills, thriving 
education, flourishing communities and a strong sense of pride and belonging. 
11.8 The council has a variety of core leisure and recreation facilities that serve the whole 
community, including Normanby Hall, 20-21 and the Ropewalk visual arts centres, North 
Lincolnshire Museum and Waters’ Edge Country Park and Visitor Centre. North 
Lincolnshire also offers a number of managed indoor and outdoor sport and recreation 
facilities for active and competitive sports. The area’s exceptional natural setting and 
wealth of open spaces also provides a wonderful stage and a range of opportunities for 
outdoor recreation and leisure. 
11.9 The council has great input towards the prevention of mental ill health and the promotion 
of good mental wellbeing in terms of Social Care, parks and open spaces, housing, and 
education, all of which influence and support the wellbeing of our residents. We will 
utilise all our available levers, whether statutory or non-statutory, excellent leadership 
and our oversight roles and responsibilities to properly support our local communities to 
be resilient and mentally well. 
HEALTH AND WELLBEING 
11.10 Health and wellbeing is about more than having access to quality healthcare. What also 
matters is living in a safe, clean and green environment, having a decent home, an 
adequate income, a purpose in life and living in communities, which are supportive, 
healthy, connected and resilient. 
11.11 Health has been the primary focus recently with the Coronavirus (Covid-19) Pandemic 
and during a few short weeks, much of the world as we know it changed. The pandemic 
has radically altered how most people go about their daily lives with huge shifts to how 
we move in the world, how we get groceries and food, whether we go outside, where we 
go, who we see, and what we do. The requirement of “social or physical distancing”— 
maintaining at least 6’ (2 m) distance between people, with significant reductions or bans 
on group gatherings and crowds—combined with what we know today about the 
transmission of this coronavirus and its increased communicability in indoor settings, 
requires that we reconsider how we use our streets for public use during this crisis and 
for the future. Access to open spaces was an important factor throughout and the 
importance of this for daily exercise and people’s mental wellbeing is widely recognised. 
11.12 The impacts of Covid-19 are vast and will be long-lasting. The Local Plan can support 
this and any future pandemics by ensuring that people have access to green open 
spaces and when designing buildings space is considered and how it’s designed and to 
ensure new housing developments have garden space and the digital infrastructure for 
home working. 
11.13 Active healthy lifestyles are made easier through the pattern of development, good 
urban design, good access to local services and facilities; green open space and safe 
places for active play and food growing, which are accessible by walking, cycling and 
public transport. Buildings in the centre of their communities will also play a key part in 
supplying a variety of services to reflect community needs such as chair based exercise 
for less mobile community members or more active sessions for those who want to move 
more. 
11.14 The Council support a set of evidence-based actions, which promote people’s wellbeing. 
They are: Connect, Be Active, Take Notice, Learn and Give. The creation of healthy living 
environments for people of all ages supports social interaction. It meets the needs of 
children and young people to grow and develop, as well as being adaptable to the needs 
of an increasingly elderly population and those with dementia and other sensory or 
mobility impairments. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 253 11.15 North Lincolnshire’s Health and Wellbeing Board will focus on some of the key lifestyle 
issues identified as having a significant impact on the health of our population. The Board 
will develop an action plan to ensure that all partners are working together to tackle 
some of the complex lifestyle behaviours in our population. 
11.16 North Lincolnshire’s health priorities and issues are set out in the latest Council Plan and 
Integrated Strategic Assessment for North Lincolnshire. The Integrated Strategic 
Assessment supports and informs the Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategy and a range 
of commissioning, service planning and delivery activity by a number of organisations in 
North Lincolnshire. The Integrated Strategic Assessment is aligned to the councils four 
strategic outcomes of ‘safe’, ‘well’ ‘prosperous’ and ‘connected’. Under the strategic 
outcome for ‘well’ is good health and wellbeing, although all four of the outcomes play a 
part in contributing to health and wellbeing. Our new Local Plan sets the framework for 
how planning can contribute to the council Priorities of prosperous, well, safe and 
connected. 
11.17 The Integrated Assessment and North Lincolnshire Joint Strategic Assessment of Health 
and Wellbeing (JSNA) Strategy 2018 focuses on what range of services can better work 
together for the health and wellbeing of North Lincolnshire. It is therefore important that 
our new Local Plan sets the framework for planning decisions that will contribute to an 
improvement in the health of local residents. Some of the key challenges regarding 
healthy communities in North Lincolnshire are: 
• improving on the current low levels of active travel; 
• excess weight and obesity, including unhealthy weight in childhood; 
• mental ill health; 
• a need for smoke free places to reduce harm from tobacco; 
• tackling physical inactivity in the population; 
• pockets of poor air quality associated with heavy industry; 
• an ageing workforce; 
• reliance on medication when alternative strategies may be more effective (e.g. social 
prescribing); 
• above average rates of some potentially preventable conditions; and 
• high use of urgent care in some communities. 
11.18 The North Lincolnshire All Age Mental Wellbeing Strategic Framework builds on the aims 
outlined in the national No Health Without Mental Health (DOH, 2011), The Five Year 
Forward View for Mental Health (NHS Mental Health Taskforce, 2016) and the key 
themes of Future in Mind (DOH, 2015) through the following key objectives: 
• Prevention, recognition and early intervention for mental ill health and wellbeing. 
• Reduction of stigma and discrimination. 
• Good mental wellbeing to be at the heart of all planning and priorities in North 
Lincolnshire. 
• To make mental wellbeing everyone’s business. 
• To promote and embed ‘The 5 Ways to Wellbeing’ across North Lincolnshire. 
• To reduce the number of suicides in North Lincolnshire. 
11.19 Inequalities in mental health arise due to the conditions in which people are born, grow, 
live, work and age. Within our communities, social determinants of good mental health 
include the economic status of the area, levels of neighbourliness and the quality of 
housing and open spaces. 
11.20 In addressing these priorities and issues, it is essential that community needs are 
supported through appropriate physical and social infrastructure, and by other facilities 
Page 254 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) and key services which contribute to improving physical and mental health and 
wellbeing, and the overall quality of life experienced by residents. 
11.21 Access to green space and low congestion is a strength in North Lincolnshire. The council 
want people to live, work and socialise in healthy places, where healthy lifestyles are the 
norm. The council recognises the impact on health of air pollution and the strong link 
between employment and positive health. It is also important to make sure that impacts 
such as noise, smells, pollution and fumes that can arise from some developments, such 
as industrial uses, are considered and managed. In turn this can help to create cleaner 
and greener places. 
11.22 Good design and planning can make sure that the layout of new development 
encourages more people to make journeys on foot or bicycle. There are benefits to 
people’s health from having shopping and community services that are easily accessible 
by walking, cycling or public transport. This can be more challenging to achieve in rural 
communities where distances to facilities are greater and public transport infrastructure 
may be lacking. 
11.23 Planning for new roads can help direct heavy goods vehicle traffic away from homes, 
helping to reduce the impacts on resident’s health. Positive health impacts can result 
from increased employment. They can also arise by ensuring housing is designed with 
access to green space, and with public transport and traffic management in mind (e.g. 
car free zones, self-enforcing speed limits, walking/cycling links between residential and 
business areas). 
11.24 Living in a warm and energy efficient home can improve general health outcomes, reduce 
respiratory conditions, improve mental health and reduce mortality. Good quality housing 
can also reduce the risk of unintentional injury, such as falls. 
11.25 As part of creating safer places, tackling the fear of crime in North Lincolnshire and 
reducing actual crime also needs to be considered. Through design, the planning system 
can help ensure that new development creates safer places, reduces the incidence of 
actual crime and the fear of crime. 
11.26 Creating healthy living environments and well designed buildings are important. 
Promoting physical activity through the design and location of development to make 
walking and cycling more attractive and promoting the creation of tobacco free places, 
such as smoke-free town centres, smoke free school gates, and smoke-free parks and 
playgrounds is also important. Walkable neighbourhoods can improve levels of both 
physical activity and social engagement. Providing and maintaining a 'green 
infrastructure' network including different clean and healthy types of green space, places 
to play, allotments and walking and cycling routes to encourage regular physical activity 
and improve wellbeing and quality of life is also required. 
11.27 The impacts of proposed developments on health should be assessed and considered by 
the applicant at the earliest stage of the design process, to avoid negative health impacts 
and ensure positive health outcomes for the community as a whole. 
11.28 The Planning Practice Guidance refers to health impact assessments. Health Impact 
Assessments (HIA) consider the potential impacts of planning policies and decisions on 
health and health inequalities. They identify actions that can enhance the positive effects 
and mitigate or eliminate the negative effects of developments. A health impact 
assessment (HIA) helps ensure that health and wellbeing are being properly considered 
in planning policies and proposals and should be considered at the very outset of 
developing planning proposals or strategies to ensure positive health outcomes. 
11.29 The Local Plan will be able to help promote physical activity by securing a high quality 
public realm and through the provision of local parks and places to play, sports and 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 255 leisure facilities and cycling and walking facilities, which are essential to the health and 
wellbeing of the population. 
POLICY CSC1: HEALTH AND WELLBEING 
1. The council will seek to improve health and wellbeing in North Lincolnshire. In order to 
achieve this the council will: 
a. Make the potential for achieving positive mental and physical health outcomes a 
priority when considering all development proposals. Where any adverse health 
impacts are identified, the applicant will be expected to demonstrate how these will be 
addressed and mitigated. 
b. Promote improvements and enhancing accessibility to the historic environment, 
nature, accessible natural greenspaces and green infrastructure corridors and blue 
and green infrastructure. 
c. Recognise the vital role heritage and nature plays in people’s lives by safeguarding 
and enhancing the quality of our surroundings to ensure positive impacts on 
individuals and communities. 
d. Use the ten principles of Active Design and develop neighbourhoods and centres that: 
i. are connected, safe accessible and attractive so that crime and disorder, and fear 
of crime do not undermine the quality of life or community cohesion; 
ii. ensure paths, play areas and open spaces are overlooked by inhabited buildings 
while maintaining the privacy of inhabitants; 
iii. are easily accessible on foot or by bicycle to all users; 
iv. improve infrastructure and layouts to support, encourage and connect walking 
and cycling routes; 
v. have high quality streets and spaces ensuring that streets and paths are 
adequately lit; 
vi. have active buildings in which the design and use should promote opportunities 
for physical activities; 
vii. have a strong sense of place, which encourages social interaction and continual 
use of public areas; 
viii. have access to a range of facilities and amenities including transport, education, 
health, sport and leisure and community facilities; 
ix. are designed to promote higher levels of physical activity, through the 
arrangement of buildings and uses, access to open space and landscaping and 
the provision of facilities to support walking and cycling; and, 
x. have facilities and open spaces which should be accessible to all users and 
should support sport and physical activity across all ages. 
e. Support the integration of community facilities and services i.e. health, education, 
cultural and leisure in multi-purpose community buildings; 
f. Development schemes safeguarding and, where appropriate, enhancing the role of 
allotments, gardens and food markets in designated public and private spaces 
accessible from the home, school or workplace providing access to healthy, fresh and 
locally produced food; 
g. Ensure development does not have an adverse impact on the environment or 
residential amenity through air, noise, vibration and water pollution; 
Page 256 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) h. Make provision for the needs of an ageing population by promoting a range of 
development which supports independent living and avoiding the need for residential 
care; 
i. Work with relevant stakeholders to reduce geographical inequalities in health through 
maximising the provision of affordable housing and regenerating poorer 
neighbourhoods within the area; and, 
j. To require in the case of development of 50 or more homes or 1000sqm commercial 
floorspace, the submission of a Health Impact Assessment (HIA); as part of the 
planning application to explain how health impacts have been identified and how they 
will be addressed and mitigated and how they have informed the design. This must 
include a statement setting out how the active design principles and the principles of 
this policy have been incorporated into the new design. 
11.30 Key issues to address through this policy are to ensure development proposals consider 
the impacts and potential for achieving positive mental and physical health outcomes. 
Helping communities, experience a high quality of life is important and it is essential that 
community needs are supported through appropriate physical and social infrastructure 
and by other facilities and key services. This will enable communities to flourish and keep 
people safe and well. Active healthy lifestyles that are made easy through the pattern of 
development, good urban design, good access to local services and facilities, green open 
space and safe places for active play and food growing and is accessible by walking and 
cycling and public transport. 
11.31 The council encourages developers to use the Sport England Active Design principles to 
inform design and layout of development proposals to promote healthy communities and 
the key principles are included in the Council’s Health and Wellbeing Policy. Planners 
should also use Active Design in determining planning applications. This will help to 
achieve improved physical activity across the local population through the creation of 
high quality active and inclusive environments. 
11.32 The impacts of proposed developments on health should be assessed and considered by 
the applicant at the earliest stage of the design process, to avoid negative health impacts 
and ensure positive health outcomes for the community as a whole. 
11.33 PPG states a health impact assessment may be a useful tool to use where there are 
expected to be significant impacts. Health Impact Assessments (HIAs) are a combination 
of procedures, methods and tools by which developments may be judged to assess 
potential effects on the health of a population and the distribution of those effects within 
the population. By providing HIAs for major developments, and/ or other significant 
development which capture health issues. They will contribute towards health priorities 
of the ‘Health and Wellbeing Board’ and partners to help reduce health inequalities 
across the area. They will support the provision of new or improved health facilities and 
protect existing health and community facilities. This will ensure that developers 
consider the requirements of Policy CS1 and Active Design and allows Development 
Management to proactively consider whether the requirements of this policy have been 
met in new development. 
PROPOSALS FOR NEW HEALTH CARE FACILITIES 
11.34 Proposals for new health care facilities should connect effectively to public transport 
services, walking and cycling routes and be easily accessible to all sectors of the 
community. Proposals which utilise opportunities for the multi-use and co-location of 
health facilities with other services and facilities, and thus co-ordinate local care and 
provide convenience for the community, will be particularly supported. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 257 11.35 The focus of future land and facility requirements will be on ensuring there is adequate 
primary care provision in the area to meet local needs. The council will support the 
provision of additional health facilities and will work with NHS England and the Clinical 
Commissioning Group and other service providers to ensure the area has a necessary 
supply and distribution of accessible premises to meet health care needs. Further 
information on health infrastructure is set out in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan. 
11.36 In addition to the provision of health services, the built and natural environment plays a 
key role in encouraging children, young people and adults to engage in more physical 
activity, play, recreation and sports. This could lead to improved physical and mental 
health, reduced segregation and isolation, and prevent long term illness, such as 
diabetes, depression and cardiovascular disease. Spatial Planning can also reduce and 
mitigate adverse impacts on health, by managing noise and air pollution, and designing 
walking routes and cycle lanes. 
11.37 North Lincolnshire Council has established four main Community Wellbeing Hubs, in 
Scunthorpe, Barton upon Humber, Brigg and Epworth. There are a further three satellite 
Hubs in Crowle, Broughton and Winterton. The Hubs community wellbeing offer 
includes: 
• Information, advice and support 
• Healthy and safe lifestyles advice 
• Wellbeing checks for those aged 75+ 
• The facilitation of community meals and social activities 
11.38 The hubs have forged links with GP surgeries, local pharmacies, local businesses, 
voluntary groups and organisations to ensure services reflect and are responsive to 
need. 
11.39 North Lincolnshire Council’s Wellbeing at Work Healthy Workplace Award Scheme is 
designed to provide a framework of support to help businesses promote and enable 
positive health and wellbeing in the workplace and provide recognition to those 
organisations who value workplace health. 
HEALTH CARE PROVISION 
11.40 North Lincolnshire Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) is the NHS organisation 
responsible for designing, developing and buying local health services in the North 
Lincolnshire area. The primary role of the CCG is to assess the health needs of the North 
Lincolnshire population and make sure safe, sustainable and high quality healthcare 
services are in place. Their strategic plan sets out the five year plan and the vision for 
health services across North Lincolnshire. NHS England is responsible for the 
commissioning of primary care services including local GP’s and dentists. Responsibility 
for Public Health services (such as Health Trainers, stop smoking services and 
emergency planning) is with the council. However, the Director of Public Health for North 
Lincolnshire works in a joint role across both the CCG and the council, thus ensuring that 
the NHS continues to contribute directly to the prevention of health issues. 
11.41 The council’s commissioned public health services include open access sexual health 
services, substance misuse services and 0-19 public health services (health visitors, 
school nurses and associated healthy child programmes). The council also provides 
healthy lifestyle services to increase the number of people who are tobacco free, 
increasing the number who eat a healthy diet, increasing the number of people who are 
physically active, increasing the number of people who drink alcohol within the 
recommended limit and increasing mental wellbeing. 
Page 258 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 11.42 The goal is to achieve flourishing communities with high levels of wellbeing with a focus 
on prevention and asset-based working. Health and care services will become more 
integrated so that when people do need support they will get the right support at the 
right time in the right place to best meet their needs. 
11.43 In the UK, over the next 50 years, the population aged over 65 will double and that the 
population aged over 85 will quadruple. Older age is related to chronic diseases, which 
are typically more prevalent as longevity increases, for example cancer, diabetes, heart 
disease, respiratory conditions, stroke, dementia and depression. A distinction can be 
made between life expectancy and healthy life expectancy, the latter being how long a 
person can expect to live in good health. Age-friendly local physical environments are 
shown to be a key factor in ensuring active, healthy ageing and mobility, preventing long 
term conditions from developing, and enhancing healthy life expectancy. Prevention and 
creating the right environments can reduce pressure on public services. In addition to 
providing care and rehabilitation, we need to consider housing and the design of the built 
environment for a sustainable, healthier future. 
11.44 The vision for the future in North Lincolnshire is one where people are enabled to manage 
their own health and live healthily. There will be a strong focus on ensuring people have 
the knowledge and support to self-care, supported by care delivered in community 
settings where clinically safe to do so. Services will be designed to respond to patient 
needs rather than service needs, with many services delivered in multiple community 
based settings, supported by appropriate transport services to meet the needs of people 
with restricted mobility. Where people do require hospital care, this will be delivered 
locally where appropriate, but it is recognised that for some types of care, it is necessary 
for this to be delivered in a centre of excellence to maintain high quality and deliver value 
for money. Focus will be on the delivery of proactive, integrated care, which enables 
people to maintain or return to independence. 
11.45 It is important to ensure that the development of primary and social care buildings 
facilitate improvements in the range and quality of services offered in primary care. 
11.46 Though the Humber Acute Service Review a wide range of investment objectives has 
been agreed for the planned development of the creation of an integrated health, 
innovation and emergency services hub for Scunthorpe, including blue light centre, 
innovation and development centre and business park for supply chain, in an edge of 
Town Centre location. There are proposals for a new hospital in Scunthorpe. There is a 
revised and more modern approach to healthcare within the whole Humber sub-region 
(commissioned through HCV and Humber CCGs). The current Acute Hospital and blue 
light offer is outdated and not fit for a 21st century offer. Many parts of Scunthorpe 
Hospital site are dilapidated, not suitable for clinical use and in need of significant capital 
investment to bring them back up to standard. This project is in the early stages and the 
delivery of this will provide new service arrangements for Scunthorpe acute health 
provision. 
POLICY CSC2: HEALTH CARE PROVISION 
1. The council will support the implementation of health care provision in North 
Lincolnshire, in order to modernise and improve the primary health care facilities, and 
to improve the health of residents through safeguarding and enhancing open space, 
facilities for sports and recreation and improving walking and cycling routes. 
2. Where appropriate, developers should consult with health care commissioners at an 
early stage in order to understand the need for new or enhanced health care 
infrastructure and improved access to primary and mental health care facilities; 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 259 3. That the healthcare infrastructure implications of any relevant proposed development 
have been considered and addressed; 
4. Proposals for new health care facilities should provide high standards of accessibility 
to all sectors of the community and should connect well to public transport services, 
walking and cycling routes and be easily accessible to all sectors of the community. 
Proposals which utilise opportunities for the multi-use and co-location of health 
facilities with other services and facilities, and thus co-ordinate local care and provide 
convenience for the community, will be particularly supported. 
5. The loss of health care facilities or land allocated for such purposes will be resisted, 
unless there is no longer a need for the land or building in any form of health care use, 
or there is an acceptable alternative means of meeting such need to the same or 
higher standard in terms of community benefit. 
6. On proposals of 11 dwellings or more in areas with the greatest health care impact 
including Scunthorpe, Barton Upon Humber, Brigg, Kirton in Lindsey, Winterton, 
Crowle and Barrow upon Humber developers will be expected to make a payment 
towards health care provision. 
7. The level of Section 106 contribution for health is proposed number of dwellings in 
development x dwelling rate £667.57. This calculation is based on an analysis of 
future requirements and standardised BCIS building rates for health centre 
accommodation and any future updates. 
8. The implementation of new facilities supported by this policy will be permitted subject 
to other relevant plan policies. 
11.47 Key issues to address through policy and public consultation are protection of existing 
facilities to meet current and future need and demand; investment in healthcare 
infrastructure, importance of location, access to services, housing quality, transport 
options and mobility and proximity to social infrastructure. 
OPEN SPACE, SPORT AND RECREATION FACILITIES 
11.48 The built and natural environments are important determinants of health and wellbeing. 
The importance of this role is highlighted in the Promoting Healthy and Safe 
Communities section of the NPPF. Access to a network of high quality open spaces and 
opportunities for sport and physical activity is important for the health and well-being of 
communities. 
11.49 The link between the provision of open spaces, sport and recreation facilities, and 
improvements to public health, is perhaps the most obvious. It is widely accepted that 
participation in physical activity and access to nature in general improves health. It has 
also been shown to increase self-esteem and can bring significant reduction in mood 
disturbance (anger, confusion, depression, fatigue and tension). 
11.50 The attractiveness of streets and green spaces and the availability of green spaces have 
also been shown to influence the level of walking and their use for physical activity. 
However, it should be recognised that the simple provision of recreation facilities may not 
be adequate to change behaviour if the quality and accessibility of the facility is poor. The 
Foresight Report 'Tackling Obesities' found evidence that, for play spaces to be used by 
children, the safety, functionality and accessibility of the recreational area is important to 
parents as well as their perceived quality of the areas. 
11.51 These spaces also have wider environmental benefits. They support biodiversity, 
providing valuable habitat and links within existing green network, which allow wildlife 
to migrate and better adapt to our changing climate. Open spaces also play a key role in 
Page 260 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) flood risk management and are key elements to developing successful Sustainable 
Drainage systems. 
11.52 Sport England’s National Sport Strategy Uniting the Movement (2021) focuses on 
tackling inactivity and increasing wellbeing through improving physical activity in active 
environments. It developed its ‘Active Design’ principles with PHE to encourage and 
promote sport and physical activity through the design and layout of the built 
environment, and so support a step-change towards healthier and more active lifestyles. 
11.53 The North Lincolnshire Council Plan 2018/19 aims to keep the people and place of North 
Lincolnshire well, through clean and green spaces, stimulating cultural experiences, 
vibrant leisure and culture and good health and wellbeing. 
11.54 The North Lincolnshire Emerging Physical Activity Insight provided by Active Humber 
(September 2018) shows Physical Activity Measures under inactive, fairly active and 
active. Inactive is % of people aged 16+ doing less that 30mins of physical activity per 
week. Duration of activity is bouts of 10min of moderate intensity and is based on 4 years 
of data. Fairly active is % of people aged 16+ doing at least 30-149 minutes a week of 
physical activity per week and active is % of people aged 16+ of people aged 16+ doing 
at least 150 mins of physical activity per week. The insight data showed that in England 
61.8% of the population were active, 12.5% fairly active and 25.7% inactive. For North 
Lincolnshire the data showed 54.7% of the population of North Lincolnshire were active, 
13.3% fairly active and 32% (45,500) inactive. This identifies that North Lincolnshire has 
a lower number of active people compared to the national population and more of the 
population inactive compared to the national population. Males inactive in North 
Lincolnshire is 27.8% higher than England 24.4% and females inactive in North 
Lincolnshire is 34.8% higher than England 26.8%. 
11.55 A new Active Communities Leisure Centre has been built in Crowle and there are new 
Artificial Grass Pitches at Barton upon Humber, Brigg, Crowle and Epworth with plans to 
replace the Artificial Grass Pitch at Winterton and construct another at Broughton. 
Outdoor facilities have been improved and new pavilions provided at Quibell Park, 
Scunthorpe and Brigg Recreation Ground. A number of new Skate parks are have been 
achieved: for example at Epworth, Barton, Broughton, and Keadby. Multi Use Games 
Areas (MUGA’s) also play a significant role in providing local opportunities to engage in 
physical activity and a number have recently been developed or improved. Other existing 
sports/leisure centres will need refurbishment or improvement works as time goes by to 
help them meet community needs. There is also a need to improve the supporting 
infrastructure for example changing rooms and all weather/floodlit training facilities. 
11.56 In terms of identifying both deficiencies and requirements for new open space to be 
provided in association with development; planning policies should be based on robust 
and up to date assessments of the needs for open space, sports and recreation facilities 
and opportunities for new provision. The assessments should identify specific needs and 
quantitative or qualitative deficits or surpluses of open space, sports and recreational 
facilities in the local area. Information from these assessments should be used to 
determine what provision and standards are required. 
11.57 The council will assess recreational need for open space by considering minimum 
acceptable standards of provision for different types of open space. An Open Space 
Study was carried out in 2011 and updated in April 2019. North Lincolnshire has also 
produced a new Playing Pitch Strategy (PPS) that has been led, checked and challenged 
by a steering group including Sport England and various National Governing Bodies for 
Sport. These studies looked at both the quantity and quality of open space provision and 
playing pitches. The open space study assessed local provision of all categories of open 
space from parks, natural open space and amenity greenspace through to playspace 
and sports facilities as well as allotments. Site assessments demonstrated that the 
quality of pitches is good, as although there remain opportunities for improvement. These 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 261 have informed the required standards and improvement opportunities. The required 
standards are summarised in respect of quantity, quality and accessibility of open space 
and playing pitch provision within North Lincolnshire and have been used to inform the 
provision requirements for new development, outlined in the Planning Obligations policy 
and Developer Contributions policy. 
POLICY CSC3: PROTECTION AND PROVISION OF OPEN SPACE, SPORTS
AND RECREATION FACILITIES 
1. The council will work with its partners, appropriate agencies and the voluntary sector 
to ensure the provision of good quality, well maintained sport and recreation facilities, 
which meet the needs of the local communities, will be secured, accessible and 
improved. 
2. In particular, provision will be sought to address identified deficiencies or that will 
benefit deprived groups and meet the needs of local communities and to improve the 
quality of, and access to existing open spaces, sports and leisure facilities. 
3. Development proposals for new sports and recreational buildings and land, children’s 
play facilities, Multi use games area, playing pitch and open space or the extension/ 
enhancement of an existing facility should be on a scale appropriate to the type and 
size of settlement. Wherever possible facilities that attract large numbers of people 
should be located in the larger settlements and be accessible by walking, cycling and 
public transport. 
4. Proposals will be permitted provided that: 
a. They support local wildlife and there is no adverse impact to nearby properties or 
habitats, by reason of noise, general disturbance, fumes or external lighting; 
b. They are multifunctional, fit for purpose and support health and outdoor recreation; 
c. They are associated with identified needs of the community; 
d. They offer greatest accessibility to the public and are easily accessible by means of 
pedestrian connections; 
e. They consider the context of any existing provision/shortfall and maximise any 
opportunities for improvement within the wider area where these are relevant to the 
development of the site; 
f. When new provision is provided, have appropriate mechanisms secured which will 
ensure the future satisfactory maintenance and management of the open space 
,sport, recreation and leisure facility; and, 
g. They will create a sense of safety, including natural surveillance by overlooking public 
spaces and encourage Secured by Design guidance. 
5. To fulfil the obligations under the Equality Act (2010) park and playground 
developments must have wheelchair play equipment and that the park/playground 
should attain the standards set out in the Plan Inclusive Playground Play Areas (PiPA) 
guidelines. 
6. Development proposals that will result in the loss of an existing sport and recreational 
building, land and facility, children’s play facility, natural greenspace or open space will 
not be supported unless: 
a. There is currently an excess of provision; or 
b. Satisfactory alternative provision equivalent or better quality and quantity in a suitable 
location is made; or 
c. Biodiversity net gain is achieved; or 
Page 262 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) d. The ecological network is protected or enhanced; or 
e. The facility is no longer needed. 
7. Proposals that result in the loss of a sport facility will be supported where there is an 
up to date and robust evidence base in the form of a Playing Pitch Strategy or Built 
Sports Facility Strategy that clearly evidences that the specific sport facility that will 
be lost be the development is genuinely surplus to both current and future sporting 
requirements. 
Provision in New Housing Developments 
8. In all new residential developments of 10 dwellings or more (or on sites of 0.5ha or 
more), the council will require provision of high-quality open spaces and sports and 
recreation facilities to meet the needs of additional residents. The types and required 
standards of these spaces and facilities will be identified in the new Developer 
Contributions SPD. 
9. On sites of less than 0.5 ha, the developer will be expected to make an appropriate 
commuted payment to off-site recreational open space provision within the 
catchment area and to contribute to future maintenance in accordance with the 
Developer Contributions SPD. 
10. The council will seek to enter into an agreement with developers which will set out the 
date of provision and arrangements for the maintenance and management of such 
areas during the course of development and thereafter. 
11. As first preference, the provision of informal Open Space should be provided on-site 
in a suitable location. Where on site provision is not feasible or suitable within a local 
context, consideration of a financial contribution to the upgrading and improvement of 
an existing usable facility will be considered as per the criteria set out in the Developer 
Contributions SPD and in accordance with national legislation. 
12. Developers will be expected to contribute towards improving catchment sports and 
recreation facilities or the provision of a new sports and recreation facility if the current 
sports and recreation facilities could not cope with the additional demand. Such 
facilities may address issues with formal outdoor sports pitch provision and/or in door 
sport and leisure facilities. Consideration for the criteria for the financial contributions 
will be set out in the Developer Contributions SPD for Sport facilities. 
13. A holistic approach to the design of new open space should be taken including 
considering the contribution to place making, the green network and protecting and 
enhancing nature conservation and the water environment. New provision should 
also aim to protect, enhance and manage integrated paths for active travel and/or 
recreation, including new and existing links to the wider countryside. 
11.58 Open space is important for its contribution to the quality of the environment of towns 
and settlements. Open Space is classed as formal and informal. Formal Open space 
includes playgrounds and informal open space are parks and green open spaces. Open 
space with recreational value should be protected from development. Identifying 
recreational land on the proposals map and considering its wider amenity importance 
will ensure that its value to the community is taken into account in determining 
development proposals. It is important to ensure that there is no loss of recreational open 
space where it is of value to a community. 
11.59 Having good quality sports and recreation facilities is important; this can be sport and 
recreation facilities and formal playing pitches for sport. Taking part in recreational 
activities, particularly outdoors, can improve your physical wellness. Leisure time is 
important as it gives a person the balance needed to focus on his or her other, more 
stressful, daily activities. Leisure time relieves boredom and stress and also improves 
one's physical and emotional health. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 263 ALLOTMENTS 
11.60 Allotment gardening or involvement in community food growing projects can increase 
overall levels of physical activity and fitness, contribute to healthy weight, increase 
healthy fruit and vegetable consumption, improve mental health, contribute to improved 
social interactions and community cohesion, and reduce stress. 
POLICY CSC4: ALLOTMENTS 
1. The council will not grant planning permission for development that would result in the 
loss of allotments unless: 
a. the allotment is badly located and a suitable replacement is provided nearby of at 
least equal size and quality but to a higher visual amenity standard; 
b. the replacement of allotments should cover a greater area when located in an area 
with an identified shortfall; 
c. the allotment is under-used and no longer meets an important local need and there is 
unlikely to be a future rise in demand for allotment plots; and, 
d. the enhancement of nearby existing allotments by a developer may be acceptable, 
instead of the provision of new replacement allotments. 
11.61 An adequate supply of allotments will be maintained to meet existing and likely future 
demand, and their development will not be permitted unless the allotment is no longer 
required to meet a local need, or the condition of the allotment has deteriorated to such 
a degree that its refurbishment is not feasible. 
11.62 The aim of these policies are to ensure that North Lincolnshire’s open space, sports and 
recreation facilities and allotments are sustained and improved so that they continue to 
make an important contribution to the health and wellbeing of local people. The policy 
supports the aims and implementations of the Council’s Plan 2018/2019, Open Space 
Study, Playing Pitch Strategy and the Built Sports Facility Strategy . 
GOLF COURSES 
11.63 Golf courses require substantial areas of land and inevitably involve changes in 
landscape character associated with the remodelling of topography and the introduction 
of artificial features and special maintenance regimes. Without due consideration, 
valuable wildlife habitats, historical and archaeological features and geological and 
physiographic features can be damaged or destroyed, either directly or indirectly, for 
example by drainage works. Conversely, a well-designed proposal can enhance the 
nature conservation value of an area, and provide more diverse habitats and other 
environmental and landscape benefits. Golf course irrigation can also make substantial 
demands on local water supplies. Some habitats and landscape types can absorb golf 
courses without significant impact, and in degraded environments golf courses may offer 
a positive opportunity for environmental enhancement. Golf courses may also provide an 
important buffer between housing and agricultural land and between housing and areas 
of nature or archaeological importance. 
Page 264 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY CSC5: GOLF COURSES 
1. Planning permission will be granted for the improvement of existing golf facilities and 
the provision of new golf courses and facilities providing that the proposal: 
a. is located, designed and landscaped so as to ensure harmony and good visual 
integration with the surrounding landscape and does not adversely affect the 
character and amenity of the area; 
b. makes provision for the retention and management of important landscape features 
and any landscaping reflects the area’s character in form and choice of species; 
c. does not result in the loss of the best and most versatile agricultural land (Grades 1, 2 
and 3a); 
d. does not adversely affect sites of nature conservation value or archaeological or 
historic importance; 
e. does not require additional built development in the open countryside unrelated to the 
operational requirements of the golf course; 
f. provides measurable biodiversity net gain in line with the Biodiversity Opportunity 
Mapping to maximise contribution to the Nature Recovery Network and Local Nature 
Recovery Strategy; 
g. demonstrates that it can meet its needs for water sustainably (without adverse effect 
on the environment) including through the use of efficiency measures; 
h. achieves a high standard of design for any new buildings and hard standings 
considered necessary and essential to the proper functioning of the golf course in 
accordance with criterion; and, 
i. a scale of development in keeping with the golfing facility. 
11.64 Large scale built development, including housing, hotels, conference centres and sports 
facilities, is often proposed in association with golf courses, in locations where they would 
otherwise be refused, sometimes on the grounds that these facilities are required to 
maintain the viability of the course. Such built development will be strongly resisted in the 
open countryside. 
WATER BASED LEISURE 
11.65 North Lincolnshire’s rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs are a valuable resource for active 
and passive leisure pursuits. 
11.66 The Rivers Ancholme, Trent and Humber form navigable links with the country’s 
waterway network. Marinas provide permanent moorings for boats clear of the 
navigational channel. At present these resources are largely under-used and offer 
enormous potential for recreation. The northern area of Ashby Ville lagoon to the south 
east of the Scunthorpe and Bottesford Urban Area offers a potential site for water-based 
recreation which is currently undertaken on an informal basis. Potential also exists for 
water-based recreation in the Ironstone Gullets area to the north east of Scunthorpe. 
11.67 In encouraging water based recreational activities the environment is an important 
concern. Some sporting activities, such as fishing, canoeing and wind surfing may be 
considered less damaging than power boating and water skiing, which cause noise 
disturbance, create wash that can damage banks and cause oil and petroleum pollution. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 265 A large number of users in an area can have an adverse impact on the surrounding 
countryside, due to increased traffic, litter generation, over-use of paths and banks, and 
habitat destruction. 
11.68 Water based leisure activities on or adjacent to rivers or the coast have the potential to 
adversely affect the integrity, operation and maintenance of flood defence banks and 
infrastructure. Developments must be located and designed to prevent this and 
opportunities should be sought to reduce flood risk overall. They will usually need an 
‘environmental permit for flood risk activities’ from the Environment Agency in addition to 
planning permission and advice on this should be obtained at an early stage in the 
design process. 
POLICY CSC6: WATER BASED LEISURE 
1. Planning permission will be granted for the development of recreational activities on 
the Rivers Ancholme, Trent and Humber, Stainforth and Keadby Canal and on inland 
lagoons and water areas providing the following criteria are met: 
a. the development does not prejudice important amenity, landscape or ecological 
characteristics of the waterway or water area and its environs. Proposals to extend 
recreational usage will need to be carefully balanced against the effect they may have 
on the ecology and wildlife of the waterway or water area; 
b. there is no adverse effect on the provision and improvement of access points and 
footpath links to the waterway or water area; 
c. there are no adverse impacts on sites of archaeological value or historic importance; 
d. recreational and leisure activities do not prejudice the operational requirements of 
rivers as commercial waterways; and, 
e. there is no adverse effect on flood risk management infrastructure, its maintenance or 
operation and the development incorporates measures to mitigate and where 
possible reduce flood risk. 
11.69 Waterways and water areas in North Lincolnshire are under-utilised as a recreational 
and tourism resource. The council is therefore committed to protecting and enhancing 
the recreation and leisure potential of these areas. This will involve closely controlling 
adjacent development to ensure that it will not prejudice the recreational use and leisure 
potential of waterways and water areas. These areas are also important for their nature 
and wildlife value, provide links in the overall network of green spaces and recreational 
paths which contributes to the Nature Recovery Network and hence need to be 
protected from inappropriate development. 
COMMERCIAL HORSE RIDING ESTABLISHMENTS 
11.70 Horse riding offers an attractive way of exploring the countryside, but attendant 
problems may arise in the case of commercial riding establishments and livery yards. 
These can potentially be substantial developments with stabling, flood-lit exercise areas 
and indoor riding schools and even demands for new housing to allow a 24 hour 
presence on site. In other cases, commercial establishments of this nature can be a 
positive force in maintaining traditional landscapes, especially where there is a 
commitment to pasture management and fence maintenance. 
Page 266 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY CSC7: COMMERCIAL HORSE RIDING ESTABLISHMENTS 
1. Development of commercial horse riding facilities and livery stables will be permitted, 
subject to proposals meeting the following criteria: 
a. a minimum of 0.6 ha (1.5 acres) of grazing land per horse or pony is available; 
b. the proposal is of a scale and nature appropriate to the character of the site and the 
ability of the local environment to absorb the development; 
c. the proposal does not adversely affect protected or priority species or sites of nature 
conservation value or archaeological or historic importance; 
d. the proposal uses existing buildings or where new buildings are proposed they are of 
a high standard of design and are sited next to existing buildings or otherwise visually 
form an integral part of the overall development; 
e. the proposal is accompanied by an integrated landscaping scheme and a scheme of 
boundary treatment; 
f. the site is accessible and adequate off-road trails and bridleways are available; and, 
g. the proposal is accompanied by an integrated lighting scheme which retains dark 
corridors along landscape features and conforms to guidance issued by the Bat 
Conservation Trust in order to minimize impacts to protected species. 
11.71 Commercial horse riding facilities are a type of land use that will most often be sited in 
open countryside, and are one of a number of uses that will in principle be suitable in 
these areas. This will be subject to the proposed development being of an appropriate 
scale and of a design in keeping with the locality; taking advantage of existing screening 
and well integrated with existing buildings; being based on a compact building layout; 
taking account of sites of archaeological importance, in particular upstanding earthwork 
remains which may be preserved under grazing or pasture land; there being sufficient 
suitable routes or land for riding in the vicinity without exacerbating pressure on already 
over-used areas; and incorporating sufficient grazing land as part of the overall 
development to allow for good pasture management and rotational grazing. 
EDUCATION -SCHOOL PLACES AND PROVISION 
11.72 National planning policy regarding education provision aims to offer choice and diversity 
to meet the needs of existing and new communities. Local Planning authorities should 
take a proactive, positive and collaborative approach to meeting this requirement and to 
development that will widen choice in education. Great weight should be given to the 
need to create, expand or alter schools and work with school promoters to identify and 
resolve key planning issues. 
11.73 North Lincolnshire’s Economic Growth Plan 2018-2023 focuses on improved skills and 
lifelong integration of skills and development which are areas where change is required 
to support prosperity in North Lincolnshire. 
11.74 North Lincolnshire’s Education and Skills Plan, All Our Children -2020 sets out the shared 
ambitions for educating children and young people in North Lincolnshire. The plan 
focuses on three overarching outcomes, which are: 
• children to feel safe and are safe; 
• children to enjoy good health and emotional wellbeing; and 
• children to recognise and achieve their potential. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 267 11.75 North Lincolnshire Council is a statutory education authority. There are 77 schools in 
North Lincolnshire 53 primary schools, 4 junior schools, 5 infant schools, 13 secondary 
schools and 2 special schools. 36 of the primary and infant schools have nursery 
provision. 3 of the secondary schools have sixth forms offering a wide range of courses 
and quality post 16 provision. There are also 2 colleges in North Lindsey John Leggott 
and North Lindsey and a University Technical College. North Lincolnshire has good 
schools and colleges with 64.8% of North Lincolnshire pupils attaining a 9-4 grade in 
both maths and english in 2016/17 academic year, higher than the regional and national 
rates or 61.8% and 59.1%. 
11.76 The council have a School Organisational Needs Assessment (SONA) 2020. The plan 
acknowledges the importance of school place planning in achieving these outcomes 
through the: 
• Effective supply of mainstream places to meet community needs; 
• Creation of a sustainable and coherent estate for life-long learning; 
• Development of an infrastructure in which all providers can quickly adapt to new 
opportunities; 
• Provision of choice of high quality educational establishments for all our children and 
young people. 
EARLY YEARS ESTATE 
11.77 As at January 2019, there were almost 3,000 children in receipt of funded early 
education in North Lincolnshire. The numbers vary each term as children turn two and 
three-years of age, the numbers of eligible children peak in the summer term each year. 
In addition to funded early education, many parents are paying privately for childcare 
hours for their children (from birth to twelve years of age). In total it is estimated that there 
are 3,500 childcare places for children under five years of age and a further 2,400 places 
for children over five years of age. 
11.78 The demand for funded early education is growing as consecutive governments invest in 
childcare policies to increase the funded childcare offer available to parents. Most 
recently the introduction of 30-hours funded childcare for three and four year olds and 
the introduction of Tax Free Childcare to support families with the cost of childcare. All 
planning areas have experienced growth. Inward migration as a result of major housing 
developments will increase the demand for childcare places. During initial phases 
demand will need to be addressed by local providers however, demand may quickly 
exceed supply. The childcare sector does attract investment from the private sector 
however, land allocations or suitable community premises are required. 
PRIMARY SCHOOL ESTATE 
11.79 As at January 2017, there were 13,728 pupils on roll in North Lincolnshire schools. There 
are a diverse range of providers responsible for running these schools. These providers 
include national academy chains, local multi-academy trusts (MAT), convertor 
academies and the local authority. 
11.80 Over recent years there has been an increased demand for school places in the primary 
sector. The anticipated demand for reception places for the whole of North Lincolnshire 
is projected to dip. The anticipated total number on roll of North Lincolnshire schools is 
also anticipated to dip slightly. Inward migration as a result of major housing 
developments will increase the demand on school places. The Lincolnshire Lakes 
development aims to build approximately 6,000 homes, 2,150 of these are homes are 
Page 268 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) expected to be delivered in the plan period. Although one new primary schools will be 
built on the development to meet demand, the immediate demand from the first wave of 
occupants, will need to be addressed using existing schools. Although overall numbers 
are projected to decline, there are significant pressures for individual schools. Whilst 
children can be accommodated in reception years in the smaller village schools, these 
schools are often popular and fill up to their published admission number with siblings 
and non-catchment pupils. 
11.81 The anticipated total number on roll in North Lincolnshire peaked in 2017/18 and is 
anticipated to fluctuate around 13,700 for the next few years. Housing developments will 
increase demand for places. All planning areas have experienced growth except Isle 
South. 
11.82 The biggest percentage increases have been in Scunthorpe South (20%), Barton District 
(20%) and Barton Town (14%). The Lakeside development with a new school, St Peter 
and St Paul, have contributed significantly to the growth in pupils in Scunthorpe South. 
SECONDARY SCHOOL ESTATE 
11.83 The anticipated total number on roll in North Lincolnshire is set to rise from 8,922 in 2017 
to 10,299 in 2024. Inward migration as a result of major housing developments will 
increase the demand on school places. Overall, the current supply is sufficient to meet the 
anticipated number on roll for the next five years. However, there are pressures in some 
locations, which are noted in the commentary for each planning area. The recent growth 
in numbers in the primary sector will start to feed through to the secondary sector and 
increase pressure on places. In addition to larger year groups, inward migration as a 
result of major housing developments will increase the demand on school places. 
11.84 The secondary school analysis is based on six planning areas: The Scunthorpe planning 
area has 7 academies and 1 school that, collectively, provide education for 52% of the 
secondary aged pupil population; the Brigg planning area has one school and two 
academies that, collectively, provide education for 20% of the secondary aged pupil 
population; the Isle north and Isle south planning areas each have one academy that, 
collectively, provide education for 14% of the secondary aged pupil population; the 
Barton planning area has one school that provides education for 8% of the secondary 
aged pupil population; the Winterton planning area has one academy that provides 
education for 6% of the secondary aged population. 
11.85 The numbers on roll in the secondary sector have declined over recent years, the lowest 
point being in 2014/15. The numbers are now on an upwards trajectory as the larger 
pupil cohorts move up from the primary sector. From 2017 to 2024 it is anticipated that 
there will be a 15% rise in numbers in the secondary sector. Inward migration as a result 
of major housing developments will also increase the demand on school places. The 
Strategic Site Allocation Lincolnshire Lakes may result in an additional 2,100 homes 
being built, and the current plan is to expand the existing secondary school estate to 
accommodate this anticipated demand. 
11.86 Further work to assess the availability of capacity of schools in the area depending on 
the future option for growth chosen will be carried out. This information will be used to 
inform the requirements for primary and secondary school places along with the cost for 
provision of these requirements. 
11.87 Schools also benefit from having land which is used for sports, recreation, forest schools 
and school gardens. As community leaders both their indoor and outdoor space 
contributes greatly to the development of sport and recreation activities (e.g. use of 
MUGA for local football club, school hall for Judo, sports hall for Streetdance. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 269 FURTHER/HIGHER EDUCATION 
11.88 North Lincolnshire Council has prioritised the delivery of a University Campus North 
Lincolnshire providing higher level skills, offering opportunities to meet the needs of 
existing businesses to attract inward investment, and to give local residents 
opportunities closer to home to increase their knowledge and qualification levels. 
Scunthorpe’s Civic Centre has become a new university campus, which aims to deliver 
1,500 university level places within Scunthorpe. This is in partnership with North Lindsey 
College and the University of Lincoln. Scunthorpe will also provide a new Post 16 Special 
Free School. 
11.89 Key Issues to address through policy and public consultation, are effective supply of 
mainstream places to meet community needs, creation of a sustainable and coherent 
plan for life-long learning, development of an infrastructure, in which all providers can 
quickly adapt to new opportunities and provision of choice of high quality educational 
establishments for all our children and young people. 
POLICY CSC8: EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
1. It is important that a sufficient choice of school and educational places is available to 
meet the needs of existing and new communities and requirements of education 
provision can be met (including early years and childcare). 
2. The following sites are allocated for new and extended school and college facilities: -
a. Land at Bowmandale School, Barton Upon Humber 
b. Strategic Site Allocation Lincolnshire Lakes, Scunthorpe 
c. West Common Lane, Scunthorpe 
3. A new or improved education facility will be supported where: 
a. the scale, range, quality and accessibility of education facilities are improved; 
b. there is a need to create, expand or alter an existing school; 
c. it meets a recognised need in the area it is expected to serve in line with the council’s 
legal responsibility to provide sufficient school places; 
d. the proposed development is of a scale and design appropriate to the location; 
e. an area of open space and playing fields sufficient to meet the needs of pupils is 
incorporated; 
f. the development is capable of a joint or dual use for community benefit, in agreement 
with the school/academy and this has been incorporated into the design; 
g. proposals that involve the relocation of existing education facilities outside settlement 
boundaries (and redevelopment of the original site for alternative use) will only be 
supported where the new site would demonstrably better meet the identified 
education needs and is acceptable in terms of its impacts on the countryside; 
h. the proposal is readily accessible by the community by public transport and by means 
other than the car; and, 
i. sufficient car parking, drop off zones and pedestrian crossings are provided. 
4. New school development should seek to ensure effective protection of environmental 
features/assets and that the design of such development should seek to achieve 
Page 270 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) multiple-benefits, including environmental enhancement, low carbon design and 
renewable energy generation. 
5. Where major new housing proposals would result in an increased demand for 
education facilities which cannot be met by existing schools and colleges, a developer 
may be required to enter into a S106 planning obligation in order to secure the 
provision of, or contribution towards new or extended facilities in accordance with the 
Developer Contributions SPD. 
6. Major new housing proposals applies to: 
a. 25 or more dwellings in the Scunthorpe and Bottesford urban area, 
b. 15 or more dwellings in principal, medium, and minimum growth settlements. 
7. Calculations are based on the DfES basic need allowance for new places and is linked 
to the DfES index. The contribution required will be set out in the Developer 
Contributions SPD and any updates. 
8. At the Planning Application Stage the council will stipulate if necessary to have 
Community Use Agreements as part of their planning conditions in order to make the 
facilities of the school available (when their use is not required by the school). 
CHILDREN’S DAY CARE PROVISION 
11.90 There is a growing need for day care facilities for children, as increasing numbers of 
parents find the need to combine work with childcare responsibilities. The growth of such 
facilities is an important contributor to allowing more people to enter employment and 
expanding choice in pre-school education. Such facilities include day nurseries, crèches 
and playgroups. 
11.91 Proposals for childcare provision have planning implications including the impact on the 
amenity of residential areas and the safety and well-being of young children. The use of 
existing dwelling houses for these purposes will require planning permission once the 
level of child-space provision from the premises reaches a level where the intensity of the 
use of the property represents a material change of use. This level will be nominally set 
at the supervision of a maximum of six children at any one time (including a family’s own 
children if they are under the age of eight) although the individual circumstances may 
dictate that planning permission is required for a lesser number. 
POLICY CSC9: NURSERY AND CHILDREN’S DAY CARE PROVISION 
1. Any additional children’s day nurseries, crèches and playgroups provision will be 
encouraged to locate within or adjacent to the Major Sub-regional Centre, Principal 
Towns, Larger Service Centres and Larger Rural Settlements or co-located within 
schools and in locations with good public transport links in order to facilitate linked 
trips by parents. 
2. Applications for new build and the conversion of properties to children’s day nurseries, 
crèches and playgroups will be determined subject to the following criteria: 
a. the property should be located within an area providing a safe environment for 
children; 
b. there are facilities for outdoor play separate from car parking and service areas. 
Where appropriate a carefully designed landscaping scheme shall be incorporated in 
the development or additional landscaping will be required to supplement existing 
screening, including the boundaries of the property; and, 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 271 c. there is on-site provision for resident and staff cars including satisfactory vehicular 
access and turning facilities within the site. 
3. The layout and design of these areas will be expected to maximise the safety of 
children within the site; and ensure: 
a. there is adequate space on the highway, or within the site as a dropping-off zone, 
which allows vehicles to park without causing a hazard to other users on the highway; 
and 
b. the proposal does not detrimentally alter the character of the area by way of visual 
impact or cause undue disturbance to neighbours. Where a proposal is within or 
adjacent to a residential area, conditions will be imposed restricting the hours of 
operation to those of the working day, i.e. 7.00 am to 6.00 pm Monday to Saturday 
inclusive, and may also be imposed limiting the number of children to 7 being cared for 
at any one time. 
4. Any consent may be restricted to the specific use applied for. 
11.92 The provision of childcare facilities, while of considerable community benefit, can result 
in loss of amenity through noise and disturbance, and excessive vehicle movements in 
residential areas. In other locations, particularly industrial areas, the surrounding 
environment of heavy vehicles can prove unsuitable for childcare facilities. Because other 
uses within Class D1, such as a house resulting in public assembly could potentially 
cause amenity problems in some locations, the council will aim to restrict some or all 
changes of use within the Use Class D1 where appropriate. 
COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SERVICES 
11.93 Community facilities and services includes facilities such as local shops, meeting places, 
sports venues, cultural buildings, public houses, libraries, places of worship and other 
local services to enhance the sustainability of communities and residential environments. 
There are many existing facilities embedded within our settlements that provide for the 
health and wellbeing, social, educational, recreational, leisure and cultural needs of the 
community. Some of these serve a local community, while some serve a wider area or 
serve a group or cluster of interdependent settlements. These facilities and services help 
create supportive communities by meeting day to day needs of residents and 
businesses. 
11.94 To be sustainable, suitable good quality facilities must be provided locally, whilst those 
that attract large numbers of visitors are accessible by walking, cycling and public 
transport. This particularly benefits the less mobile and more deprived members of the 
community. 
11.95 The North Lincolnshire Council Plan 2018/19 aims to have strong communities and to 
create neighbourhoods where people are proud to live, get on well together and support 
each other. The council will seek to ensure that community facilities and services are 
provided in the most effective and accessible way. In rural communities, services must be 
protected as much as possible, as their loss can have a major impact on communities. 
The provision of local community facilities and services is essential to the quality of life for 
local residents as they encourage community cohesion and social interaction, healthy 
lifestyles, improve the ‘liveability’ of places, provide employment opportunities and will 
reduce the need for people to travel to obtain essential services. 
Page 272 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 11.96 Key issues to address are; 
• building inclusive and healthy communities with good and reasonable access to well-
located high-quality key services and community facilities, 
• protecting existing community facilities and 
• the delivery of new facilities to meet community needs and promoting healthy lifestyles 
through support for initiatives such as provision of sports and recreation facilities and 
improved access to green infrastructure. 
11.97 A key challenge will be to ensure that the correct amount and type of facilities are 
delivered as part of future growth proposals to meet community needs. 
POLICY CSC10: COMMUNITY FACILITIES AND SERVICES 
1. The provision of new community facilities, or the improvement of existing community 
facilities, which meet the needs of local residents will be supported in principle. 
2. Good quality services and facilities will be provided that meet the needs of local 
communities and are accessible by public transport, cycling or on foot and be 
accessible for all members of society. They should be designed so that they are 
addable and can be easily altered to respond to future demands if necessary. 
3. The provision of new facilities should be focused in the following locations: 
a. Sites allocated for such purposes. 
b. In town centres, market town centres, district centres or local centres subject to policies 
in the local plan. 
c. In principal towns, large service centres, larger rural settlements and smaller rural 
settlements and where the facility is needed to serve the immediate local area and 
could not be provided elsewhere. 
d. In market towns, rural settlements and rural settlements in the countryside where the 
facility is needed to serve the immediate local area and could not be provided 
elsewhere. 
e. In residential areas where there is no adverse affect on the amenities of neighbouring 
properties. 
4. The provision of services and facilities will be of the scale appropriate to the type and 
size of the settlement. 
5. The loss of community facilities or land allocated for such purposes will be resisted, 
unless there is no longer a need for the land or building in any form of community use, 
or there is an acceptable alternative means of meeting such need. 
6. Evidence of marketing over a period of at least 12 months which shows efforts to sell 
or let the use or site at an appropriate market price/rent taking into account size and 
condition. This marketing should be through recognised local and national agents 
relevant to the nature of use. It also must be shown that efforts have been made to 
explore alternative community, cultural or social uses before loss to other uses. 
7. Developers will be expected to make an appropriate contribution towards necessary 
improvements or additional provision for community services and facilities arising 
from their development proposals. 
11.98 An analysis of the need for the community facilities and services will be undertaken on a 
site-by-site basis, taking account of the type of asset and any existing provisions. 
Similarly, the context of the site and the function and purpose of the use will determine 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 273 the extent of the local community that the use serves. The term “local” will differ between 
circumstances; for example, the local community of a single public house in a village 
would likely be the residents of that village. For a children’s home, “local” could be more 
wide-reaching, covering the catchment area that the children’s home would serve. 
11.99 The retention of community facilities in settlements is considered essential in maintaining 
the long term vitality and viability of these areas. 
11.100 Policies and decisions should aim to achieve places, which promote opportunities for 
meetings between members of the community who might not come into contact with 
each other, including mixed use developments, strong neighbourhood centres and active 
street frontages which bring together those who work, reside and play in the vicinity. 
11.101 Policies should also plan positively for the provision and use of shared space, community 
facilities and other local services to enhance the sustainability of communities and 
residential environments. 
POLICY CSC11: ENTERTAINMENT AND CULTURAL FACILITIES 
1. Planning applications for development, which increases the provision of cultural/ 
entertainment facilities in the area will be permitted in town centres subject to there 
being no conflict with other policies within this Plan. 
11.102 The development of museums, arts and entertainment facilities in the area offer 
opportunities to raise the overall image of North Lincolnshire and the quality of life for its 
residents. There are still opportunities to further develop cultural and entertainment 
facilities for heritage interpretation, performances, exhibitions and other activities. 
POLICY CSC12: RESTAURANTS AND HOT FOOD TAKEAWAY 
ESTABLISHMENTS 
1. Proposals for restaurant and hot food takeaway establishments will be permitted in 
town, district and local centres subject to the following criteria: 
a. the premises are not located where individually or cumulatively they would have an 
adverse impact on the occupiers of nearby residential properties by reason of noise 
and disturbance, litter or on-street parking; 
b. the development must not create a road safety hazard or create traffic congestion, due 
to it being located on a bend, junction, hill or any other restriction on the public 
highway; 
c. suitable off or on-street parking is available on or near the premises so as to avoid 
detriment to road safety or residential amenity; 
d. a suitable fume extraction system and refuse storage area is installed to ensure that 
the amenity of nearby residents is protected from the emission of smells and fumes; 
e. when planning permission is granted for restaurants and hot food takeaway 
establishments, the council will consider whether it is desirable to impose conditions, 
including limiting the hours that the premises may remain open, so as to avoid possible 
loss of amenity to nearby residents resulting from noise and disturbance; 
Page 274 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) f. it has been demonstrated that account has been taken of whether the proposal would 
result in an unacceptable concentration of hot food takeaway uses in the centre (total 
units must not exceed 10%) and in order to promote healthy lifestyles in young people, 
proposals for hot food takeaway uses will not be permitted outside of a defined centre 
and proposals within 400m of an existing or proposed school or college building will 
be resisted. 
g. a Health Impact Assessment has been carried out, and where an unacceptable 
adverse impact on health is established, permission should not be granted; and, 
h. it has been demonstrated that appropriate measures to prevent the discharge of Fats, 
Oil and Grease to the sewerage network have been implemented and will be 
maintained in perpetuity. 
11.103 Takeaway food establishments and restaurants can add to the quality and 
attractiveness of existing centres and provide a useful service to shoppers and local 
residents. However, at the same time they can cause a nuisance both in the immediate 
area of the facility itself, through problems with noise, smell, traffic and litter, as well as 
further away. The policy is that a 400 metres restriction buffer is defined around schools 
and colleges as this represents a reasonable distance given that it broadly represents a 
10-minute walk (5 minutes each way), taking into account physical barriers on any route. 
This is deemed to be the distance that a young person will walk from school and back to 
purchase fast food. 
11.104 Dietary risk factors for obesity include high energy density foods, diets high in fat and low 
in fibre, sugar-rich drinks, and consumption of large portion sizes. The proportion of food 
eaten outside the home has increased in recent years. This is an important factor 
contributing to increasing levels of obesity. Food eaten outside the home is more likely to 
be high in calories and hot food takeaways tend to sell food that is high in fat and salt, 
and low in fibre, fruit and vegetables. Studies show that regular consumption of energy 
dense food from hot food takeaways is associated with weight gain. 
11.105 The NPPF recognises the role that planning can play in better enabling people to live 
healthier lives. Locally, key indicators of health show that there is a need to improve 
health and that obesity is one of the key issues. Locating interacting uses, e.g. homes, 
workplaces and shops, so that it is easy for people to walk or cycle between them, rather 
than depend on use of cars as part of a solution. Childhood obesity has specifically been 
identified as a significant threat to children with additional implications for long-term 
adult health. 
11.106 In 2008 the Government published Healthy Weight, Healthy Lives which encouraged 
councils to use planning powers to control more carefully the rising numbers of fast-food 
takeaways. Whilst this document is now dated, the 2013 Public Health reforms were 
based upon returning much of the responsibility for local public health to individual 
councils and health and well-being boards. There remains a clear message highlighting 
that local planning authorities should work with public health leads and organisations to 
understand and take account of the health status and needs of the local population. It is 
appropriate, therefore, to consider what steps can be taken here. Currently, both 
recorded and estimated levels of adult excess weight in North Lincolnshire are above the 
national average, with an estimated 70% of adults obese or overweight, compared with 
65% nationally. The risk of childhood obesity is therefore likely to be higher locally, and as 
adult rates increase, so does the risk amongst children. 
11.107 The council’s aim is to assist local communities in providing restaurants and hot food 
takeaway establishments within the neighbourhoods they serve, while protecting the 
amenity of residents in these areas. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 275 BURIAL AND CEMETERY PROVISION 
11.108 Cemeteries and burial grounds are a necessary community need. This function is not only 
related to a practical social land use, but also has recreational and archaeological value 
in terms of providing open space and historical information. 
11.109 The council has Woodlands Crematorium with chapel facilities and burial facilities in 
eight public cemeteries. Other cemeteries in North Lincolnshire are Crosby Cemetery, 
Brumby Cemetery, Brigg Cemetery, Scawby Cemetery, Barton Cemetery, Barrow 
Cemetery and Winterton Cemetery. 
POLICY CSC13: BURIAL GROUNDS AND CEMETERY PROVISION 
1. Cemetery sites are proposed at the following location: 
a. Land at Plymouth Road, Scunthorpe 
2. If a need is identified for any other new cemeteries or burial grounds in North 
Lincolnshire, sites should be located adjacent or in close proximity to existing 
cemetery and crematoria facilities. 
11.110 A high priority is placed on protecting groundwater within principal aquifers and 
groundwater catchments used for drinking water supply, and new larger cemetery 
developments in such areas might not be appropriate. 
11.111 A need has been identified to extend the existing cemetery facilities on land at Plymouth 
Road, Scunthorpe. The policy also addresses the possible need for further cemetery 
facilities arising in North Lincolnshire. If a need does arise, sites should be located 
adjacent or in close proximity to existing cemeteries and crematoria in order to help to 
reduce vehicle journeys and trip lengths. 
11.112 More information regarding protecting groundwater is contained within ‘the Environment 
Agency’s approach to groundwater protection’ on GOV.UK’. 
POLICY CSC14: CHURCHES, PRAYER HOUSES AND OTHER PLACES OF
WORSHIP 
1. Applications for planning permission for the change of use of properties and the 
extension of existing places of worship, and the construction of new buildings as 
places of worship will be approved subject to the following criteria: 
a. the property should preferably be detached. Applications for the conversion of semi-
detached or terraced houses to places of worship will only be approved where the 
adjoining property is in some form of non-residential use or is occupied by a religious 
official associated with the proposed development; and, 
b. the proposal does not lead to loss of amenity to any residential properties in the 
vicinity. 
2. Any consent may be restricted to the specific use applied for, or to only some of the 
other uses within Use Class F.1. 
Page 276 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 11.113 The council’s aim is to assist local communities in providing places of worship for all 
denominations and religions within the neighbourhoods they serve, while protecting the 
amenity of residents in these areas. 
TOURISM AND VISITOR ACCOMMODATION 
11.114 Tourism is a growth industry, which contributes £186.5m to the North Lincolnshire 
economy. Over 2,000 people are employed locally in the industry. In 2018 there were 
3.1m day visits to North Lincolnshire attractions. 
11.115 There are currently 1,266 serviced bed spaces and over 40 visitor attractions, which 
include art galleries, historic market towns, the birthplace of world methodism, 
Normanby Hall, the Humber Estuary, Thorne and Crowle Moors and the surrounding 
attractive countryside have a huge role to play in developing and moving forward North 
Lincolnshire’s tourism offer. Any development that potentially brings additional people to 
these sites would increase recreational disturbance and may require assessment under 
the Habitats and Species Regulations. 
11.116 Day visits are the main income for tourism sector businesses. The area’s geographic 
position – within an hour’s drive of major centres of population such as Leeds, Bradford, 
Sheffield and Hull – makes it an easily accessible and attractive proposition. The majority 
of visitors to our market towns are from within the UK. Of those asked, 77 per cent said 
they were on a leisure trip, 12 per cent visiting friends and relatives and 11 per cent on 
special shopping trips. Of those who are visiting market towns, 44 per cent of visitors 
said they would be happy to return to the town and likely to make a repeat visit. 
11.117 The development of tourism in North Lincolnshire is important in providing economic 
support for local people and for reinforcing local culture and local distinctiveness. Tourism 
can also provide a strong impetus for environmental enhancement, including the 
restoration of historic buildings, the interpretation of archaeological sites, the 
conservation of past industrial areas, and the enhancement of the countryside and water 
environment. 
11.118 If insensitively handled, however, it can lead to a rapid dilution of local character, cause 
damage to sensitive areas and threaten local qualities that attract visitors in the first 
place. 
11.119 North Lincolnshire Council is committed to enhancing the visitor offer by focusing on five 
themes: 
• Best place for outdoor activities 
• Best place for culture, heritage and arts 
• Best place for food and accommodation 
• Best place for rural countryside, nature and green space 
• Best place for market experience 
POLICY CSC15: TOURISM AND VISITOR ATTRACTIONS 
1. The visitor sector is an important and resilient part of the area’s economy. In order to 
raise the quality of the visitor experience, the provision of new visitor attractions or the 
expansion of existing attractions will be permitted provided: 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 277 a. it is located in sustainable and accessible locations within, adjoining or close to the 
Major Sub-Regional Centre, Principal Towns or Large Service Centres or can be made 
so; 
b. it is appropriate to the site’s location in terms of scale, design, layout and materials; 
c. It does not have an unacceptable adverse impact on the area’s valuable natural, built 
or heritage assets and helps to enhance any affected asset, including through the 
provision of measurable Biodiversity Net Gain; 
d. it can demonstrate the viability of the new attraction or where appropriate helps 
support the viability of an existing attraction; and, 
e. it enhances and complements existing visitor attractions or priorities in the area and 
supports the development of a year-round visitor economy and/or extends visitor 
stays. 
2. Where a countryside location is necessary the development should: 
a. meet identified visitor needs; 
b. support local employment and community services; 
c. ensure adequate infrastructure; and, 
d. relate to an existing tourism asset that is based upon a site specific natural or heritage 
feature. 
Large Scale Development 
3. Comprehensive master planning and a robust business plan to articulate the potential 
impacts, proposed mitigation and economic, social and environmental benefits should 
accompany applications for large scale new or expanding visitor attractions. 
11.120 New visitor attractions will be directed to accessible and sustainable locations in the first 
instance in order to address the need to develop the visitor offer and encourage visitors 
to stay longer. Where development is not in accessible locations it will be focussed on the 
conversion of existing buildings and developments that contribute to rural diversification, 
enjoyment of the countryside and access to heritage. 
11.121 Planning for tourism should make the most of our assets, enriching them rather than 
harming the very character, quality and beauty that makes them attractive to residents 
and visitors. This can be achieved by ensuring development is appropriately located and 
levels of visitor activity are not likely to significantly affect protected sites and species, 
particularly those of National and European Importance. 
11.122 To encourage a broad range of visitors in addition to day visitors, and to meet the 
accommodation needs of businesses in the area, it is necessary to offer a wide range of 
visitor accommodation including hotels, bed and breakfasts and self-catering facilities. It 
is also important to consider sculpture parks and more attractions for children aged 10-
18 to increase the offer for this age group in the area. 
11.123 In terms of existing provision, Scunthorpe in particular lacks hotel accommodation of the 
size and quality to fully capitalise on the market for accommodating local business 
visitors. The North Lincolnshire area as a whole acts as both a visitor attraction in itself 
and as a touring base for the wider Lincolnshire and North Humber Bank area, and as 
such, offers wide opportunities for expanding accommodation. 
Page 278 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY CSC16: HOTEL AND GUEST HOUSE ACCOMMODATION 
1. Within defined settlement boundaries new hotels, guest houses and bed and 
breakfast accommodation will be permitted provided that the development proposed 
is compatible with its surroundings in terms of siting, scale, design, materials and 
landscaping, and neighbouring residential amenity will not be detrimentally affected. 
2. In the open countryside outside defined settlement boundaries planning permission 
will be granted for: 
a. the extension of existing hotels, guest houses, public houses and farmhouse/bed and 
breakfast accommodation; 
b. the provision of visitor accommodation within the curtilage of existing public houses 
and restaurants; 
c. the change of use of residential premises; and, 
d. the conversion of rural buildings; including those of architectural or historic merit 
provided that the development proposed; 
e. is compatible with its surroundings in terms of siting, scale, design materials and 
landscaping; 
f. does not have an adverse effect on the character and appearance of the open 
countryside; 
g. would not be harmful to highway safety or have a detrimental impact on the free flow 
of traffic on the adjacent highway network; and, 
h. does not harm neighbouring residential amenity. 
3. Such accommodation will not be permissible close to the Humber Estuary attractions 
for reasons of high flood risk and biodiversity impact. 
11.124 The policy emphasises how hotel development can bring economic and employment 
benefits for the local community. 
CAMPING AND CARAVAN SITES 
11.125 Camping and caravan sites can make a valuable contribution towards providing 
inexpensive visitor accommodation in the area. Such facilities can however be a 
particularly intrusive element in the open countryside. A distinction must also be made 
between static caravan sites and chalets (which can be highly intrusive), and touring 
caravan sites, which are generally of a smaller scale with caravans removed during the 
winter and problems of off-season storage being largely avoided. 
11.126 Touring caravan sites tend not to be intrusive in the landscape. Static holiday caravan 
and chalet sites are an all year round feature in the countryside, and place demands on 
infrastructure and services. They do, however, have a generally higher standard and 
wider range of facilities than touring sites and can contribute to the development of 
tourism and the rural economy. By directing the development of these sites mainly to 
principal recreational attractions, their environmental impact on the countryside can be 
minimised. Sporadic development, however, can cause uncertainty in infrastructure 
provision and place undue pressure on the surrounding locality and rural communities. 
11.127 Transit and touring camping or caravan facilities are generally a less damaging feature 
on the open countryside than sites for static holiday caravans and chalets. The need for 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 279 on-site facilities and in some instances warden’s accommodation, is recognised but 
these should be restricted to the site’s immediate needs. A touring site should not be seen 
as a reason for erecting new dwellings or additional facilities such as shops, cafés and 
petrol stations in the countryside, which would not be permitted under other policies in 
this Local Plan. 
POLICY CSC17: CAMPING AND CARAVAN SITES 
1. New caravan and camping facilities (both touring and static) will be granted planning 
permission provided: 
a. the development is closely associated with existing or proposed recreational and 
tourist attractions and is of an appropriate scale having regard to the size and type of 
attraction with which it is associated; 
b. The site can be suitably screened by existing land forms and includes the provision of 
a scheme of landscaping which contributes to measurable Biodiversity Net Gain; and, 
c. the provision of any built development is restricted to those essential facilities which 
are required to service the site. 
2. In granting planning permission conditions will be imposed, where necessary, 
restricting the use of the site to holiday lettings. 
3. A change of use of existing transit and touring caravan and camping facilities to static 
holiday caravans or chalets will not be permitted unless the site is: 
a. closely associated with a major existing or proposed recreational and tourist 
attraction; 
b. the development is of an appropriate scale in relation to its setting and there is no 
material adverse impact upon the amenity and character of the locality; 
c. existing sewerage facilities are capable of being upgraded (including connection to the 
mains sewerage network where appropriate and practicable) to accommodate the 
intensified use of the site. Conditions will be imposed requiring such improvements in 
landscaping and screening as are necessitated by the intensified use of the site; and, 
d. the site is not in an area with a high probability of flooding, unless a site specific flood 
risk assessment and flood emergency plan have demonstrated the risks can be 
adequately managed. 
Page 280 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 12 Planning for a Sustainable Supply
of Minerals 
INTRODUCTION 
12.1 Minerals play a vital role in society. Aggregates and other types of construction minerals 
are needed to build homes, factories, offices and transport infrastructure. Other minerals 
are used in industry, food production and agriculture. Energy minerals like oil and gas 
provide the country with power and heating. Whilst seeking to deliver development, 
increase our quality of life, and create sustainable communities, it is essential that we 
plan appropriately for minerals. Doing so ensures that the need for minerals by society 
and the economy, together with the impacts of extraction and processing on 
communities and the environment, are managed in an integrated way. 
12.2 Minerals are also a finite resource and can only be extracted where they are found. This 
means it is important to make best use of them and secure their long-term conservation. 
North Lincolnshire’s geology ensures the presence of several different mineral resources 
in the area. These include sand and gravel, limestone, chalk, silica sand, clay, ironstone 
and peat as well as hydrocarbon (oil and gas) deposits. We have five quarries extracting 
either chalk or limestone and four extracting either sand and gravel, or silica sand. 
Ironstone extraction ceased some time ago, as has peat extraction. There is one 
operational oil well. The British Geological Survey (BGS) report on mineral resources in 
former Humberside area and its accompanying map identifies the type and extent of the 
minerals present in North Lincolnshire. 
MINERAL SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS 
12.3 As highlighted above, minerals are essential for society and the wider economy. National 
policy is clear that there is a need to maintain an adequate and steady supply of 
minerals, particularly aggregates, to meet local as well as national requirements. 
POLICY MIN1: MINERAL SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS 
1. To support a steady and adequate supply of minerals including aggregates and 
industrial mineral, the Council will seek to make available sufficient land. In doing so 
the Council will seek to maintain a minimum crushed rock landbank of at least 10 
years and a minimum sand and gravel landbank of at least seven years at all times. 
The Council will monitor mineral supply requirements and review and update as 
necessary throughout the plan period, using the latest available data from the annual 
Local Aggregate Assessment. 
2. Evidence shows that North Lincolnshire should make provision for 3.6 million tonnes 
of sand and gravel and 8.6 million tonnes of crushed rock over the plan period. This 
equates to: 
a. Sand & Gravel – 0.18 million tonnes per annum; 
b. Crushed Rock – 0.43 million tonnes per annum. 
3. Appropriate landbanks will also be maintained for silica sand and brick clay, in line 
with national policy. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 281 4. Provision will be derived from existing operational sites, additional allocations and 
new sites that meet the policy requirements for mineral extractions, as well as those 
of the wider Local Plan. Permission will only be granted for mineral extraction where 
it can be demonstrated that the extraction of minerals will not result in adverse effects 
on the natural environment in accordance with policy MIN3. 
12.4 To identify future requirements and demand for aggregates, we have to prepare a Local 
Aggregate Assessment (LAA) that is updated each year, based on annual survey of 
mineral operators. The Council works with its neighbours in the Humber area to prepare 
this as a joint piece of work. Future supply and demand is based on a rolling average of 
10-year sales data and other local information. It looks at all supply options including the 
availability of secondary or recycled aggregates as well as imports and exports. 
12.5 In making this decision the Council must have regard to the annual average sales figure 
for the last three years, with the purpose of identifying the general trend of demand as 
part of the consideration of whether it might be appropriate to increase supply. Annual 
figures over the ten year period leading up to the commencement of the plan period 
(2020 to 2038) and the annual average for ten year and three year periods set out below. 
The figures shown are for the Humber sub-region, based on the 2019 version of the LAA. 
TABLE 12.1: AGGREGATE SALES IN THE HUMBER SUB-REGION (2009 TO 2018) 
Year Sand & Gravel 
Sales (million
tonnes) Crushed Rock Sales 
(million tonnes) 
2009 1 0.06 
2010 0.59 0.16 
2011 0.71 0.23 
2012 0.56 0.21 
2013 0.92 0.21 
2014 0.92 0.75 
2015 0.92 0.75 
2016 0.9 0.85 
2017 0.84 0.86 
2018 0.92 0.98 
Ten Year Average 0.83 0.53 
Three Year Average 0.89 0.9 
12.6 Work has been undertaken to apportion these sales to the north and south banks of the 
Humber – i.e. East Riding of Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire as the only mineral 
producing areas – as part of evidence base being prepared to support minerals planning 
in both areas. East Riding of Yorkshire and Hull City Council have prepared a minerals 
apportionment paper to support their Joint Minerals Plan and to be read alongside the 
LAA. This work suggests that East Riding and Hull should plan for 0.81 million tonnes per 
annum of sand and gravel and 0.13 million tonnes per annum of crushed rock. 
12.7 This work and LAA therefore gives an indicative apportionment (based on 10 year 
average sales) to the south bank of the Humber of 0.15 million tonnes per annum of sand 
and gravel) and 0.27 million tonnes per annum of crushed rock. This would give an 
overall indicative requirement in North Lincolnshire up to 2038 of 2.85 million tonnes and 
Page 282 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5.13 million tonnes, for sand and gravel and crushed rock respectively. A similar 
apportionment paper has been produced alongside the Local Plan. 
12.8 It should be noted that sales and reserves information for North Lincolnshire over the last 
ten years, particularly for sand and gravel, is limited or incomplete due to lack of 
responses from site operators, as well as the need for commercial confidentiality. The 
council will continue to work with operators to identify more accurate information. 
12.9 The NPPF sets out clear policy requirements in relation to a number of minerals. It 
requires the maintenance of landbanks of at least 7 years for sand and gravel, 10 years 
for crushed rock, 10 years for silica sand sites (15 years where significant capital 
investment is required) and 25 years for clay. It also requires us to consider how to meet 
the demand for minerals for the repair of historic assets. Landbanks are the stock of 
planning permissions for mineral extraction over a specified period of time. Information 
about landbanks in North Lincolnshire, in particular for sand and gravel, is limited. These 
will be monitored through the LAA and annual surveys undertaken on behalf of the 
Yorkshire & Humber Aggregates Working Party (YHAWP). 
12.10 Existing reserves (as of 2018) for sand and gravel are 1.5 million tonnes (based on 
operator and planning application information) and 5.7 million tonnes for crushed rock. 
Based on the indicative apportionments, outlined above this would identify landbanks of 
8.05 years and 13.5years respectively, meeting the government requirements. It should 
be noted that this might change as sites are developed out or planning permissions 
expire. 
MINERAL SAFEGUARDING 
12.11 Minerals can only be worked where they are found. This means that it is important to 
make sure that key mineral resources are safeguarded from development that may result 
in their sterilisation, thus preventing their extraction. National policy requires mineral 
planning authorities to safeguard mineral resources via Mineral Safeguarding Areas 
(MSAs) and that known locally and nationally important resources are not sterilised by 
non-mineral development. It must stressed that there is no presumption that resources 
defined within MSAs will be worked. MSAs are tools to alert prospective developers to 
the presence of a mineral resource. 
POLICY MIN2: MINERAL SAFEGUARDING 
1. To ensure the long-term conservation of nationally and locally important minerals in 
North Lincolnshire, Mineral Safeguarding Areas (MSAs) are defined to prevent their 
sterilisation by non-minerals development. The following minerals are considered to 
be important: 
a. Chalk; 
b. Lincolnshire Limestone; 
c. Sand & Gravel; 
d. Silica Sand; and, 
e. Brick Clay. 
2. Buffer areas of 250m & 500m will be established in order to maintain proximal 
safeguarding around sand and gravel, and crushed rock resources. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 283 3. Where non-mineral development is proposed within a Minerals Safeguarding Area 
(unless it constitutes development that is exempt from the mineral safeguarding policy 
as listed within Appendix 3), as defined on the Policies Map, a minerals assessment 
should be provided to demonstrate that either: 
a. The mineral is not of economic value or potential value, or does not exist; or 
b. That extraction of the mineral would not be physically or economically viable, 
practicable or environmentally acceptable; or 
c. The mineral can be extracted or partially extracted satisfactorily, having regard to 
Policy MIN3, prior to the non-minerals development taking place without adversely 
affecting the viability or deliverability of the non-minerals development; or 
d. The incompatible development is of a temporary nature that can be completed and 
the site returned to a condition that would not prevent future mineral extraction; or 
e. Material considerations indicate that the need for the development overrides the 
presumption for mineral safeguarding, such that sterilisation of the mineral can be 
permitted following the exploration of opportunities for prior extraction. 
4. Prior extraction of safeguarded minerals will be supported in MSAs, where it is 
necessary for non-mineral development to take place, subject to meeting the 
requirements of policy MIN3, and other policies within the Plan. 
5. Mineral sites (excluding dormant sites) and associated infrastructure that supports 
the supply of minerals in North Lincolnshire will be safeguarded against development 
that would unnecessarily sterilise the sites and infrastructure or prejudice or 
jeopardise their use by creating incompatible land uses nearby. 
12.12 Mineral Safeguard Areas (MSAs) have been defined for North Lincolnshire’s key mineral 
resources to ensure that they are not sterilised by non-mineral development, covering 
sand and gravel, chalk, limestone, silica sand, brick clay and ironstone. They are essential 
for the construction sector as well as the production of industrial products. Silica sand 
which is used in the glass, ceramics and foundry sector, for example, is classed as being 
of national importance, due to limited number of areas where it is found. North 
Lincolnshire is one of eighteen areas of the UK where it is extracted. 
12.13 North Lincolnshire’s Minerals Safeguarding Areas (MSAs) have been developed in 
accordance with guidance and using mineral resource mapping information produced by 
the British Geological Survey (BGS). In some cases, they cover extensive areas of North 
Lincolnshire, and ensure that the mineral safeguarding is considered appropriately in the 
Local Plan and in determining planning applications. Where proposals for development 
in MSAs are put forward, they should be accompanied by a mineral resource assessment 
(see Appendix 3), unless it constitutes an exempt use (see Appendix 2). 
12.14 Prior extraction of safeguarded minerals will be encouraged in MSAs, where it is 
necessary for non-mineral development to occur. However, this is dependent upon 
whether it can be done without unacceptable adverse impacts on the environment and 
amenity of local communities and achievable within an acceptable timescale. Where 
planning permission is granted, planning conditions or obligations will be imposed to 
ensure that the mineral resource can be adequately worked and the site restored to a 
satisfactory after-use, should the following development be delayed or not implemented. 
12.15 The NPPF also includes a requirement to safeguard existing, planned and potential 
mineral infrastructure. This can include rail heads, wharfs, depots, coating and batching 
plants. In the case of North Lincolnshire there are no specific rail heads or wharves that 
handle minerals. However, there are a number of port and wharf facilities along the 
Rivers Humber and Trent that have the potential to be used for landing marine 
Page 284 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) aggregates, if required. Policy EC6 seeks to safeguard these facilities as part of the area’s 
transport strategic infrastructure. There are a number of concrete batching plants in the 
area, particularly in the Scunthorpe and Bottesford Urban Area, as well as an asphalt 
plant. Singleton Birch have a lime manufacturing plant at Melton Ross. There are also 
several facilities for the production of recycled aggregates associated with the area’s 
three limestone quarries as well as at Elsham Wold (Stoneledge). 
MINERAL EXTRACTION 
12.16 As well as ensuring a steady and adequate supply of minerals, their efficient use, and 
safeguarding key resources and infrastructure, it is essential that the impacts of all types 
of minerals development, including extraction and processing, on their surroundings are 
managed appropriately. The Local Plan will need to include policies to manage the 
impact of all forms of development, including minerals, on the wider environment and 
communities. The Government’s Planning Practice Guidance sets out some of the 
environmental considerations that need to be taken into account when assessing 
proposals for minerals extraction. Examples include noise, dust, air quality, lighting, traffic 
landscape and flood risk. 
POLICY MIN3: MINERAL EXTRACTION 
1. Development for mineral extraction, except for energy mineral extraction, must 
demonstrate the extent, quality, significance and need for the resources to be 
extracted. All types of mineral extraction must ensure that: 
a. The historic environment, highway safety and human health is conserved, managed 
and enhanced as appropriate; 
b. Impacts to the natural environment, including water and soil quality and resources, are 
identified , mitigated and enhanced, for example through biodiversity net gain through 
the restoration of the extraction site (see policy MIN8: Restoration, Aftercare and 
Afteruse of Mineral Extraction Sites); 
c. Residential amenity and human health is protected from issues including noise, 
vibration, water pollution and air quality; 
d. Workings will not increase the potential of flood risks or surface water flooding; 
e. Any carbon emissions are identified and minimised to an acceptable level and are 
offset where practicable; 
f. Essential infrastructure is protected; and, 
g. The transportation of minerals makes use of sustainable modes of transport, wherever 
possible. 
2. Where the above cannot be ensured, the benefits of mineral extraction must 
outweigh any likely harm and significant justification and mitigation must be 
provided. 
12.17 This policy sets out the Council’s approach for dealing with planning applications for 
mineral extraction and the key criteria that will be considered, alongside all other relevant 
policies of this plan. 
12.18 Proposals for mineral extraction (including extensions to existing sites), will be required to 
robustly justify the requirement for extraction, specifically in relation to the need for the 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 285 site to maintain supply in line with the latest Local Aggregate Assessment and the 
maintenance of the aggregates landbank. 
12.19 The possibility of significant environmental and social effects associated must be fully 
understood before consideration can be given as to whether the development is 
acceptable. 
12.20 The applicant will be expected to provide detailed information of the likely significant 
effect of the development on human beings, flora, fauna, soil, water, air, climate, 
landscape, material assets and cultural and historical heritage. Potential cumulative 
impacts must also be considered. 
RECYCLED & SECONDARY AGGREGATES 
12.21 As minerals are a finite resource, it is important to ensure that they are used in a way that 
is appropriate, efficient and sustainable. This can be done by encouraging the re-use and 
recycling of suitable materials to help reduce the amount of primary mineral extraction. 
This is supported by national policy and guidance. In doing so, the contribution that 
secondary and recycled minerals can make to the overall supply should be taken into 
account. 
POLICY MIN4: RECYCLED & SECONDARY AGGREGATES 
1. The use of recycled and secondary aggregates will be supported in order to reduce 
the reliance on primary aggregates and contribute towards sustainable development. 
Proposals for facilities for secondary and recycled aggregates will be permitted where 
it can be demonstrated that potentially adverse impacts are able to be avoided and/or 
minimised to acceptable levels and that the proposal is compliant with relevant Local 
Plan policies. 
2. Preference will be given towards sites at the following locations: 
a. Mineral extraction sites with existing processing plants; 
b. On-site as an ancillary activity to construction or demolition projects; 
c. Committed waste management facilities or within suitable areas for waste 
management where the proposed use accords with the type of waste use either 
existing at that location, or is complementary to the current economic role, status and 
uses of the employment area (where applicable); and, 
d. Existing industrial areas or on land that is permitted or allocated for general 
employment development. 
3. For sites where the primary use is temporary (e.g. mineral extraction and where 
associated with construction or demolition projects), permission will be granted for a 
period not exceeding the permitted life of the primary use, unless exceptional 
circumstances would justify the retention of the facility for a longer period. 
4. Specifically, regarding proposals on mineral extraction sites, permission will only be 
granted where there is no conflict with the approved restoration scheme, unless 
exceptional circumstances exist that would justify the retention of the facility and an 
appropriately amended restoration scheme could be delivered. 
5. Development of temporary facilities for the recovery and recycling of inert materials 
as an ancillary activity to construction projects, must demonstrate that the materials 
will be recycled and reused (as far as practicable) on-site. 
Page 286 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 12.22 Recycled and secondary minerals are those that, after processing or treatment, can 
potentially be used to substitute for primary or land-won aggregate and provide a more 
sustainable source of aggregate for construction. They may be derived from processing 
of construction, demolition and extraction waste (CDE) (recycled aggregate) or may be 
by-products of mineral extraction or processing, or industrial processes (secondary 
aggregate). 
12.23 Nationally, 74 million tonnes of recycled and secondary material was produced in 2017, 
representing 30% of the British aggregates market. The Government’s National & 
Regional Guidelines for Aggregate Provision (2005 to 2020), assume that recycled and 
secondary aggregates will form a proportion of England’s aggregate supply. In respect 
of the Yorkshire & Humber region, they are expected to contribute 133,000 tonnes out of 
a total requirement for aggregates of 431,000 tonnes, between 2005 and 2020. 
12.24 Information on the amount of available recycled and secondary aggregates being 
produced in the area is variable and not considered to be completely reliable. It is 
therefore difficult to accurately assess the role that they play in aggregate supply and 
demand. In many cases CDE waste is processed on site using mobile plant and then 
either reused on site or taken direct to other construction sites for use. Collecting 
information from these sites is extremely difficult because of their temporary nature. 
However, the Local Aggregate Assessment will monitor production levels. In 2013, the 
estimated level of recycled and secondary aggregate production/sales in North 
Lincolnshire was over 50,000 tonnes. However, this may not generally be accurate. 
12.25 There are a number of sites where the production of recycled and secondary aggregates 
take place in North Lincolnshire. Some associated with existing quarries, whilst others 
are located in employment areas. 
ENERGY MINERALS 
12.26 Oil and gas (also known as 'hydrocarbons') are primary sources of energy and have a 
vital role in the UK economy. Government policy is to ensure that the country has a secure 
and diverse supply of energy sources, including the use of indigenous hydrocarbons from 
conventional and unconventional sources. The majority of oil and gas in the UK 
originates off-shore, for example in the North Sea, however some does come from on-
shore extraction. 
POLICY MIN5: ENERGY MINERALS (OIL & GAS/HYDROCARBONS) 
1. Proposals for the exploration, appraisal and production of conventional and 
unconventional hydrocarbons will be supported where they are consistent with the 
following principles: 
a. This takes place within areas covered by Petroleum Exploration & Development 
Licences (PEDLs) and hydrocarbon extraction sites, as shown on the Policies Map. 
b. Support will only be given to applications for energy minerals that significantly benefit 
the economy and that any cumulative and adverse impacts on the environment, such 
as water quality, or residential amenity, such as noise, can be avoided or mitigated to 
the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority. Proposals much also demonstrate 
how they will provide benefits to the natural environment, such as through biodiversity 
enhancement and where contamination has occurred as a result of extraction, 
measures must be employed to sufficiently remediate the site following 
decommissioning. Adequate separation should be maintained between residential 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 287 buildings and other sensitive receptors where deemed necessary with regard to the 
proposal type and the technical evidence available. 
c. Proposals for the exploration, appraisal and production stage should include: 
i. A detailed scheme of working, 
ii. A plan showing the locations where surface work and underground operations 
will occur, and, 
iii. A plan showing the proximity of other oil or gas fields 
2. In addition to the above criteria, proposals at the production stage should include: 
a. A completed appraisal of the hydrocarbon resource field; 
b. A comprehensive scheme for the full development of the hydrocarbon resource within 
an agreed timescale; and 
c. The use of existing facilities for the development of any additional fields discovered 
unless the applicant satisfies the Council that this would not be technically feasible 
and any adverse impacts can be mitigated. 
12.27 Conventional oil and gas refers to oil and gas resources which are found in relatively 
porous sandstone or limestone rock formations. These resources are located both off-
shore and onshore. Extraction methods generally involve drilling a borehole down to the 
porous rock where oil or gas has formed in a reservoir. Because the oil and gas resources 
can flow relatively freely within the porous rock, all that is needed is for the gas or oil to 
be pumped out of the ground using beam pumps ('nodding donkeys') or electric pumps. 
A minority of conventional sites use low volume hydraulic fracturing techniques to 
provide downhole stimulation to improve the recovery of the energy mineral. 
12.28 Unconventional gas and oil resources are found in fine-grained sedimentary rocks 
known as shales. Shale rocks are very common and are often the source rock for 
conventional gas fields. Shale gas and oil is trapped in the rock, typically at depths 
between 1,500 and 4,200 metres below the surface. It cannot be recovered using 
conventional oil and gas extraction techniques, hence the use of ‘hydraulic fracturing’ 
and other unconventional techniques, including but not limited to acidisation. 
12.29 The on-shore oil and gas industry is well established in the United Kingdom. There are 
120 on-shore sites with 250 operating wells producing conventional oil and gas across 
the country. In North Lincolnshire, reserves of conventional oil have been discovered at 
Crosby Warren to the north east of Scunthorpe, as well as in the Broughton and Brigg 
areas. The only area that has been worked is at Crosby Warren, where oil has been 
produced since the mid 1980s. Other exploratory wells have been drilled since the mid 
1940s, looking for conventional oil and gas as well as coalbed methane. These wells are 
now mostly plugged and abandoned. In the case of the coalbed methane wells, there 
has been no further activity since exploration took place. 
12.30 The British Geological Survey (BGS) has estimated that the UK has more shale gas than 
previously expected (1,300 trillion cubic feet of shale gas in the north of England and the 
Midlands). A BGS study, published in 2013, examined a large area of the Bowland shales 
of northern England, stretching from Merseyside in the west to the Humber in east, and 
Loughborough in the south to Pickering in the north, and its potential for shale gas to be 
present. 
12.31 The study suggests that the geology beneath part of North Lincolnshire may contain 
commercially viable shale gas resources. However, the exact extent of any resource and 
whether it is economically and commercially viable to extract is not clear. To date there 
have not been proposals to explore for or extract shale gas in North Lincolnshire. 
Page 288 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 12.32 National energy policy is that oil and gas make an essential contribution to the country’s 
prosperity and quality of life. While renewable energy must form an increasing part of the 
national energy picture, oil and gas remain key elements of the energy system for years 
to come. The Committee on Climate Change in the net zero report found that due to 
production decline from the UK offshore oil and gas fields, that the shortfall between 
domestic energy supply and demand will grow. There is also a commitment to 
maximising indigenous resources, subject to safety and environmental considerations. 
The Government, on 4th November 2019, through the Energy Policy Update: Written 
Ministerial Statement – HCWS68 placed a presumption against issuing consents for 
hydraulic fracturing. This has removed Government support for unconventional 
hydrocarbon extraction using hydraulic fracturing techniques. Future applications for 
hydraulic fracturing will be considered on their own merits and evidence will be required 
to address concerns relating to the prediction and management of seismic activity. 
12.33 The NPPF states that for oil and gas including unconventional hydrocarbons, minerals 
planning authorities should develop criteria based policies that clearly distinguish 
between the three phases of development (exploration, appraisal and production) and to 
address constraints that apply within licensed areas. All three stages require planning 
permission, and there is no presumption in favour of permission being granted at 
subsequent stages. 
12.34 The three phases are: 
• Exploration: this phase seeks to acquire geological data to establish whether 
hydrocarbons are present. This may involve drilling and, in the case of shale gas, fracking. 
• Appraisal: this is where the operator needs further information about the extent of 
reserves and its characteristics to establish whether it can be economically exploited. It 
includes hydraulic fracturing and is usually a relatively short-term activity, typically 
between six months and two years. 
• Production: This is the longer-term process of extracting the oil and gas and will involve 
associated infrastructure such as pipelines, processing facilities and storage tanks. 
12.35 It should be noted that the planning system for oil and gas development operates 
alongside other regulatory regimes. This includes: 
• The Oil and Gas Authority (OGA) issue Petroleum Exploration and Development Licenses 
(PEDLs) under powers granted by the Petroleum Act 1998. The current licensed areas in 
North Lincolnshire are shown on the Policies Map. PEDLs allow companies to pursue a 
range of oil and gas exploration activities, subject to necessary drilling/development 
consents and planning permission. The OGA are also responsible for assessing risk and 
monitoring of seismic activity, as well as granting consent for flaring or venting; 
• The Environment Agency (EA) is responsible for protecting water resources (including 
groundwater aquifers), ensuring appropriate treatment and disposal of mining waste, 
emissions to air, and suitable treatment and managing any naturally occurring 
radioactive materials; 
• The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) regulates the safety aspects of all phases of 
extraction, in particular responsibility for ensuring the appropriate design and 
construction of a well casing for any borehole. 
12.36 In view of the potential risks associated with exploration and production of both 
conventional and unconventional sources of oil and gas, it is essential operators apply 
the highest environmental standards so that groundwater pollution does not occur. 
Operators are encouraged to begin communications with regulators early, to understand 
the appropriate planning and permitting controls. More information is contained within 
‘the Environment Agency’s approach to groundwater protection. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 289 12.37 In all cases, the Environment Agency will work with the relevant planning authority 
during the planning consultation process, to ensure the necessary controls are put in 
place through the planning and permitting processes. 
12.38 The Council is responsible for granting permission for the location of any wells and well 
pads, and will impose conditions to ensure that the impact on the land is acceptable. 
12.39 A hydrological assessment will be required in support of any planning application and 
water availability may be a limiting factor in any proposal. 
MINERALS SITE ALLOCATIONS 
12.40 In order to deliver the requirements for minerals outlined in policy MIN1, it will be 
important to identify appropriate sites, areas of search or preferred areas within the Local 
Plan. There are a number of existing mineral extraction sites in North Lincolnshire that 
will continue to make a contribution to supply over the coming years; however, additional 
sites will be required. 
POLICY MIN6: MINERAL SITES 
1. Provision to meet the mineral requirements in North Lincolnshire to 20368 will come 
from sites with planning permission and the following allocations: 
Sites with Planning Permission/Operational Sites 
MIN6-1: Cove Farm, Westwoodside (Sand) 
MIN6-2: Kettleby Parks Quarry (Sand & Gravel) MIN6-3: Melton Ross Quarry (Chalk) MIN6-4: South Ferriby Quarry (Chalk & Shale Clay) MIN6-5: Hibaldstow Quarry (Limestone) MIN6-6: Manton Quarry (Limestone) MIN6-7: Kirton Quarry (Limestone) MIN6-8: Barton East (Clay) MIN6-9: Messingham Quarry (Silica Sand) MIN6-10: Eastfield Farm (Silica Sand) MIN6-11: Crosby Warren (Oil) MIN6-12: Low Melwood Quarry (Clay) MIN6-13: Land north of Brigg Road, Messingham (Silica Sand) MIN6-14: Hibaldstow Quarry (Extension) (Limestone) 
2. All relevant constraints and issues have been identified and mitigation put in place 
through existing planning permissions. It is expected all sites will conform to the 
planning permission, associated conditions, and agreed restoration and aftercare 
plans. 
New Sites/Areas of Search 
MIN6-15: Cove Farm, Westwoodside (Extension) (Sand & Gravel) (Area of Search) MIN6-16: Land at Holme Lane (Silica Sand) (New Site) 
Page 290 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) MIN6-17: Eastfield Farm, Winteringham (Silica Sand) (New Site) 
MIN6-18: Land South of Composition Lane, Winteringham (Silica Sand) (Area of 
Search) 
3. The Council will support alternative mineral extraction sites where it has been 
demonstrated by the applicant, to the satisfaction of the mineral planning authority, 
that there is a need for additional mineral resource that cannot be met through the 
allocated mineral extraction sites. 
4. Where proposals come forward for mineral extraction on the above sites, applications 
should be supported by a range of assessments that address potential environmental 
impacts including air quality, biodiversity, drainage, dust, ecology, flood risk, heritage/ 
archaeology, hydrology, landscape/visual impact, noise and transport/highways. In 
some cases an Environmental Statement may be required. All new developments for 
mineral extraction will be required to demonstrate how any environmental impacts 
have been mitigated and deliver environmental benefits such as biodiversity net gain. 
All proposals should include a restoration plan (as required in policy MIN8). 
5. All above the sites will be identified on the Policies Map. 
12.41 The sites/areas of search listed above, will ensure that North Lincolnshire continues to 
ensure a steady and adequate supply of minerals in line with national policy. As 
mentioned, a number of existing operational and permitted sites will continue during the 
lifetime of the Local Plan, until extraction ceases and they are restored for a beneficial 
afteruse. These sites benefit from planning permissions and should continue to be 
operated in line with the conditions attached to them. 
12.42 The new sites listed above consist of those considered suitable, when assessed through 
the Call for Sites processes (2017 & 2018). In the case of the Cove Farm extension site, it 
was granted planning permission in 2009, with a condition requiring extraction to 
commence by 1st November 2015. This was subsequently amended in 2013 to push 
back commencement to 1st November 2018, however this has not occurred. Based on 
the planning permissions, it was felt appropriate to identify it as an Area of Search. 
12.43 All proposals that come forward on the new site allocations will be accompanied by a 
range of assessments to address key environmental impacts. Any prospective applicant 
should discuss the exact type and nature of assessments with the Council when putting 
together their proposals. 
12.44 North Lincolnshire has a number of historic stonepits identified in the Historic England 
(previously English Heritage) Strategic Stone Study. 
BORROW PITS 
12.45 ‘Borrow pits’ are temporary mineral workings opened locally to supply material for a 
specific construction project. This would normally be a large project where a substantial 
amount of aggregate needs to be supplied over a relatively short period. Examples are 
road building schemes or the construction of a reservoir, although their use in association 
with smaller projects is not unknown. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 291 POLICY MIN7: BORROW PITS & ANCILLARY EXTRACTION 
1. Permission will be granted for the development of borrow pits and extraction 
occurring as an ancillary activity, where it can be demonstrated that one of the 
following applies: 
a. The borrow pit is in close proximity to the construction project it is intended to supply, 
and that extraction of minerals from the borrow pit constitutes the most appropriate 
supply option, with regard to the type and quality of the mineral and proximity to other 
mineral extraction sites. The estimated size of the resource, and proposed extractive 
operations, is commensurate to the estimated needs of the associated construction or 
engineering works; 
b. The extraction of the mineral can be clearly demonstrated to be ancillary to the 
proposed development. The estimated size of the resource, and proposed extractive 
operations, is proportionate to the primary use; 
c. The proposal is for the prior extraction of minerals within a Mineral Safeguarding Area. 
2. In addition to the above, the proposal will need to demonstrate that inert waste arising 
from the associated works or extraction is used in restoration works where 
appropriate and that the proposed development is compliant with relevant local plan 
policies. An assessment of any environmental impacts will also be required with 
mitigation where necessary. Restoration of Borrow Pits following mineral extraction 
should provide for biodiversity enhancement in line with the Biodiversity Opportunity 
Mapping and contribute to the Nature Recovery Network. 
12.46 In considering proposals for borrow pits, the MPA will need to be satisfied that it 
represents the most suitable source of material to meet the specific demand involved, 
and that both working and restoration can be achieved without unacceptable 
environmental impacts. Restoration and aftercare proposals will be expected to be to as 
high a standard as for other mineral workings. 
12.47 In most cases it is preferable to open up a borrow pit close to the project site to ensure 
the availability of the necessary supplies and to avoid the need to import material by lorry 
from further afield. It also provides an opportunity to release otherwise unviable deposits. 
These considerations are particularly important in the Plan area where operational 
quarries may not be available in the immediate locality of a specific construction project. 
RESTORATION & AFTERCARE 
12.48 Minerals extraction, and some types of waste development, is a temporary use of land, 
albeit one that can last for a number of years. National policy seeks to ensure that the 
Local Plan sets out policies to encourage the reclamation of former minerals workings at 
the earliest opportunity and that high quality restoration and aftercare of mineral sites 
takes place. A number of former mineral sites in North Lincolnshire have been restored 
for agricultural use, whilst others have been re-used for habitat creation and nature 
conservation purposes as well as for leisure and recreation uses. 
Page 292 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY MIN8: RESTORATION, AFTERCARE & AFTERUSE OF MINERAL
EXTRACTION SITES 
1. Proposals for minerals extraction and temporary waste management facilities will be 
granted where provision has been made for high standards and quality of restoration 
and aftercare of the site, alongside delivery of a beneficial afteruse. A programme of 
aftercare should be provided for a minimum of five years following the cessation of 
mineral extraction. 
2. Restoration plans should be submitted with the planning application which reflect the 
proposed after-use. These should reflect the requirements set out in Appendix 4. 
3. As part of the process of considering proposals for mineral development, biodiversity, 
environmental, landscape and other public benefits (including potential recreation 
use) will be sought through: 
a. The progressive working and phased restoration of the site; 
b. The after-care and after-use of extraction sites which should be locally relevant to the 
site and within the context of wider green infrastructure and ecological networks 
where relevant; 
c. The environmental conservation and enhancement of the wider surrounding area to 
which the proposed extraction relates; and, 
d. The promotion of recreational opportunities within the area including the promotion of 
access to nature through public rights of way where appropriate. 
4. Proposals for restoration, where relevant, should make a positive contribution in 
accordance with policy DQE3 to: 
a. Landscape character and quality that is in keeping with the character and setting of 
the local area; 
b. Air, soil and water quality; 
c. Flood water management; and, 
d. The promotion of recreational facilities. 
5. Restoration proposals should demonstrate how a positive contribution will be made 
to secure biodiversity and wildlife conservation and enhancement and be informed by 
the Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping and how it will contribute to the Nature 
Recovery Network. Restoration proposals should also address how the site will be 
managed and monitored long term post restoration to ensure that ecological targets 
are met. 
6. The Council will secure the implementation of mineral site restoration plans through 
conditions in a timescale appropriate to the development, unless exceptional 
circumstances deem it necessary to secure the restoration of the mineral site through 
bonds or legal agreements. 
12.49 Restoration, aftercare and after-use should occur promptly when mineral extraction 
ceases. Therefore, it is essential for restoration and future use of sites to be considered 
as part of the planning application stage. All restoration should be appropriate for the site 
and be sympathetic to the character of the area. 
12.50 Responsibility for restoration and aftercare of mineral extraction sites lies with the 
operator, and/or the landowner. The nature of restoration activity depends on the choice 
of after-use. This will be influenced by a range of factors including: 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 293 • the aspirations of the landowner(s) and the local community; 
• the site characteristics and its surroundings; 
• any strategies for the area (e.g. Greater Lincolnshire Nature Strategy priorities and 
Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping); 
• the nature, scale and duration of the proposed development; and 
• the availability and quality of soil resources/restoration materials. 
12.51 Sites should be restored to at least the quality equivalent to that prior to development. 
However, restoration and after uses represent an opportunity to enhance the quality of 
the landscape and local environment for benefit of the community. Schemes could, for 
example, include measures to improve biodiversity interest in line with the priorities of the 
Greater Lincolnshire Nature Strategy and Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping. They could 
also contribute towards a Green Infrastructure Network in the area, or managing the 
impacts of climate change. 
12.52 Aviation safety needs to be taken into account as part any restoration process. Where 
this involves the creation of water bodies or wetland habitats or have the potential to 
attract a larger number of birds, it may present a hazard to aircraft within a statutory bird 
strike safeguarding zone or, in the case of other aerodromes, where operators have 
produced a non-official safeguarding map. 
12.53 The NPPF and Planning Practice Guidance, highlight that financial guarantees to cover 
restoration and aftercare should only be required in exceptional circumstances. 
12.54 Restoration, aftercare and after-use will be secured through the use of planning 
conditions. Appendix 4 sets out what should be included in a Restoration Plan. 
Page 294 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 13 Sustainable Waste Management 
13.1 Nearly all activities create waste, whether it is through the production or consumption of 
goods and services, or as part of the economy and wider society. This means that it 
needs to be managed in the most appropriate and sustainable manner. Waste is viewed 
as a resource rather than something that is to be disposed of, whilst its management is 
seen as being a part of efforts to reduce carbon emissions and combat climate change. 
Government policy, as set out in the National Waste Strategy (2013), clearly points 
towards a zero waste economy. This means that material resources like waste are re-
used, recycled or recovered, wherever possible, and only disposed of as the last option. 
This contributes to developing a place that is cleaner and greener. 
13.2 In a similar vein to the NPPF, the National Planning Policy for Waste (NPPW), stresses a 
positive approach to planning for waste management and delivering sustainable 
development in accordance with the Waste Hierarchy¹ ² . This prioritises the options for 
managing waste in order according to their environmental impact. 
FIGURE 13.1: THE WASTE HIERARCHY 
13.3 North Lincolnshire hosts a number of waste management, treatment and disposal 
facilities. These range from hazardous and non-hazardous landfill sites to waste transfer 
stations and material recycling facilities. The waste industry is estimated to employ over 
740 people (2011 data) in North Lincolnshire. 
13.4 In line with Government guidance the Local Plan will, where necessary, make provision 
for the sustainable management of the following waste streams: 
• Local Authority Collected Waste (LACW): waste that is collected by the Council from 
households and businesses; 
• Commercial and Industrial Waste (C&I): waste arising from premises used wholly or 
mainly for trade, industry or industrial processes; 
1 A legislative requirement under Ar ticle 4 of the revised EU Waste Framework (Directive 2008/98/EC) transposed through 
the Waste (England and Wales) Regulations 2011. 
2 The full definition of each level of the waste hierarchy is set out in Article 3 of the revised Waste Framework Directive 
(2008/98/EC); see also the Waste Management Plan for England 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 295 • Construction, Demolition and Excavation Waste (CDEW): waste produced from the 
construction, repair, maintenance and demolition of buildings and structures and 
consisting mainly of associated rubble and soils; 
• Hazardous Waste: wastes that are defined by the Hazardous Waste Regulations 2005; 
• Low Level Radioactive Waste (LLRW): wastes typically produced in small quantities by 
hospitals, academic facilities and medical research facilities; 
• Agricultural Waste: waste used in the course of the use of land for agriculture and 
produced in the course of farming; and 
• Waste Water: waste derived from sewage treatment works and sludge treatment 
plants. 
WASTE MANAGEMENT 
13.5 National policy requires Local Plans, where appropriate, to make provision for the 
sustainable management of non-hazardous and hazardous waste, as well as low level 
radioactive waste, agricultural waste and waste water. The NPPW requires Local Plans 
to identify sufficient opportunities to meet the identified needs for managing waste in 
their area. This should be achieved by driving waste management up the waste 
hierarchy, provided this does not endanger human health or harm the environment. 
POLICY WAS1: WASTE MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES 
1. Development that encourages and supports the minimisation of waste production, 
and the re-use and recovery of waste materials will normally be supported. 
2. Proposals for waste management facilities to deal with waste arisings will be 
encouraged based upon the following principles: 
a. Managing waste through the waste hierarchy in sequential order. Sites for the 
disposal of waste will only be permitted where it meets a need which cannot be met 
by treatment higher in the waste hierarchy; 
b. Promoting the opportunities for on-site management of waste where it arises and 
encouraging co-location of waste developments that can use each other’s waste 
materials; 
c. Ensuring that sufficient capacity is located within the area to accommodate forecast 
waste arisings of all types during the Plan period; 
d. Supporting delivery of the North Lincolnshire Municipal Waste Management Strategy; 
e. Facilitating the development of recycling facilities across the area to ensure there is 
sufficient capacity and access for the deposit of municipal waste for re-use, recycling 
and disposal; 
f. Facilitating the development of a network of local waste management facilities in 
accessible locations, and effective methods of waste management such as suitable 
facilities to separate or store different types of waste, including materials that are 
required to be separated for kerbside collection schemes; 
g. Ensuring new waste developments are located and designed to avoid unacceptable 
adverse impacts on heritage assets and amenity; 
h. Ensuring new waste developments mitigate any impacts on the natural environment 
and provide landscape and biodiversity enhancements where feasible; 
Page 296 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) i. Working collaboratively with neighbouring local authorities with responsibilities for 
waste and other local authorities where waste import/export relationships exist. This 
will ensure a co-operative cross boundary approach to waste management is 
established and maintained; and, 
j. Addressing to an acceptable standard the potential cumulative impacts of any waste 
development and the way it relates to existing developments. 
13.6 This policy sets out the council’s strategic planning framework and principles for 
sustainable waste management, reflecting the requirements of national policy and 
guidance, as well as the Waste Framework Directive. It supports the need to minimise 
the amount of waste produced in North Lincolnshire, and seeks to move the 
management of all waste streams up the waste hierarchy. Waste will be viewed as a 
resource, with a greater emphasis on recovery, recycling and re-use. Adopting a more 
sustainable approach will lead to the reduction in the use of natural resources as well as 
helping to level of out greenhouse gas emissions. 
13.7 It also seeks to ensure that that there are more opportunities for recovery, recycling and 
re-use of waste across the area in accessible locations. New facilities will need to 
contribute towards ensuring that there is sufficient capacity to deal with the area’s 
needs. In addition, it aims to minimise the negative effects of the generation and 
management of waste on human health and the environment. 
WASTE FACILITIES 
13.8 National planning policy requires us to identify suitable sites and/or areas for sustainable 
waste management. The NPPW sets out the type of locations that we should consider 
for new waste facilities, as well as guidance to assist us in determining the suitability of 
sites. Appendix B of the NPPW also provides a list of criteria that can be used to assess 
sites for inclusion in Local Plans. Our Plan will build on this approach and will consider our 
own local context. The location of any new waste facilities in North Lincolnshire will need 
to be broadly related to the overall spatial strategy as well as the area’s settlement 
pattern. 
POLICY WAS2: WASTE FACILITIES 
1. New waste management facilities should be located in sustainable locations that are 
appropriate to the proposed waste management use and its operational 
characteristics, and where impacts on the community and the environment can be 
avoided or addressed appropriately. Proposals for Energy from Waste Facilities will 
be supported provided that they meet the criteria set out in this policy and policy 
DQE9 Renewable Energy Proposals. All proposals for new waste management 
facilities should have regard to the overall spatial strategy (policy SS2) and the 
following sequential priorities, unless the need for an alternative location or site can 
be demonstrated, including for technical reasons (such as for the expansion of water 
recycling centres): 
a. Sites allocated or with permanent planning permission for waste management 
purposes; 
b. Employment sites where co-location with existing waste facilities is possible; 
c. Employment sites suitable for B2 & B8; 
Page 297 d. Sustainable locations within vacant previously developed land; 
e. Existing/former mineral workings; 
f. Existing farm buildings/complexes. 
2. All proposals will be required to meet the following criteria: 
a. Demonstrate the need for the facility, if there is a clear conflict with other policies of the 
Plan; 
b. All waste processes and operations must be contained, processed and managed 
within buildings, unless there are acceptable operational reasons why these 
processes cannot be contained within buildings; 
c. Proposals must accord with all other policies in relation to the protection of the 
environment and public amenity, or demonstrate that other material considerations 
outweigh any policy conflict; and, 
d. Demonstrate that the following potential impacts of the waste management facility 
have been fully considered and addressed: 
i. Duration of the development and operational hours; 
ii. Design and layout of the facility and associated buildings; 
iii. Landscape and visual impacts; 
iv. Harmful materials entering the public highway; 
v. Generation of noise, odours, litter, light, vibration, dusts, flies, rodents, birds and 
other infestation; 
vi. Suitability of the highway network to accommodate the proposed traffic levels 
including potential vehicle routing; 
vii. Suitability of the site access and egress arrangements; 
viii. Risk of serious fires through combustion of accumulated wastes; 
ix. Harm to water quality and resources and flood risk management/drainage 
x. Harm to air quality and consideration of mitigation methods to reduce/prevent 
greenhouse gas emissions; 
xi. Land instability; 
xii. Land use conflict; 
xiii. Restoration and aftercare; 
xiv. Fair and reasonably related community benefits; and, 
xv. Where necessary, mitigation measures should be identified to ameliorate any 
negative impacts to an acceptable level. 
13.9 Whilst policy WAS1 sets out the key principles for sustainable waste management, this 
policy sets out those matters that should be taken into account when deciding where 
future waste management facilities are located, as well as in determining planning 
applications. 
13.10 In common with other forms of development, waste management facilities should be 
located in sustainable locations. However, these will also need to reflect the proposed 
waste management use and its operational characteristics, and to ensure that they are 
located where impacts on the community and the environment can be mitigated. 
Proposals should be located in line with the overall spatial strategy, outlined in policy SS2, 
as well as the sequential approach outlined. Other locations may be acceptable for 
certain types of waste management facilities. 
Page 298 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 13.11 National policy suggests that industrial or employment areas may be appropriate, as 
they are often located distant from residential areas and close to where waste is 
generated. This would have the effect of reducing the need to transport waste over 
significant distances. Siting waste management facilities within or in close proximity to 
industrial areas will reduce their impact on the surrounding area. However, before any 
proposals are permitted, applicants should demonstrate that they have fully considered 
the likely impacts associated with the development and any measures which could 
satisfactorily mitigate those impacts. Cumulative impacts should also be considered. 
13.12 Applicants will be expected to demonstrate the need for the facility in terms of the type 
of facility and taking account of the capacity findings. To ensure waste management 
sites operate without detriment to amenity, public safety and without having a significant 
adverse effect on the environment and appearance of the proposed development site, it 
is expected that proposals will be located within buildings, unless there are specific 
operational reasons why this is not possible. 
WASTE MANAGEMENT PROVISION 
13.13 North Lincolnshire has a wide range of waste management facilities. It is likely that most 
will continue to be operational through the plan period (2020 to 2038), making a strong 
contribution to meeting future needs. However, as the need to move waste up the waste 
hierarchy and have less reliance on disposal, it may be that additional capacity may 
needed. 
POLICY WAS3: WASTE MANAGEMENT PROVISION 
1. Net self-sufficiency in waste management will be achieved through the provision of 
the waste management capacity needs of North Lincolnshire. This capacity will be 
met through existing operation waste management facilities (and extensions, where 
appropriate) and new facilities. 
Waste Stream Total Waste Management 
Capacity Needs (million tonnes) 
2018 2023 2028 2033 2038 
Local Authority Collected Waste 97,636 100,600 103,156 105,712 108,268 
Commercial and Industrial Waste 558,916 565,097 571,555 578,297 585,330 
Construction, demolition and excavation waste 137,114 144,108 151,459 159,185 167,305 
Hazardous Waste 58,258 61,230 67,636 71,086 
13.14 Data from the Environment Agency Waste Data Interrogator (2016) showed that waste 
arisings in North Lincolnshire were 895,920 tonnes. This consisted of various waste 
streams, including Local Authority Collected Waste (LACW), commercial and industrial 
(C&I), construction, demolition & excavation waste (CDE), hazardous waste and 
agricultural waste. Of this overall amount, 698,0269 tonnes was management or 
disposed at facilities in the area, with 197,884 being exported to facilities in other local 
authority areas. Imports of waste to North Lincolnshire from elsewhere, totalled 
1,514,359 tonnes. Much of this came from neighbouring areas including Lincolnshire, 
Doncaster and North East Lincolnshire as well as the wider Yorkshire & Humber region. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 299 13.15 The Council has prepared a Local Waste Needs Assessment (LNWA) to examine current 
and future capacity requirements in North Lincolnshire during the plan period. The LWNA 
shows that there is a permitted capacity of around 6.65 million tonnes. 
TABLE 13.1: NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES – ANNUAL 
PERMITTED CAPACITY (2016) 
Waste Hierarchy 
Management Level Management Method Waste Streams -
Managed Permitted Capacity (Mtpa)/ 
Remaining Void Space (Mt) 
Household Recycling
Centres Household; Commercial;
Industrial; Hazardous;
C&D 90,000 tonnes 
Preparing for Re-use &
Recycling Transfer Household; Commercial;
Industrial; Hazardous;
C&D 2,085,608 tonnes 
Metal Recycling & ELV Industrial; Commercial;
C&D; Hazardous 1,079,996 tonnes 
Composting Commercial; Industrial 74,999 tonnes 
Other Recovery Anaerobic Digestion Commercial; Industrial 55,100 tonnes 
Non-Hazardous Landfill Municipal; Industrial;
Commercial; C&D 1,917,300 tonnes (Permitted Capacity)
25,624,111m3 (Remaining Void) 
Disposal Restricted Landfill Commercial; Industrial 850,000 tonnes (Permitted Capacity)
5,238,016m3 (Remaining Void) 
Hazardous Landfill Hazardous 500,000 tonnes (Permitted Capacity)
841,436m3 (Remaining Void) 
SAFEGUARDING WASTE FACILITIES & INFRASTRUCTURE 
13.16 North Lincolnshire has 55 publicly and privately operated waste management facilities 
that deal with the various forms of waste arising within the area and elsewhere. These 
facilities form an important element of the area’s infrastructure. Therefore, it is important 
to ensure that such facilities and any associated infrastructure is protected from other 
development that may encroach upon them. 
POLICY WAS4: SAFEGUARDING EXISTING WASTE SITES & 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
1. Existing and planned waste management sites and infrastructure in North 
Lincolnshire will be safeguarded from inappropriate development. This will ensure 
that existing levels of waste management capacity is maintained. Safeguarded 
waste management facilities are identified in Table 13.2 (below) and on the Policies 
Map. Non-waste developments will only be considered where it can be demonstrated 
that: 
a. The planning benefits on non-waste development outweigh the needs for the waste 
management facility at the location; 
b. There is no longer a need for the facility and will not be required during the plan period; 
and, 
c. An alternative site providing an equal or greater level of waste management capacity 
of the same type has been found, granted permission and shall be developed and 
operational prior to the loss of the existing site. 
2. Where proposals for non-waste development are put forward in the vicinity of an 
existing or planned waste management facility, it should be demonstrated that 
adequate mitigation measures are proposed as part of the encroaching development 
to ensure that it is adequately protected from any potential adverse impacts from the 
existing waste facility. 
Page 300 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 13.17 Retaining existing waste management capacity is essential in creating a sustainable 
waste management network in North Lincolnshire. Where these sites are located will 
vary depending on commercial influences. These influences may include changes in 
waste management technology, whilst moving waste up the waste hierarchy could 
affect the type of facilities needed. Nonetheless, it is important to ensure that waste sites 
can continue to operate without being constrained by other forms of (non-waste) 
development within their vicinity. Table 13.2 and the Policies Map set out those existing 
waste management facilities that should be safeguarded. 
TABLE 13.2: SAFEGUARDED WASTE FACILITIES 
Site Category Facility Type Facility Name 
Landfill Non-Hazardous Landfill • Campwood Landfill, Melton Ross Quarries, Barnetby-le-Wold 
• New Crosby Landfill, Crosby Warren, Dawes Lane, Scunthorpe 
• Roxby Landfill, Winterton Road, Roxby 
• Crosby North Landfill, Dawes Lane, Scunthorpe 
• Winterton North Landfill, Coleby Road, West Halton 
Hazardous Merchant Landfill • Winterton South Landfill, Coleby Road, West Halton 
Restricted Landfill • Yarborough Quarry, Dawes Lane, Scunthorpe 
Metal Recycling
Site Car Breaker • Unit 1, Delta Business Park, Sandtoft 
• 3 to 6 Scotter Road South, Scunthorpe 
• New Holland Shipyard, Humber Bank East, New Holland 
Metal Recycling • Scunthorpe Integrated Iron & Steel Works, Brigg Road, Scunthorpe 
• 5 to 7 Banbury Road, Scunthorpe 
• 10 High Street East, Scunthorpe 
• AC Autos Pit Bottom, Winterton Road, Scunthorpe 
Vehicle Depollution Facility • Selby’s Yard, Sandtoft Industrial Estate, Sandtoft 
• Renparts, Sandtoft Industrial Estate, Sandtoft 
Transfer Household Waste Recycling
Centre (Civic Amenity Site) • Barnetby HWRC, Bigby Road, Barnetby-le-Wold 
• Barton HWRC, Gravel Pit Lane, Barton upon Humber 
• Belton HWRC, Epworth Road, Belton 
• Broughton HWRC, Brigg Road, Broughton 
• Cottage Beck HWRC, Cottage Beck Road, Scunthorpe 
• Goxhill HWRC, College Road, Goxhill 
• Kirton HWRC, Redbourne Mere, Kirton in Lindsey 
• Winterton HWRC, North Street, Winterton 
Hazardous Waste Transfer • Cottage Beck Transfer Station, Cottage Beck Road, Scunthorpe 
• Pit Bottom, Winterton Road, Scunthorpe 
Non-Hazardous Waste 
Transfer • Old Home Farm, Gainsthorpe Road, Kirton in Lindsey 
• Groveport, Gunness 
• New Crosby Waste Management Facility, Crosby Warren, Dawes 
Lane, Scunthorpe 
• 21 Midland Road, Midland Road, Industrial Estate, Scunthorpe 
• Roxby Transfer Sidings, Roxby 
• Unit 7, Sandtoft Estate Road, Belton 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 301 Site Category Facility Type Facility Name 
Treatment Anaerobic Digestion • North Moor Farm, Crowle 
• Northwold Farm, Worlaby Top, Brigg 
Biological Treatment • Old Cement Works, Gainsthorpe Road East, Kirton in Lindsey 
• Scunthorpe Sewage Treatment Works, Scotter Road South, 
Scunthorpe 
• Althorpe Sewerage Treatment Works, Chesswick Crescent, Althorpe 
• Burton upon Stather Sewerage Treatment Works, Chafer Lane, Burton upon Stather 
• East Butterwick Sewerage Treatment Works, High Street, East Butterwick 
• Epworth Sewerage Treatment Works, West End Road, Epworth 
• Haxey Sewerage Treatment Works, Akeferry Road, Graizelound, Haxey 
• Kirton in Lindsey Sewerage Treatment Works, Moat House Road, Kirton in Lindsey 
• Crowle Sewerage Treatment Works, Marsh Road, Crowle 
• Wroot Sewerage Treatment Works, Sand Lane, Wroot 
• Barnetby-le-Wold Sewerage Treatment Works, Marsh Lane, Barnetby-le-Wold 
• Barton upon Humber Sewerage Treatment Works, Marsh Lane, Barton upon Humber 
• Brigg Sewerage Treatment Works, Atherton Way, Brigg 
• Broughton Sewerage Treatment Works, Bridge Road, Wressle, Broughton 
• Dragonby Sewerage Treatment Works, 
• Hibaldstow Sewerage Treatment Works, Scawby Road, Hibaldstow 
• Kirmington Sewerage Treatment Works, Habrough Lane, Kirmington 
• Melton Ross Sewerage Treatment Works, 
• North Ferry Sewerage Treatment Works, 
• South Killingholme Sewerage Treatment Works, 
• Thealby Sewerage Treatment Works, 
• Ulceby Sewerage Treatment Works, Thornton Lane, Ulceby 
• Whitton Sewerage Treatment Works, 
• Winteringham Sewerage Treatment Works, Composition Lane, Winteringham 
Inert Waste Transfer/
Treatment • Melton Ross Quarries, Barnetby-le-Wold 
• Normanby Road, Scunthorpe 
• Elsham Airfield, Middlegate Lane, Elsham Wold 
Non-Hazardous Waste 
Transfer/Treatment • Unit 4, Stirling Business Park, Park Farm Road, Scunthorpe 
Page 302 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Site Category Facility Type Facility Name 
Treatment Physical Treatment • 52b & 52c, Colin Road, Scunthorpe 
• Groveport, Grove Wharf, Gunness 
• Hibaldstow Quarry, Hibaldstow 
• Opposite 39a Hoylake Road, South Park Industrial Estate, 
Scunthorpe 
• Manton Quarry, Kirton in Lindsey 
• Scunthorpe Aggregate Processing, Dawes Lane, Scunthorpe 
• Kirton Quarry, Gainsthorpe Road, Kirton in Lindsey 
• Pit Bottom, Winterton Road, Scunthorpe 
Physical-Chemical Treatment • Dewatering Plant, Billet Mill Approach, Scunthorpe 
13.18 The loss of any well-located waste management facilities will have an impact on the 
ability of North Lincolnshire to meet its own needs for dealing with waste and could 
require the development of greenfield sites to replace them. In turn, this could result in 
detrimental impacts on the environment and local communities. Accordingly, existing 
facilities (permanent sites or those with a long term planning permission) will be 
safeguarded, unless it can clearly be demonstrated that the planning benefits of the non-
waste development outweigh the need to retain the facility and/or it is no longer required 
or alternative provision can be made. 
13.19 Under this policy these waste management facilities are safeguarded during their 
operational period, subject to their decommissioning and revocation of any associated 
waste permits the facilities would no longer be subject to the protection under this policy, 
unless an equivalent replacement facility was provided. 
13.20 Where proposals for non-waste development are put forward in the vicinity of existing 
waste management development, they should include appropriate mitigation measures 
to ensure it is adequately protected from any adverse impacts arising from the waste 
facility. 
WASTE WATER TREATMENT 
13.21 As with other waste streams, waste water is now treated as a resource rather than 
something to be disposed of, and one that requires the provision of infrastructure of 
varying scales. In North Lincolnshire, there are 24 waste water treatment works 
(WWTWs), owned and operated by Anglian Water and Severn Trent Water. These 
facilities are key parts of the area’s physical infrastructure, and due consideration will 
need to be given in the Local Plan to the impact that growth and development will have. 
It may be the case that additional or extended facilities will be required over the plan’s 
lifetime. The Council will work closely with the water companies to identify future needs 
resulting from growth and development. 
POLICY WAS5: WASTE WATER TREATMENT 
1. Proposals relating to the role, function and operation of wastewater treatment 
facilities, including where for new or expanded waste water treatment capacity and 
supporting infrastructure (including renewable energy) will be supported in principle, 
particularly where it is required to meet wider growth proposals identified in the Local 
Plan provided that it can be demonstrated: 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 303 a. it contributes towards the provision of a North Lincolnshire-wide network of facilities 
which meets current and future requirements; 
b. there is a suitable watercourse to accept discharged treated water and there would 
be no unacceptable increase in the risk of flooding to other areas; 
c. there would be no deterioration in the ecological status of the affected watercourse (to 
comply with the Water Framework Directive); 
d. there would be no significant adverse impact on the condition, functionality or safety 
of water supply and waste water infrastructure; 
e. there would be no significant adverse impact to the amenities of local communities via 
odours and other emissions; and, 
f. there would be no significant adverse impact to visual amenity or landscape character 
such as through the provision of a landscaping scheme to provide appropriate 
mitigation. 
2. Proposals for the collocation or co-treatment of waste water and organic wastes 
should accord with the provisions outlined above. All proposals should accord with all 
other relevant policies set out in the Plan. 
13.22 In recent years, European Directives have resulted in regulations around the treatment of 
waste water becoming stricter. It can no longer be disposed of into rivers or seas without 
prior treatment. There are two processes involved in managing and treating waste 
water, the management of waste water and the management of sewage sludge. Waste 
water can be treated to produce a safe liquid which can be discharged into water 
courses, leaving a solid sludge which is suitable for reuse or disposal. 
13.23 Sewage sludge should be managed and treated in line with the Waste Hierarchy, which 
means reducing the amount of waste that needs to be disposed of and increasing its 
beneficial uses. It can be treated in a number of different ways, to reduce liquid and/or 
organic content and minimise the presence of micro-organisms. Treatment can include 
anaerobic digestion, composting or thermal treatment. Beneficial uses could include 
fertiliser and energy generation. As the methods used to treat waste water are similar to 
those used for other organic water, it may be beneficial to collocate facilities or use a 
single facility to deal with a range of organic wastes. 
13.24 All proposals for new or extended waste water treatment facilities should meet the same 
policy requirements as other waste development, due to their possible impacts on the 
environment, economy and communities. However, there are some specific impacts that 
will need to be addressed relating to pollution of water courses, sea and surface water. 
This must be managed to acceptable limits. As water needs to be discharged into water 
courses, facilities may need to be situated in high flood risk areas. 
13.25 Based on their potential impacts, new or extended waste water treatment facilities 
should be located where they: 
• provide an area-wide network serving North Lincolnshire’s communities; 
• maximise the recycling, composting and then recovery of waste material; 
• reduce the distance that sewage products are transported for re-use, particularly for 
agricultural use; 
• meet discharge requirements into local watercourses; and 
• minimise potential impacts on the local community, particularly in terms of odour. 
13.26 Mitigation measures may be required to minimise development impacts of these 
facilities. Consideration should be given to facility siting, layout and design, the 
Page 304 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) implementation of sustainable drainage systems or the provision of, or contribution to, 
the delivery of flood prevention and management infrastructure. 
WASTE MANAGEMENT IN DEVELOPMENT 
13.27 In establishing the overall levels and locations for future growth in North Lincolnshire, it is 
important to consider the implications it will have for the levels of waste produced and its 
management, in particular, minimising the amount produced and driving it up the Waste 
Hierarchy. Preventing waste generation from all sources is the key in moving towards 
making more sustainable and efficient use of resources, as reflected in national policy. 
This means increasing the amount of waste that is recycled, re-used, or composted. The 
Local Plan has a key role in supporting waste prevention and encouraging sustainable 
use as part of new developments. 
13.28 Waste will arise during construction and demolition stages of new development. Once 
completed, developments will also generate waste that will need to be collected and 
managed. 
POLICY WAS6: WASTE MANAGEMENT IN DEVELOPMENT 
1. Proposals for new development should support the efficient use and recovery of 
resources throughout its lifetime, including during construction, operation and/or 
occupation. This should include giving due consideration to sustainable waste 
management. 
2. New developments should include: 
a. Design principles and construction methods that minimise the use of primary minerals 
and encourage the use of building materials made from recycled and alternative 
materials; 
b. Measures that support the implementation of the waste hierarchy, including 
construction and demolition methods that minimise waste production, maximise the 
re-use and recovery of materials (as far as practicable) on-site and minimise off-site 
disposal. In major developments the production of a waste audit and the use of Site 
Waste Management Plans are encouraged; and, 
c. Design and layout that complements sustainable waste management by providing 
appropriate storage and segregation facilities. Proposals for major development that 
seek to deliver the housing requirement or employment land will be encouraged to 
incorporate neighbourhood waste management facilities (where appropriate). Any 
waste management facilities or bin/waste storage should be well designed and 
integrated into the development in order to reduce impacts on the community and 
environment. Provision for waste collection should also be reflected in the design and 
layout of development. 
3. Where development results in pressure on existing waste management facilities or 
infrastructure, or results in the need for new infrastructure, the Council may seek 
financial contributions towards enhanced or new provision. 
13.29 The starting point for all new development is that it should make the most efficient use 
and recovery of resources during its lifetime. Developments should seek to ensure that 
reliance on primary minerals are kept to a minimum and that greater use should be made 
of recycled or alternative building materials. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 305 13.30 The construction sector produces a significant amount of waste. Government policy 
seeks to ensure that the handling of waste from the construction and operation of new 
development, maximises the opportunities for re-use and recovery of waste arising from 
construction and operation of new development, with off-site disposal being minimised. 
This includes greater on-site management as a means of reducing the amount of waste 
generated. Site Waste Management Plans (SWMP) will be encouraged. 
13.31 For major development, developers should demonstrate how they intend to reduce the 
amount of waste that will be produced, and how it will managed in accordance with the 
Waste Hierarchy through the provision of a waste audit. Details should be provided 
about the amount and type of waste being produced and measures taken to prevent and 
minimise waste arisings and how it will be managed. 
13.32 National policy and guidance identifies the need for new (non-waste) development to 
make sufficient provision for waste management, that meets the needs of the 
development and the type and quantity waste that will be produced. With this in mind, it 
is important that sustainable waste management is considered and integrated at the 
earliest stages when designing new development and their layouts. This will ensure 
there are no adverse impact on the wider development and surrounding environment. 
13.33 Accordingly, developments should include opportunities for on-site provision that allows 
the occupiers to separate and store of waste for recycling and recovery, however the 
exact nature will vary between different types of development and its location. For 
residential development, provision should be made for storing bins, as part of ensuring 
that a high quality, comprehensive and frequent waste collection service. Bin storage 
areas should be well designed and integrated into the wider built environment. 
13.34 Smaller development sites could include the provision of collection points for segregated 
waste. On larger sites, particularly where significant areas of new housing or 
employment land are proposed, waste storage facilities will almost always be needed 
and provision might also include on-site treatment/management facilities or, in the case 
of industrial operations, the management of specific wastes produced on site. The scale 
and type of any facilities will vary depending on the development. 
13.35 How waste is collected should also be considered as part of the design and layout of 
new development. Provision should be made for refuse vehicles to access development 
to allow collections to take place. The ADEPT report "Making Space for Waste" sets out 
specifications for the minimum standards for the type, and scale of facilities and vehicular 
manoeuvrability needed for new residential, commercial and mixed-use developments. 
Discussions should also take place with the Council’s waste management team. 
13.36 Larger scale developments have the potential to result in increased levels of waste that 
will need to be managed. In particular, residential developments will result in increased 
numbers of households, putting additional pressure on waste management facilities and 
infrastructure. Financial contributions towards the provision of adequate waste 
management infrastructure to serve the development may be necessary. 
RESTORATION & AFTERCARE 
13.37 The Local Plan is committed to reducing the amount of waste being disposed of in landfill 
sites. It is likely that there will be a continued need for landfill capacity over the plan period 
whilst there are also several operational landfill sites in North Lincolnshire that are likely 
to close. Therefore, it is essential to make sure that these sites, as well as any other 
temporary waste management facilities, are subject to the appropriate restoration and 
aftercare regimes as well as finding a beneficial after use. 
Page 306 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY WAS7: RESTORATION & AFTERCARE 
1. Proposals for temporary waste management development, including landfilling or 
landraising, will be permitted where they provide for the restoration and aftercare of 
the site in a phased manner during its operation and/or promptly on completion of the 
operation. 
2. The restoration and aftercare scheme accompanying such proposals shall include: 
a. Details of the proposed landform, landscaping and planting and how they respond to 
the context of the surrounding topography and vegetation; 
b. Details of how the proposals would improve and connect with the green infrastructure 
network, including enhancement of biodiversity and access for informal recreation. 
Proposals should respond to the priorities within the Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping 
and Greater Lincolnshire Nature Strategy and contribute to a Nature Recovery 
Network; 
c. Measures for the management of emissions (including gases and liquids); 
d. Phasing arrangements; and, 
e. A programme of aftercare and monitoring of the site. 
13.38 The NPPW and Planning Practice Guidance states that in determining planning 
applications, the Council should ensure that land raising landfill sites are restored for 
beneficial afteruses at the earliest opportunity and to high environmental standards 
through the application of appropriate conditions where necessary. This is a similar 
approach to that taken towards former mineral workings. 
13.39 The type of afteruse will be dependent on the nature of the site, its operation, the final 
land form and neighbouring uses. In some cases, sites may be restored to agricultural 
use, provision made for public access, informal recreation or habitat creation and 
biodiversity enhancement. Strong consideration should be given to how restored sites 
could be linked to North Lincolnshire’s green infrastructure network for maximising 
community and environmental benefits. 
13.40 Discussion between the developer and Council on restoration and aftercare 
requirements should take place as early as possible when proposals for temporary 
waste management facilities are being developed. This will allow suitable schemes to be 
considered in the context of how the site will be worked and to ensure proposals preclude 
the provision of appropriate restoration. It is recommended that discussions should also 
take place with the Environment Agency to make sure that the scheme meets the 
requirements of the waste management licence (Environmental Permit). 
13.41 Amongst the matters that restoration schemes will need to consider are: 
• The provision of an appropriate phasing plan to consider how different parts of the site 
should be restored, during and after operations, to ensure that parts of the site which are 
no longer in use are restored as soon as possible; 
• The removal of plant from the non-operational area; 
• Potential re-engineering of the site including the importation of inert waste to cap the 
tipped area; 
• The introduction of various measures to prevent infiltration; 
• A suitable scheme of planting, utilising native species of local provenance; and 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 307 • How they reflect the priorities within the Biodiversity Opportunity Mapping for North 
Lincolnshire and the Greater Lincolnshire Nature Partnership; and 
• An appropriate scheme covering aftercare and monitoring. 
13.42 The restoration and aftercare scheme should form an important part of the supporting 
information, submitted alongside a planning application. Its implementation will be 
required through conditions attached to the planning permission. Once restoration is 
complete, aftercare arrangements will usually be in place for a period of time and will be 
subject to monitoring visits from the Council. 
Page 308 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 14 Connecting North Lincolnshire 
14.1 Transport has an important role to play in facilitating sustainable development through 
the promotion of walking, cycling and public transport as key modes of travel as an 
integral part of all developments. This also contributes to wider aspects of sustainability 
including improving people’s health and environmental quality, through reduced vehicle 
emissions and increasing active travel. Whilst behaviours, working patterns and lifestyle 
choices, coupled with emerging technological changes and innovation in how we travel, 
are changing transport choices, it is clear that new development will continue to generate 
additional transport movements, both now and in the future. 
14.2 The availability and use of transport can have a significant impact, both positive and 
negative on people’s physical and mental health and wellbeing. 
14.3 Transport, particularly vehicle emissions, are a major source of carbon dioxide emissions 
which, in turn, is a major cause of climate change. Other pollutants from vehicles include 
particulate matter and nitrogen dioxides, which impact on local air quality. Both of these 
can cause health problems. Short journeys are generally more polluting as vehicles tend 
to emit more pollution during the first few miles, while the engine is warming up. Traffic 
noise and vibration can also affect people’s physical and mental health and wellbeing. If 
traffic movements continue to increase then these adverse impacts will also be 
exacerbated. 
14.4 Therefore, transport, can play a key part in the development of a low carbon economy 
through mode shift to walking/cycling for shorter journeys or an increase in electric/low 
emission vehicles. Many of the priorities identified in Policy T1, will play an important part 
in helping to de-carbonise transport. Measures to reduce the need to travel, widen travel 
choice and reduce dependence on the private car, alongside investment in low-carbon 
vehicle technologies are an important part of helping to meet national climate change 
targets. 
14.5 In addition to this, the role of transport in allowing people to easily access key services, 
employment, education and training will impact on their health and wellbeing. The ability 
to do so will positively improve the health and wellbeing of people, whilst an inability to 
do this, can result in people feeling isolated and excluded, which will have a detrimental 
impact on their mental health. 
14.6 Walking and cycling should be the travel mode of choice for all short trips and an 
increase in these ‘active travel’ modes will improve people’s physical and mental health 
and wellbeing. 
14.7 It is also important that pedestrian and cycle access is prioritised, to and within new 
developments. North Lincolnshire is a wide ranging geographical area which is 
predominately rural in nature, interspersed with market towns, villages and the main 
Scunthorpe urban area. Scunthorpe is well served by public transport and is a compact 
urban area where journeys can be made by foot and cycle. This is also true for the market 
towns, although they lack the range of services and facilities that the larger urban area 
can offer. The mode of travel for the majority of everyday journeys is very much reliant on 
where you live and where you want to travel to. Whilst walking, cycling and public 
transport should be promoted as the preferred mode of transport, the rural nature of the 
area means that the private car will still have an important role to play in everyday 
journeys. 
14.8 It is important that all development is accessible, both for all modes of transport and by 
all users irrespective of any mobility impairment. In order to achieve greater sustainability 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 309 and assist in the efficient movement of people, developments must be served adequately 
by public transport, cycling, walking and the existing highway network. 
14.9 With the exception of localised pinchpoints, congestion is not currently an issue in North 
Lincolnshire. However increased traffic growth from new developments, has the 
potential to impinge on the achievement of the economic, social and environmental 
objectives within this Plan. It is important therefore, that major development proposals 
provide measures to reduce the impact of vehicular movements, including realistic, safe 
and easy alternatives to the private car. However, to achieve this, developments need to 
be conveniently located within easy reach of key services, by sustainable travel modes 
to make these a realistic and practical option to the private car. 
14.10 A new Integrated Transport Strategy (ITS) is currently being drafted to align with the new 
Local Plan. It will set out the key transport and infrastructure challenges to delivering the 
council’s outcomes of Safe, Well, Prosperous and Connected and how these can be 
overcome within North Lincolnshire. The proposed Integrated Transport Vision is: 
14.11 Transformational transport networks that connect people, products, places and supports 
the delivery of the council priorities ”. 
14.12 In order to realise this vision, the ITS will adopt the following integrated transport 
priorities: 
• Connect North Lincolnshire locally, regionally, nationally and internationally to support 
sustainable economic growth, by implementing transport improvements in key 
development areas and along key strategic corridors. 
• Develop a connected transport network which provides excellent access to employment, 
education, key local services and which is accessible to all. 
• Minimise the environmental impact via sustainable transport solutions. 
• Provide safe transport networks which improve quality of life and health and well-being. 
14.13 It is proposed that transport schemes delivered through the ITS will be packaged into the 
following themes: 
• Pedestrian Improvements 
• Cycling Improvements 
• Public Transport Improvements 
• Local Safety Schemes 
• Demand Management 
• Highway Asset Enhancement and Renewal. 
14.14 It is therefore recognised that significant benefits can be achieved by locating 
developments in places where the need to travel will be minimised and the option to 
make sustainable choices can be maximised. 
POLICY T1: PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE TRANSPORT 
1. To reduce congestion, improve environmental quality and encourage more active and 
healthy lifestyles, the Council will support measures that promote more sustainable 
transport choices. 
2. Where appropriate, proposals should seek to: 
a. focus development which generates significant movements in locations where the 
need to travel will be minimised; 
Page 310 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) b. prioritise pedestrian and cycle access to and within the site and provide connections 
into the wider network; 
c. make suitable provision for access to public transport and other alternative means of 
transport to the car; 
d. make suitable provision to accommodate the efficient delivery of goods and supplies; 
and, 
e. make suitable provision for electric vehicle charging, car clubs and car sharing when 
considering parking provision. 
PUBLIC TRANSPORT IN NORTH LINCOLNSHIRE 
Rail 
14.15 Unlike many other rural areas North Lincolnshire is generally well served by rail 
infrastructure (see Key Diagram), with the Trans-Pennine line providing direct links to the 
East Coast Main Line at Doncaster and across to Manchester for the airport and West 
Coast Main Line. There are local services provided on the Barton Branch line, a semi 
regional service from Grimsby to Lincoln via Barnetby and a Saturday only service 
running along the Brigg line from Cleethorpes to Gainsborough and Sheffield. 
14.16 What is lacking is the provision of appropriate services running along the infrastructure 
and providing the connections that support the wider spatial strategy. This would enable 
the sustainable movement of people to access work, training, education, health and 
leisure facilities. 
Bus 
14.17 In North Lincolnshire, buses are currently the most viable alternative to the car, 
particularly for commuter, shopping and leisure trips and are used by far more 
passengers than the rail services. 
14.18 The majority of North Lincolnshire’s bus services are operated from Scunthorpe Bus 
Station and are provided by two main bus operators, Stagecoach and Hornsby Travel, 
with the existing bus network split into urban and rural or inter-urban services. The main 
bus corridors in Scunthorpe are along Doncaster Road and Oswald Road/Ashby Road 
with the majority of urban services operating as a circular route to and from Scunthorpe 
Bus Station, which provides easy and direct access to the Town Centre. The majority of 
services also pick up and drop off passengers on either Mary Street or High Street and 
this provides good access to the western part of the main retail centre. The rural/inter-
urban services operate throughout the rest of North Lincolnshire, linking the more rural 
settlements with key urban centres both within and outside of North Lincolnshire. Much 
of the network is subsidised with only a handful of services operating on a fully 
commercial basis. This is not untypical of an area with such a large rural hinterland with 
some very low density areas of population. 
14.19 In an attempt to address weaknesses in bus provision the Council, as part of the 
Department for Transport (DfT) sponsored Total Transport Initiative, developed a pilot 
project to test the viability and feasibility of DRT bus services in the more rural parts of 
the authority’s area. The pilot project ran until March 2017, at which time the authority 
decided to maintain the services. It procured operators to deliver the CallConnect 
services, with a call centre managed by Lincolnshire County Council as part of a Service 
Level Agreement and the buses run by local operator Hornsbys. 
14.20 In line with the Councils strategic outcome to be “Connected” a new transformational 
DRT (JustGo North Lincs) has been developed that was launched in September 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 311 2020. This evolved from the lessons learnt from its predecessor. “JustGo North Lincs” 
utilises online methods for best route scheduling, smooth booking, on line payment, real-
time text alerts. It has unified sophisticated marketing approaches for specific 
demographics, starting with under 25s and commuter travellers, and extended operating 
hours from 7am -7pm Mon to Friday and 8am – 6pm Saturday, with an extension on 
Friday and Saturday nights up to midnight to support the evening economy in 
Scunthorpe and other market towns. 
14.21 “JustGo North Lincs” will set North Lincolnshire Council at the very forefront of innovative 
rural transport provision and the Council intends to utilise it as a springboard to relaunch 
bus use following the COVID pandemic and to build up a stronger passenger base made 
up from all areas of society. 
Public Transport Vision 
14.22 The shift to a more polycentric spatial strategy, that starts to direct more development 
away from Scunthorpe towards the other Principal Towns and other large service 
centres, requires a recasting of public transport provision, with a need to maintain focus 
on supporting Scunthorpe but also to start to better connect the surrounding key 
settlements, not just with Scunthorpe but also with each other. 
14.23 Rail transport is suitably well placed to play a significant role in supporting the spatial 
strategy, not least because the vast majority of identified growth settlements are on the 
rail network and infrastructure improvements are in the main not required. However, 
what is needed is a significant alteration to service provision and a transformational 
change to the timetables and connection opportunities. The rail network in North 
Lincolnshire is greatly underutilised for the movement of people and is an asset that can, 
with modest alterations to service provision, provide significant opportunities to support 
the spatial strategy and encourage and support modal shift and the sustainable 
movement of people. 
14.24 Coupled to this alteration to rail services is the need to improve bus service provision to 
plug the gaps in the rail network. Notably, to provide an improved direct link between 
Barton and Brigg via Barnetby linking identified housing and employment sites. Short 
term subsidy is likely to be required for such a service but longer term, with the support 
of other policies in this Plan and the LTP ITS, a commercial and sustainable operation 
should be achievable. 
14.25 Furthermore, a radical alteration to bus service provision with a significant shift towards 
“JustGo North Lincs” will implement advances in booking and scheduling technology. 
This would see the replacement of many of the heavily subsidised fixed route services 
with a flexible DRT system, enabling passengers to book and travel when they want to, 
rather than being tied to a timetable. This web of DRT would link into the fixed nodes 
such as rail stations and other key interchange points enabling complete mobility and 
connectivity across the authority’s area without the need to access a car. 
POLICY T2: PROMOTING PUBLIC TRANSPORT 
1. To support the spatial strategy and encourage sustainable transport use the Council 
will support measures and actively encourage through partnership working, a 
transformed level of public transport service provision. 
2. This will include actively pursuing changes to rail franchises and timetables to 
improve services on the rail network to better integrate and link the key settlements. 
3. Provide for improved infrastructure at key interchange points. 
4. Support “JustGo North Lincs”/ DRT services across the area by seeking contributions 
from developers. 
Page 312 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) NEW DEVELOPMENTS AND TRANSPORT 
14.26 NPPF seeks to balance the transport system in favour of sustainable transport modes, 
giving people a real choice about how they travel. It requires development to give priority 
to pedestrian and cycle movements and have access to public transport. This Local Plan 
recognises that development management provides an opportunity to seek to modify 
travel demands and habits to promote sustainable development. 
14.27 NPPF states that all developments that generate significant amounts of movements 
should be supported by a Transport Assessment or Statement, which will in turn inform 
a Travel Plan. The required level of assessment should be discussed and agreed with the 
Council, prior to submitting a planning application. 
14.28 Transport Assessments set out the transport issues relating to proposed major 
developments and identify what measures will be taken to deal with the anticipated 
transport impacts of a scheme. This assessment is integral to the production of a Travel 
Plan. A Travel Plan aims to improve accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, 
particularly for alternatives to the car such as walking, cycling and public transport, for a 
particular development or organisation. It will therefore identify initiatives and measures 
that are specific to the development or organisations own circumstances and 
requirements. All Travel Plans would be expected to include the following: 
• Site assessment and audit 
• Impact assessment of the proposed uses 
• Objectives and overall strategy 
• Appropriate measures to encourage/deliver outcomes/targets 
• Targets 
• Arrangements for carrying out review and monitoring of the Travel Plan 
• Steps to be taken to promote/disseminate identified measures to the end users 
• Timetable for implementation of measures 
14.29 The Travel Plan measures for each site will vary, depending upon the circumstances of 
each development, the requirements and travel patterns of the site users and the 
constraints and opportunities offered by the site itself. However, measures which should 
be considered include: 
• Site layout designed to encourage and maximise opportunities to walk and cycle and 
allow for access by bus services and provision of bus stops 
• Provision of direct, convenient and attractive pedestrian and cycling routes to local 
facilities and which connect into the wider network 
• Information provided on the health benefits of walking and cycling (e.g. maps and online 
references) 
• Provision of secure, sheltered and adequate cycle parking facilities 
• Provision of changing/shower facilities, drying rooms and cycle locker facilities at work 
places 
• Introduction of financial incentives to encourage cycling (e.g. cycle mileage allowance for 
work use) 
• Provision of site specific public transport information (e.g. maps, leaflets) 
• Provision of discounted ticketing and season ticket loans. 
14.30 For a Travel Plan to work successfully, a Travel Plan Coordinator should be appointed, 
who will be responsible for: 
• Implementing the Travel Plan measures 
• Liaising with users of the development and promoting sustainable travel 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 313 • Liaising with stakeholders, including the Local Planning and Highway Authorities 
• Monitoring the effectiveness of the Travel Plan 
• Reviewing the Travel Plan and preparing Action Plans. 
POLICY T3: NEW DEVELOPMENT AND TRANSPORT 
1. In order to increase overall accessibility, minimise congestion and improve safety, new 
development will be supported where it is accessible, or can be made accessible, by 
sustainable modes of transport and addresses its likely transport impact. 
Development proposals should: 
a. Produce and agree a transport assessment and travel plan, where requested by the 
Council; 
b. Support, encourage and promote sustainable travel options, which may include 
walking, cycling, public transport, electric and ultra-low emission vehicles, car sharing 
and car clubs particularly in the Scunthorpe and Bottesford urban area, principal 
towns and large service centres; 
c. Bring forward other necessary transport infrastructure to accommodate expected 
movement to and from the development; 
d. Be provided with a satisfactory access which must ensure the safe operation of the 
highway. Proposals that cannot be served by a safe access and/or would adversely 
affect the safe operation of the highway will be refused; and, 
e. Not have an adverse impact on the network's functioning and safety. Proposals that 
have significant transport implications will be expected to deliver necessary and cost 
effective mitigation measures. Such measures shall be secured through conditions 
and/or legal agreements. 
2. Developers will be required to demonstrate that their development is adequately 
served by a variety of modes of transport and will not have an adverse effect on 
transport near the site. The Council will require developers to contribute towards 
measures in the vicinity of the development to enhance the following, both on and off 
site: 
a. Public transport services and infrastructure, providing bus stops within a 400m walk 
of all new developments, 
b. Facilities for pedestrians and cyclists, 
c. On street parking controls, 
d. Traffic calming/reduction measures. 
3. These measures will be secured through planning conditions and/or legal 
agreements. 
PARKING 
14.31 Parking provision should generally meet the anticipated level of demand for the 
development following the implementation of any travel planning measures. Therefore, 
in locations where good sustainable transport linkages exist, alongside easy access to 
shops and services, less provision may need to be made. Getting this balance right is 
crucial as failure to provide sufficient parking can lead to indiscriminate parking that not 
only looks unattractive but can be unsafe or lead to neighbour disputes. The NPPF has 
introduced greater flexibility to take account of the particular nature and setting of 
Page 314 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) development and the importance of local factors in determining the level of car parking 
provision is recognised. These relate to the need to revitalise an area, the extent to which 
an area is environmentally sensitive, to the availability of infrastructure for cyclist and 
pedestrians, and the availability of public parking facilities. 
14.32 The Council will work with partners to ensure that car parking is managed to support the 
economy and sustainable communities. The lack of, or poor planning of parking provision, 
can have a negative impact on the public realm and the local highway network and can 
restrict the accessibility and mobility needs of people and businesses. Over-provision and 
poor management can lead to inefficient land use and can also discourage greater use 
of more sustainable modes of transport. 
14.33 Traffic congestion is directly linked to air pollution with the most polluting vehicles being 
those with older diesel engines. This contributes to increases in nitrogen dioxide (NO2) 
emissions in the atmosphere. Air pollution is damaging to human health and can 
exacerbate respiratory problems including asthma and inflammation of the airways as 
well as many other ill health effects. Poor air quality is the largest environmental risk to 
public health in the UK and therefore measures to address it should be considered as a 
priority. 
14.34 The Climate Change Act 2008, committed the UK to reducing greenhouse gas emissions 
by at least 80% by 2050. In order to meet this target, the Government has committed for 
nearly every car and van in the UK to be zero emissions by 2050 as set out in their Road 
to Zero Strategy 2018. The strategy sets out how this will be achieved: 
• The UK will end the sale of all new conventional petrol and diesel cars/vans in 2030. 
• The UK will ‘develop one of the best Electric Vehicle Charging Point (EVCP) networks in 
the World. 
14.35 There are also many benefits to the owner of electric vehicles including lower fuel costs, 
no road tax and no congestion chargers in some inner city areas. As such, any measures 
that can be taken now to facilitate this change to low emission vehicles will help to 
future-proof development within North Lincolnshire. 
14.36 The Government’s Clean Growth Strategy 2018, states that the Public Sector is to lead 
the way to transitioning to zero emission vehicles. To ensure the district is prepared for 
future changes in vehicle demands, it is essential that the necessary infrastructure to 
facilitate the uptake is provided. Therefore, new development should seek to deliver high 
standards of sustainability in accordance with Local and National Planning Policy. NPPF 
(revised 2021) encourages the provision of electric vehicle charging points (EVCP) in 
developments by ensuring an adequate provision of spaces for charging plug-in and 
other ultra-low emission vehicles and that development should be designed to enable 
charging of plug-in and other ultra-low emission vehicles in safe, accessible and 
convenient locations. It is also stated in paragraph 179 of the Framework that ‘Planning 
policies and decisions should sustain and contribute towards compliance with relevant 
limit values or national objectives for pollutants, taking into account the presence of Air 
Quality Management Areas and Clean Air Zones, and the cumulative impacts from 
individual sites in local areas’. 
14.37 There are a number of options available in the UK for the charging of electric vehicles. 
Consideration for the implementation of EVCP’s needs to be given to the location, vehicle 
type, required speed of charge, future proof and UK wiring regulations. It is expected that 
the following guidance documents are considered for the implementation of EVCP 
installations: 
• ‘Code of Practice for Electric Vehicle Charging Equipment Installation’ written by IET 
Standards (http://www.theiet.org/resources/standards/ev-cop.cfm) or with the equivalent 
most up to date guidance note. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 315 • ‘A Guide to Electric Vehicle Infrastructure’ by BEAMA (2015), or the equivalent most up to 
date copy (www.beama.org.uk) 
14.38 Developers are now required to demonstrate that they are making all reasonable efforts 
to minimise total emissions from development sites during both construction and 
operational phases. This will include the requirement to promote and incentivise the use 
of low emission vehicles to reduce the overall emission impact of development related 
traffic. 
POLICY T4: PARKING 
1. Development proposals that generate additional parking demand should ensure that 
appropriate vehicle, powered two wheeler and cycle parking provision is made. The 
form and scale of off-street parking required will be assessed against the following: 
a. the accessibility of the development; 
b. the type, mix and use of the development; 
c. the availability and frequency of public transport services; and, 
d. local car ownership levels. 
2. Developers will be expected to have considered and incorporated measures to 
minimise parking provision without causing detriment to the functioning of the 
highway network, local amenity, and safety. 
3. Where private and/or public on-site parking for public use is to be provided at least 5% 
of parking bays, should be designed, set out and reserved for people with mobility 
impairments. Such parking bays should be located as close to the main access to the 
building as possible. 
4. Parking should incorporate facilities for electric vehicle charging and other ultra-low 
emission vehicles where appropriate, including parking courts and at non-residential 
locations. The type and number of chargers will vary dependant on location. One 
charging point per residential parking space should be provided. 
5. Development proposals that make provision for surface parking areas to serve more 
than a single household, visitor, employee, or customer, should ensure that 
appropriate low maintenance landscaping is integrated into the design and layout of 
the sites. 
Page 316 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 6. Electric Charging Points are to be provided to the following standards: -
Type of Development Requirement 
Residential Dwellings with secure parking 
(defined as a house with a 
garage or a private driveway) 1 electric vehicle charging point per dwelling. 
Dwellings with private allocated
off curtilage parking 1 electric vehicle charging point per 10 parking 
spaces. Passive provision (cabling laid out to 
enable future provision) is provided for the 
remainder of the spaces. 
Other types of development (Commercial/ 
industrial/retail etc.) Up to 50 parking bays 
At least one electric vehicle charging point which
must be marked out for use by electric vehicles
only. Greater than 50 parking bays Electric vehicle charging points totalling 5% of
the total car parking space provision. These must
be marked out for use by electric vehicles only. Type of charging equipment provided to be 
agreed with the Local Planning Authority and is
dependent on end use requirement. Where provision is required for taxi waiting, the
taxi spaces will be expected to include electric
vehicle charging facilities. 
Mixed use A combination of the above requirements to be 
agreed with Local Authority. 
14.39 Parking provision for cycles and motorcycles should also be considered. Cycling offers a 
cost effective, environmentally friendly way of travelling and is good for people’s health. 
Correct provision of cycle parking facilities can encourage more people to cycle. However, 
incorrect provision can put people off cycling or result in bikes being parked 
inappropriately. Motorcycles are also a good way to travel around, they cause less 
congestion and can be less polluting than a car. If people are to be encouraged to use 
motorcycles the design of parking facilities need careful thought; fear of theft is one of the 
biggest deterrents to motorcyclists. Both cycle and motorcycle parking take up less space 
than car parking and are cheaper to provide. 
POLICY T5: CYCLE AND MOTORCYCLE PARKING 
1. Development proposals that generate additional parking demand should require that 
adequate cycle and motorcycle parking provision is made. This should be: 
a. Well signed, easy to find and benefit from good natural surveillance; and, 
b. Cycle shelters and compounds should be provided for all day/long stay parking . 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 317 MOVING FREIGHT 
14.40 The efficient movement of freight is of significant importance in North Lincolnshire. The 
Ports of Immingham and Grimsby are the busiest ports in the UK in terms of tonnage 
handled. In addition to these, there are several smaller ports and inland wharves, which 
are an important part of the local economy and allow for the import and export of various 
cargos, including steel, timber and dry bulk. 
14.41 The majority of freight is moved by road and the environmental impact of these 
movements can be reduced by the increased impact of rail and water transport. 
Although the proportion of total freight that is transported by rail is small, it is anticipated 
that 25% of all UK rail freight passes through North Lincolnshire. 
14.42 It is predicted that by around 2021, over 50% of containers arriving at UK ports will be on 
‘high cube’ containers. Work has been completed on the railway line between Doncaster 
and Immingham to provide W12 Gauge Clearance, to allow these containers to be 
transported and encourage a modal shift from road to rail. One intermodal train is the 
equivalent to 43 HGVs, therefore a mode shift from road to rail for container traffic would 
significantly reduce vehicle emissions and reduce air quality. It is estimated that per 
tonne, rail freight produces around 76% less C02 emissions than road haulage and also 
less than a tenth of the nitrogen oxide and fine particulates of road haulage per tonne 
carried. 
14.43 Road freight is prevalent in North Lincolnshire and it is acknowledged that there is a 
shortage of lorry parking in the area, particularly around Scunthorpe and the South 
Humber Gateway. This leads to inappropriate parking in these areas with associated 
negative environmental impacts, such as littering. 
POLICY T6: FREIGHT 
1. The existing network of rail freight routes and infrastructure will be safeguarded. 
Disused railway alignments will be protected from development where there is a 
reasonable prospect of their re-use for transport purposes. 
2. The use of rail for goods traffic will be encouraged by ensuring: 
a. New developments which generate freight capable of bulk transport by rail are 
located close to rail facilities wherever possible; 
b. Greater use of private sidings and the introduction of new ones; and, 
c. Provision of rail freight handling facilities at ports and other appropriate facilities. 
3. Support the development of a freight strategy to include lorry parking sites, HGV route 
management and provision of facilities for (and promote the benefits of) transferring 
freight delivery from road to rail and/or water transport, wherever practical, 
particularly in relation to the movement of freight to and from the South Humber Ports 
and Trent Wharves. The use of the waterway network for waterborne goods 
movement will be encouraged. 
SAFEGUARDING TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE 
14.44 The Council has identified a number of transport infrastructure schemes that will assist 
in delivering the economic and housing growth that this Plan promotes and seeks. They 
are seen as being fundamental of delivering this plan’s housing and employment sites. 
Page 318 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Funding for the majority of the schemes is sought from the Local Enterprise Partnerships 
and other external funding sources and are in varying stages of consideration. 
Lincolnshire Lakes 
14.45 The highways infrastructure is required to unlock land for housing and facilitate 
development, including: 
• Creation of two new junctions on the M181, southern (terminal) junction and northern 
junction, with associated de-trunking and reclassification of the M181 to an A road 
• Further works will be required to the de-trunked M181, including new signage, reduced 
speed limits and provision of footway/cycleway between Frodingham Grange and the 
Northern Junction to complement the de-trunking works. 
• Signalised junction at West Common Lane/Scotter Road 
• Junction improvements at Burringham Road/Scotter Road 
• Junction improvements at Scotter Road/Brumby Wood Lane 
• Provision of high quality pedestrian and cycling infrastructure throughout the site, 
including the downgrading of Brumby Common Lane to become a non-motorised user 
route and upgraded facilities on Burringham Road 
• High quality public transport services and facilities 
Brigg Link Road 
14.46 The primary aim of the Brigg Link Road is to gain access to the five housing allocations 
in Brigg to the north and west of the town (approximately 820 dwellings across sites 
H1P-11, H1P-12, H1P-13 and H1P-14). A Link Road from Wrawby Road, across 
Grammar School Road to Atherton Way, through the land allocations is required as an 
integral part of the development. 
Barton Link Road 
14.47 To support the growth of the manufacturing sector in Barton upon Humber and unlock 
land for future housing, a new road is recommended to the immediate south of the town. 
This will link the A1077/Falkland Way to the A15 via the B1218, reducing traffic flows, 
particularly HGVs, through the town centre. 
Melton Ross Bridge 
14.48 This structure carries the A18 over the South Humber Mainline (rail), linking Humberside 
Airport to the M180 at Barnetby Top. The bridge is currently in a weakened state and the 
only long-term practical solution is the provision of a new structure. This will ensure that 
this section of the A18 remains open to all vehicles and maintains unimpeded linkages 
between the Airport and M180. This would assist in opening up development land at the 
airport. 
Improved access to North Killingholme Airfield 
14.49 North Killingholme Airfield is a strategic employment site, which is closely linked to the 
employment land allocation at the South Humber Bank. Currently, the Airfield is accessed 
via Lancaster Approach. However, a new access is required to improve access to the site, 
provide resilience and minimise the impact of development traffic on residents. Further 
work is required to identify a preferred option of a new access route and external funding 
would be required to deliver this. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 319 Improved access to Sandtoft Industrial Estate 
14.50 Local access improvements to serve Sandtoft Business Park are required. These include: 
• Junction improvements at A18/High Levels Bank/Jaques Bank 
• Localised improvement/widening at Brooks Corner 
• Carriageway widening to M180 overbridge 
• Roundabout at site access on C202 Idle Bank 
• Link road through the site and associated internal infrastructure 
• Roundabout on Belton Road 
• Traffic Management measures on Westgate Road. 
A15 Improvements 
14.51 The A15 between Junction 4 of the M180 and the A46 at Lincoln is a key north-south 
strategic transport corridor. The A15/A46 connects the Humber ports into the wider 
network to Newark and the A1, or to the A17 and access to the food production areas of 
southern Lincolnshire and Norfolk beyond. 
14.52 There has been continued decline in the performance of the A15, with slow journey times 
impacting upon journey reliability, safety and the resilience of the network. This holds 
back productivity and is also a barrier to future growth. 
14.53 Transport infrastructure is a key driver in delivering economic growth and North 
Lincolnshire Council and partner authorities have prioritised investigating improvements 
to the A15. This will enable faster, safer, reliable and resilient connectivity to regional, 
national and international markets. Further work is required to produce a feasibility study 
for upgrading the route, and North Lincolnshire Council will work with partner authorities 
and organisations to deliver improvements and upgrades to the A15. 
14.54 These measures will be developer led and delivered in a phased manner in accordance 
with a masterplan accompanying any planning application(s) to be agreed with North 
Lincolnshire Council. 
POLICY T7: SAFEGUARDING TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE 
1. The Council will safeguard the routes of, and support measures which deliver, 
maintain and improve, key transport infrastructure, identified on the Policies Map, 
namely: 
a. Lincolnshire Lakes road and transport infrastructure, 
b. Brigg Link Road, 
c. Barton Link Road, 
d. Melton Ross Bridge, 
e. Improved access to North Killingholme Airfield, to provide an alternative access to 
Lancaster Approach, 
f. Improved access to Sandtoft Industrial Estate, 
g. Improvements to the A15 (South) – between Junction 4 of the M180 and A46. 
Page 320 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) SAFEGUARDING AVIATION 
14.55 North Lincolnshire has a rich aviation history and the council recognises the importance 
of aviation to the local and regional economy. Aviation creates jobs, encourages the 
economy to grow and connects the UK with the rest of the world as a dynamic trading 
nation. It is also important for maintaining social and family ties. This is why the growth 
of aviation is supported and the benefits this would deliver, provided that growth takes 
place in a sustainable way, with actions to mitigate the environmental impacts. 
14.56 There are two international airports in and around North Lincolnshire that provide air 
links to Europe and beyond - Humberside Airport and Doncaster Sheffield Airport. 
Humberside serves over 230,000 passenger a year and enjoys three daily direct flights 
to/from Amsterdam’s Schiphol Airport, one of the globe’s major hub airports, which offers 
connections to over 800 destinations worldwide. 
14.57 Humberside Airport is located adjacent to the A18 at Kirmington some two miles to the 
east of Barnetby Top Interchange with the M180/A180. 
14.58 The airport has established air traffic associated with off-shore gas production and 
exploration and UK domestic and European flights. In addition there a number of charter 
flights, with the number being seasonally influenced. The airport has also been the 
subject of significant investment in recent years. It is currently one of largest helicopter 
base in the UK for the off-shore oil and gas industry in the southern North Sea, a role and 
a market segment which is continuing to grow 
14.59 In addition to Humberside Airport there are a number of privately owned airfields across 
North Lincolnshire that are used for a variety of flying related activities, that fall under the 
general aviation sector. All of which are located on former RAF airfields utilising runways 
and facilities originally established during WW2. 
14.60 These facilities provide a valued contribution to North Lincolnshire’s economy and offer 
commercial and private flying in a variety of forms. It is considered that local airfields 
offering general aviation flying should be protected from development that would have 
an adverse impact on the running and operation of the airfield, unless it can be 
demonstrated that the airfield use is no longer viable. 
14.61 The Trent Valley Gliding Club, since the early 1970s, have flown from the grass airstrip 
located to the south of the technical buildings at the former RAF Kirton in Lindsey, which 
was opened in 1940 as a fighter base. 
14.62 Hibaldstow airfield, originally developed for Bomber Command in 1941 but used by 
fighter command has been home to Skydive for over 25 years and has become one of the 
UK’s largest dropzones. 
14.63 Sandtoft airfield, a former WW2 satellite bomber base is home to a private airstrip and 
is commercially run and offers flying and plane repairs/maintenance. 
POLICY T8: SAFEGUARDING AVIATION 
1. The Humberside International Airport site, Sandtoft Airfield, Hibaldstow Airfield, and 
the landing area at the former RAF Kirton in Lindsey is safeguarded for aviation uses. 
Any development at Humberside Airport itself, or on nearby sites, which will prejudice 
the aviation use of the site will not be permitted. 
2. Any development at Sandtoft Airfield, Hibaldstow Airfield and the landing area at the 
former RAF Kirton in Lindsey, or on nearby sites, which will prejudice the current 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 321 aviation use of the site will not be permitted, unless it can be proven that such use is 
no longer viable and that the site is not required for aviation purposes. 
Page 322 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 15 Development Management 
15.1 The Development Management (DM) chapter of the North Lincolnshire Local Plan sets 
out the Council's planning policies for managing development and growth in the area 
from now until 2038. It assists in achieving our ambition that North Lincolnshire is the 
best place for our residents and the best Council we can be. The DM policies aim to 
ensure all new developments will result in safer communities, safer places, safer people, 
safer environments and spaces. This should result in an improved overall quality of life for 
existing and future residents of North Lincolnshire. 
15.2 The policies in this section should be read alongside the strategic policies set out in the 
earlier section of this Local Plan. The Council will produce Supplementary Planning 
Documents (SPDs) where it considers them necessary to provide more details on the 
policies set out within other parts of the Local Plan. SPDs are not part of the statutory 
development plan and do not have the same weight; however, they will be significant 
considerations in determining planning applications. 
15.3 The primary objective of development management is to enable the delivery of 
sustainable development. The Council sees development management as a positive and 
proactive approach to shaping, considering, determining and delivering development 
proposals and it is not intended to hinder or prevent sustainable development. 
15.4 Government guidance makes it clear that a Local Plan should not repeat policies that are 
in either National Policy or other ‘development plan’ documents. The absence of a policy 
for a particular topic in the Local Plan therefore does not necessarily mean that the topic 
is unimportant; it may be that there is already a relevant adopted policy and must 
therefore be read in conjunction with the other relevant plans and guidance. 
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
15.5 To design communities that are safe and flourishing, all new development should meet 
the aspirations for excellence and sustainability in their design and layout. In short, good 
design is inseparable from good planning. 
15.6 High quality sustainable design is that of a notable standard, which, by its nature, 
features and usability, will sustain over the longer term as it is fit for purpose, has 
potential to respond to changing needs, and enables occupants/users to live more 
sustainably. 
15.7 A fundamental part of achieving high quality sustainable design, and ultimately high 
quality sustainable places, is the need to develop a thorough understanding of the local 
character and the qualities which contribute to local distinctiveness. North Lincolnshire is 
made up of many locally distinctive places including high streets, market squares, 
industrial estates, urban neighbourhoods, rural villages and landscapes, which, in 
combination with a variety of natural forms and features, contribute to the rich and varied 
character of North Lincolnshire. All new development must make a positive contribution 
to the character and appearance of the environment within which it is located, having 
regard to its local context, and should not impact negatively upon the amenity 
experienced by neighbours. By its very nature mineral extraction potentially could impact 
on local character, landscape and townscape. Where the above cannot be ensured, the 
benefits of mineral extraction must outweigh any likely harm and significant justification 
and mitigation must be provided. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 323 15.8 Developers will be expected to explain how the policy matters below have been 
addressed within their development proposals, where appropriate, in the Design and 
Access Statement submitted with their planning application. 
POLICY DM1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
1. All new development, including extensions and alterations to existing buildings must 
achieve high quality sustainable design that contributes positively to local character, 
landscape and townscape, and supports diversity, equality and access for all. 
2. Development proposals will be assessed against the following relevant design and 
amenity criteria: 
Design Principles 
3. All development must respect and enhance the character and local distinctiveness of 
the area and create a sense of place. As such, proposals will be required to: 
a. Make efficient use of land; 
b. Maximise pedestrian mobility and avoid barriers to movement through careful 
consideration of street layouts and access routes; 
c. Respect the existing topography, landscape character and identity, and relate well to 
the site and surroundings, particularly in relation to siting, height, scale, massing, form 
and lot widths; 
d. Where applicable, not result in the visual or physical coalescence with any 
neighbouring settlement; 
e. Where applicable, not result in ribbon development, nor extend existing linear features 
of the settlement, and instead retain, where appropriate, a tight settlement nucleus; 
f. Incorporate and retain as far as possible existing natural and historic features such as 
hedgerows, trees, ponds, boundary walls, field patterns, buildings or structures and 
watercourses; 
g. Incorporate appropriate landscape treatment to ensure that the development can be 
satisfactorily assimilated into the surrounding area; 
h. Provide well designed boundary treatments, and hard and soft landscaping that 
reflect the function and character of the development and its surroundings; 
i. Protect any important long local views into, out of or through the site; 
j. Duly reflect the original architectural style of the local surroundings, or embrace 
opportunities for innovative design and new technologies which sympathetically 
complement or contrast with the local architectural style; 
k. Use appropriate, high quality materials which reinforce local distinctiveness, with 
consideration given to texture, colour, pattern and durability; 
l. Ensure places and buildings are accessible to all and design against crime; 
m. Incorporate sustainable design to reduce long term greenhouse gas emissions; 
n. Enhance the natural environment through the provision of measurable net gains to 
biodiversity and contribute to nature’s recovery through establishment of Nature 
Recovery Networks, as appropriate to their nature and scale; and, 
o. Incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems and the Drainage Hierarchy. 
Page 324 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Amenity Considerations 
4. The amenities which occupiers of neighbouring properties may reasonably expect to 
enjoy must not be harmed by or as a result of the development (including extensions 
to existing premises and change of use). Proposals should demonstrate, where 
appropriate, how the following matters have been considered, in relation to both the 
construction and life of the development: 
a. Compatibility with neighbouring land uses; 
b. Overlooking; 
c. Overshadowing; 
d. Loss of light; 
e. Adequate storage, sorting and collection of household and commercial waste, 
including provision for increasing recyclable waste; and, 
f. Creation of safe environments. 
5. Planning permission for development will only be permitted where it can be 
demonstrated that the levels of potentially polluting emissions, including effluent, 
leachates, smoke, fumes, gases, dust, steam, smell or noise do not pose a danger by 
way of toxic release; result in land contamination; pose a threat to current and future 
surface or underground water resources; or create adverse environmental conditions 
likely to affect nearby developments and adjacent areas. 
Changes of Use in Residential Areas 
6. Within residential areas, favourable consideration will be given to proposals for a 
change of use from residential to other uses, provided that the development will not 
adversely affect the appearance and character of a residential area or residential 
amenity by virtue of noise, vibration, traffic generation, reduction in road safety, 
odorous emissions (by way of dust, smell, fumes, smoke, soot, ash or grit) or other 
adverse environmental conditions. 
7. Where applications are for temporary operations, which may have significant impacts 
for a short period, conditions can be applied to control such impacts, but the benefits 
must outweigh any likely harm and justification and mitigation must be provided in 
advance. 
Piecemeal Development 
8. In sites suitable for large developments, proposals that are piecemeal in nature will 
normally be resisted unless it is demonstrated that it will not prejudice the delivery of 
the larger site. Any proposal will be considered in the context of the larger site where 
appropriate. 
15.9 One of the key aims of Policy DM1 is to help encourage the growth and development of 
small businesses but to maintain control over the impact that business activity, carried 
out at home, can have on the surrounding area. 
15.10 Current economic trends are towards domestic properties being used as a base for 
starting a new business. In some cases the change of use will be so small in scale that it 
will not require planning permission. In other cases activities can be carried out with no 
resulting adverse effects on local amenity, as most uses will fall within Use Class E 
(Commercial, business and service) of the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) 
(Amendment) England Regulations 2020 (SI 2020 No.757). Where uses give rise to 
nuisance or inconvenience they are often considered unacceptable, for example as a 
result of higher levels of vehicle movement than would reasonably be expected from a 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 325 residential address, or because of noisy or odorous operations. In some cases, planning 
conditions can be used to control the impact of such proposals, but if adverse impacts 
cannot be reduced to acceptable levels, planning permission will be refused. 
15.11 Policy DM1 also ensures that piecemeal development does not prejudice the proper 
planning of a large development whether or not the large development site is formally 
identified in a development plan. In most cases, it is expected that layout, open space, 
access and infrastructure will be the prime issues. 
TEMPORARY BUILDINGS 
15.12 Temporary buildings include portable offices and classrooms. These usually do not give 
the appearance of being substantial structures intended to remain in situ on a permanent 
basis, and can potentially have a negative impact on local amenity. However, it is 
recognised that such facilities can be vital to the expansion of industrial and commercial 
premises, and that short-term arrangements are often required to accommodate the 
expansion of community facilities such as schools and health centres. In other cases, 
permanent development might prejudice other planned development, when the site is in 
temporary occupation pending such development commencing. Only in these 
circumstances will the erection of temporary buildings be given favourable consideration. 
15.13 The Town and Country Planning (General Permitted Development) Order 2015 (as 
amended) provides permitted development rights for temporary buildings associated 
with construction works. In all other circumstances where planning permission is sought 
for the siting of temporary buildings, the need for such structures will be balanced 
against the need to avoid any adverse effects on visual amenity. 
POLICY DM2: TEMPORARY BUILDINGS 
1. Planning permission will be granted for temporary buildings provided the following 
criteria are met: 
a. the building is not highly visible to the general public or detrimental to the amenity of 
the area/landscape; and, 
b. the development will not prejudice proposals for permanent development on the site. 
2. In granting planning permission for temporary buildings, conditions may be imposed 
requiring the landscaping of the development or other measures to help mitigate its 
impact on the visual amenity of the area. 
3. A time limited (temporary) planning permission will be granted for non-permanent 
structures in cases where a permanent permission would prejudice future 
development of the site. 
15.14 Temporary buildings, whilst being essential to the expansion and development of 
business and community facilities, are by their nature likely to incur high maintenance 
and running costs. There is no wish to overly restrict the erection or use of such buildings 
but there is nevertheless a need to ensure that they are adequately maintained and 
removed from the site when their useable life has expired. Neither should the erection of 
a temporary building prevent the satisfactory development of permanent buildings on 
the site at a later date. 
Page 326 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
15.15 The Local Plan plays an important strategic role in delivering development that is 
sustainable, clean and green. North Lincolnshire’s prosperity and well-being is 
underpinned by a high quality and well managed environment. We rely upon our water 
and green spaces for food, water and the air we breathe. Pollution of air, land and water 
has the potential to have adverse impacts upon the environment and therefore if not 
properly controlled and managed development can adversely impact the health, well-
being and prosperity of residents and local businesses. It is therefore essential to ensure 
that wherever possible, all forms of pollution (including noise, vibration, light, impacts 
upon air quality land and water) are considered, controlled and mitigated against in order 
to keep people safe and well and improve prosperity within North Lincolnshire. 
15.16 NPPF requires that planning policies ensure that new development is appropriate for its 
location taking into account the likely effects (including cumulative effects) of pollution on 
health, living conditions and the natural environment, as well as the potential sensitivity 
of the site or the wider area to impacts that could arise from the development. The 
Council’s policies seek to ensure that approved developments are an acceptable use of 
the land and in doing so the policies will seek to: 
a. Prevent new and existing development from contributing to, being put at unacceptable 
risk from, or being adversely affected by, unacceptable levels of soil, air, water or noise 
pollution or land instability and contamination, natural hazards such as radon and mining 
activities, impacts of remediation; 
b. Remediate and mitigate, degraded, derelict, contaminated and unstable land; 
c. Mitigate and reduce to a minimum potential adverse impacts resulting from noise from 
new development – and avoid noise giving rise to significant adverse impacts on health 
and the quality of life; 
d. Limit the impact of light pollution from artificial light on local amenity, intrinsically dark 
landscapes and nature conservation; 
e. Contribute towards compliance with relevant limit values or national objectives for 
pollutants, taking into account the presence of Air Quality Management Areas and Clean 
Air Zones, and the cumulative impacts from individual sites in local areas; 
f. New development can be integrated effectively with existing businesses and community 
facilities. 
15.17 Development that is sensitive to pollution that is within legal limits will not be appropriate 
where existing sources of pollution cannot be satisfactorily mitigated or where it would 
prejudice the viability of other important land uses by reasons of its sensitivity to 
pollution. 
AIR QUALITY 
15.18 Defra’s Clean Air Strategy 2019 has identified air quality as the top environmental risk to 
human health in the UK and the fourth greatest threat to public health after cancer, heart 
disease and obesity. The strategy sets out the long term national strategic goals to 
improve air quality. In addition to traffic and industrial sources, air pollution can also be 
caused by intensive agricultural food production and the heating of our homes. The 
strategy sets ambitious targets to reduce 5 key pollutants by 2020 and 2030 based on 
2005 baseline emissions as set out in Table 1 below: 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 327 TABLE 15.1 – EMISSION REDUCTIONS REQUIRED BY 2020 AND 2030 
2005 baseline 
(kt) Reduction 
required by 
2020 Reduction required by 
2030 2020 ceiling 
(kt) 2030 ceiling 
(kt) 
NOx 1,714 55% 73% 771 463 
SO2 773 59% 88% 317 93 
NMVOCs 1,042 32% 39% 709 636 
PM25 127 30% 46% 89 69 
NH3 288 8% 16% 265 242 
15.19 Further details in relation to the Governments Clean Air Strategy 2019 can be found here: 
https: //assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment_data/file/770715/clean-air-strategy-2019.pdf 
15.20 Local Plan policies will seek to ensure that the targets and milestones set out in the Clean 
Air Strategy 2019 and any future iterations/supporting policies/documents are achieved. 
15.21 The Council monitors and manages air pollution associated with National Air Quality 
Objectives via the mechanism of Local Air Quality Management in accordance with the 
Environment Act 1995. Further information can be obtained from the Council’s website 
http://www.nlincsair.info/ 
15.22 North Lincolnshire is currently compliant with National Air Quality Objectives for 
pollutants associated with traffic and the Council’s policies will ensure that development 
does not adversely impact this positive position. There is currently one Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA) within North Lincolnshire which covers land surrounding the 
Integrated Steelworks and the East of Scunthorpe, this is known as the Scunthorpe Town 
AQMA. This AQMA was first declared in 2005 for exceedances of the Particulate Matter 
(PM10) Daily Mean Air Quality Objective. The AQMA was later updated in 2018 due to 
ongoing improvements and collaborative working between local industry, the 
Environment Agency and North Lincolnshire Council. 
15.23 The Council has also produced an Air Quality Action Plan for the Scunthorpe Town 
AQMA. The Action Plan is a list of measures designed to improve local air quality. The 
consideration of air quality within planning responses is included as a key action to 
mitigate against any adverse impacts. This is achieved by following National Guidance 
such as the Institute of Air Quality Management (IAQM) and Environmental Protection UK 
(EPUK) Guidance Documents. 
15.24 The Government is leading the national commitment to preserve and enhance the 
environment via its publication of A Green Future: Our 25 Year Plan to Improve the 
Environment HM Government 2018. The 25 year strategic plan to improve the 
environment also links in to two other important government strategies: The Industrial 
Strategy which aims to boost productivity in the UK and Clean Growth Strategy which 
sets out economic and environmental policies designed to mitigate climate change and 
bring about clean green growth. 
15.25 The Government has identified that delivery of this plan requires sustained and 
committed effort to make these aspirations a reality and this requires collaborative 
working with local councils via an adoption of Do More Harm Less Policy. Incentives and 
regulation will aim to ensure these ambitions are met. The Government will embed 
changes that ensure housing and infrastructure development will be able to deliver 
“Environmental Net Gain”. 
15.26 When assessing applications, the Council will consider any metric measures and 
governance that are relevant to the 25 year environmental plan. This will be kept under 
Page 328 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) review to ensure the systems and requirements are kept up to date and in line with 
legislation and policy. This will allow flexibility to the assessment of applications that will 
ensure adaption to new evidence and changes in circumstances over the coming years. 
The provision of good evidence by applicants to support these metric measures will allow 
good decision making. New industry will be expected to align to the governments clean 
growth strategy. 
15.27 Where a specific development proposal has the potential to result in adverse 
environmental impacts, the Council will adopt the ‘polluter pays’ principle whereby the 
developer should meet the costs of mitigation or contribute towards environmental 
improvements elsewhere through planning contributions. The cumulative effects of 
various sources of pollution will be taken into account and detailed assessments to 
evaluate the level of risk and to identify appropriate measures to satisfactorily mitigate 
the risk of pollution may be required. 
LIGHT 
15.28 The introduction of new external light sources such as floodlights or the change to an 
existing light source can have a detrimental impact on residential amenity and wildlife 
alike. NPPF highlights the need to consider the impact of a proposed development in 
relation to human health, living conditions and the natural environment. It is important 
that the potential impact on wildlife from new light source pollution is considered and 
addressed early. Proposals will be required to consider solutions such as the retention of 
light corridors to overcome detrimental impacts on nature conservation and wildlife. 
NOISE 
15.29 The World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines has identified noise as an important 
public health issue featuring among the top environmental risks to health. Noise has 
negative impacts on human health and well-being and is a growing concern. The 
guidelines provide robust public health advice underpinned by evidence, which is 
essential to drive policy action that will protect communities from the adverse effects of 
noise. 
15.30 The guiding principles are to reduce exposure to noise, while conserving quiet areas; 
promote interventions to reduce exposure to noise and improve health; coordinate 
approaches to control noise sources and other environmental health risks; and to inform 
and involve communities potentially affected by a change in noise exposure. 
15.31 The Local Plan will seek to ensure that the guidelines set out by the WHO and any future 
recommendations are achieved. 
CONTAMINATED LAND 
15.32 North Lincolnshire has a long industrial heritage and it has large areas of land which are 
important for food production. Activities associated with industrial/commercial and 
agricultural processes, can result in adverse ground conditions which can pose a risk to 
the development, future site users and the environment. Former landfills, infilled ground 
and some naturally occurring sources such as peat and limestone/chalk can also be 
sources of hazardous ground gases which can pose an asphyxiation or explosion risk. 
Contamination can also occur naturally due to certain types of minerals being present in 
rocks and soils. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 329 15.33 Contamination can be present in various forms including chemical, biological and 
radioactive. Risks from contamination exists where there is a source (contaminant) a 
receptor and a pathway linking the two. The development of land can introduce new 
receptors and pathways to a site which previously were not present. 
15.34 The Council in collaboration with other local authority Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Pollution 
Advisory Group (YALPAG) members have produced a contaminated land planning good 
practice guidance document. The purpose of this guidance is to promote regional 
consistency and good practice for development on land affected by contamination. The 
guidance also specifies what information should be submitted to the Local Planning 
Authority when applying for planning permission. 
• YALPAG Technical Guidance for Developers Landowners and Consultants 
15.35 The above document has been produced in accordance with the NPPF and details that 
the developer is required to ensure that: 
• Where there is potential for contamination on a site or where a proposed development is 
vulnerable (for example housing with gardens, schools or nurseries) the risks from 
contamination are adequately considered. 
• Sufficient information demonstrating that the risks have been adequately considered 
and produced by a suitably qualified persons should be submitted with the application. 
• The information provided should follow the guidelines within CLR11 Model Procedures 
for the Management of Contaminated Land and any future updates and be in 
accordance with establish procedures such as BS 10175 Investigation of Potentially 
Contaminated Sites – Code of Practice. 
• Following remediation, the site should not be capable of being determined as 
contaminated land under Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990. 
ODOUR 
15.36 Odorous emissions arise from activities such as sewage works, intensive animal rearing, 
processing of animal remains, solid waste management (for example composting) and 
some industrial processes. 
15.37 The introduction of new sources of odours in proximity to sensitive receptors, or locating 
sensitive receptors near existing sources of odours should be avoided. Where potential 
adverse odour impacts are relevant to the development an odour impact assessment 
and proposed mitigation measures that demonstrates amenity will not be adversely 
impacted will be required. Such assessment should be compiled by a suitably qualified 
person in accordance with good practice guidance, such as the Institute of Air Quality 
Management: Guidance on the assessment for odour for planning. 
POLICY DM3: ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION 
1. Development proposals as appropriate to their nature and scale, should demonstrate 
that environmental impacts on receptors have been evaluated and appropriate 
measures have been taken to minimise the risks of adverse impacts to air, land and 
water quality, whilst assessing vibration, heat, energy, light and noise pollution. 
Air Quality 
2. The Council will seek to ensure that proposals for new development will not have an 
unacceptable negative impact on air quality and will not further exacerbate air quality 
Page 330 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) in the Scunthorpe Town AQMA or contribute to air pollution in areas which may result 
in a new AQMA. Applicants will be required to provide an air quality impact 
assessment to demonstrate this. 
3. The Council will seek to ensure that where a sensitive use is being proposed in an area 
of known poor air quality, the applicant will be required to provide an air quality impact 
assessment to demonstrate the development will not result in adverse effects on 
human health and local amenity. Residential development within the Scunthorpe 
AQMA will not be permitted where there is evidence of adverse effects on human 
health and local amenity. 
4. The Council will support and promote the provision of charging points for ultra-low 
emission vehicles. 
Light pollution 
5. Planning applications which involve light generating development including 
floodlighting will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that there would be 
no adverse impact (individually or cumulatively) on local amenities, living conditions, 
health and the natural environment. 
Noise pollution 
6. Development generating noise which is likely to create significant adverse impacts on 
health and quality of life and cannot be mitigated and controlled through the use of 
conditions will not be permitted. 
Contaminated Land 
7. In the case of proposals for development on land known or strongly suspected as 
being impacted by contamination, hazardous gases, land instability, of a sensitive end 
use, the applicant will be required to provide sufficient information that demonstrates 
that the level of contamination can be overcome by remedial measures or 
improvements. In these cases permission will only be granted where a phase 1 desk 
based assessment and detailed site survey has been submitted. Where significant 
risks to human health and/or the environment are present; planning permission will 
only be granted in circumstances where a suitable scheme of remedial measures has 
been agreed that will be obtained via a planning condition and/or legal agreement to 
overcome any existing contamination. 
Odour 
8. Where proposals have the potential to release significant odours or where a sensitive 
use is being proposed near to an existing odorous process, applicants will be required 
to provide an odour impact assessment which demonstrates that impacts upon 
amenity can be avoided or properly mitigated and managed by remedial measures or 
improvements as part of the design of the proposed development. In these cases, 
planning permission will only be granted where a suitable mitigation scheme of 
remedial measures or improvements has been agreed that will be obtained via a 
planning condition and/or legal agreement to overcome any adverse impact upon 
amenity. Proposals for development adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, existing uses will 
need to demonstrate that both the ongoing use of the site is not compromised, and 
that the amenity of occupiers of the new development will be satisfactory with the 
ongoing use of the existing site. 
9. Development will not be permitted where it would have an adverse effect on the 
quality or quantity of groundwater sources or watercourses or water bodies. 
Proposals will be supported where it can be demonstrated in a hydrogeological/water 
quality risk assessment that there are no unacceptable impacts on surface water 
quality and flows or groundwater quality and levels at or in the vicinity of the site. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 331 Water Environment 
10. Development will not be permitted where it would have an adverse effect on the 
quality or quantity of groundwater resources or watercourses and water bodies. 
Opportunities for environmental improvement are encouraged, particularly: 
a. the availability of water to support the development; 
b. the capacity to effectively and sustainably manage foul and surface water; 
c. sustainable drainage systems; 
d. water efficiency*; 
e. access to infrastructure and water environments for the purpose of maintenance and 
monitoring; 
f. protecting aquifers and groundwater in sensitive locations by preventing potentially 
polluting activities being located in the most sensitive locations for groundwater; and, 
g. acknowledging the requirements of the Water Framework Directive. (*The 
requirement for higher water efficiency standard of 110 l/person/day). 
11. In order to promote natural solutions to climate change, reference should also be 
made to the requirements of Policy DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity in this Plan. 
Hazardous Installations and Pipelines 
12. Proposals for the development of hazardous installations/pipelines, modifications to 
existing sites, or development in the vicinity of hazardous installations or pipelines, will 
be permitted where it has been demonstrated that the amount, type and location of 
hazardous substances would not pose unacceptable health and/or safety risks. 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND BROADBAND 
15.38 Effective telecommunications play an essential role in modern life. Mobile 
telecommunications and access to high speed, reliable broadband are essential to the 
efficient operations of modern business and to individual lifestyles. As technology 
advances the demand for new telecommunications infrastructure will continue to grow. 
15.39 The Northern Lincolnshire Broadband project; a partnership between North and North 
East Lincolnshire Councils, was established to upgrade broadband across Northern 
Lincolnshire. In June 2018 1.5% of Northern Lincolnshire will not have access to Next 
Generation access (NGA, superfast) broadband infrastructure. The Council is continuing 
to take advantage of funding to deliver high-speed broadband to as many parts of North 
Lincolnshire as possible. 
15.40 The Council is keen to support this growth whilst seeking to ensure that visual and 
environmental issues are given appropriate consideration. 
15.41 Government is clear that the provision of gigabit-capable connectivity to new build 
developments is a crucial element of meeting our ambitious broadband targets. The 
Government has therefore secured commitments from network operators, outlining their 
commitment to work with housing developers on providing gigabit-capable connections 
to all new build developments across the UK. These commitments alongside the 
amendments to the Building Regulations 2010 to require all new build developments to 
have gigabit broadband will ensure that 99% of all new homes will be able to be built 
with gigabit-capable broadband. 
Page 332 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 15.42 Access to mobile telecommunications and high speed, reliable broadband is now 
considered essential to the efficient operation of modern business and to individual 
lifestyles. Much of the urban area has good access and recent investments in 
infrastructure have brought significant improvements to these rural settlements; 
connecting the village residents to the superfast broadband fibre-optic network. There is 
however, still a requirement to improve broadband coverage in much of the rural area. 
Policy DM4: Telecommunications and Broadband supports further improvements across 
the wider area. The Council is committed to securing a high-quality communication 
infrastructure. The lack of such infrastructure would potentially hold back the areas 
competitiveness and economic well-being. The installation of digital infrastructure can 
also help to mitigate air quality impacts by reducing the need to travel, through initiatives 
such as home working. Developers for all new sites (residential and non-residential) 
should engage with broadband providers to ensure that communications network 
infrastructure, capable of delivering at least superfast broadband, is installed as part of 
the build process. New properties should be provided with the internal infrastructure to 
ensure that they can be connected to the broadband communication network. The 
broadband should be installed on an open access basis allowing for use by a number of 
internet service providers, and cables should be threaded through resistant ducting to 
enable easy access to the fibre optic cable for future repair, replacement or upgrading. 
15.43 Whilst most telecommunications infrastructure is unobtrusive, and often permitted 
development, some telecommunications infrastructure has the potential to be obtrusive, 
and can lead to adverse impacts on the surrounding area. Policy DM4: 
Telecommunications and Broadband seeks to ensure that development requiring 
consent does not intrude into or detract from the landscape or urban character of the 
area and seeks to minimise visual impacts. 
POLICY DM4: TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND BROADBAND 
1. Proposals for telecommunications development, including consideration of 
appropriate prior approval applications will be permitted, or determined, provided 
that: 
a. the development is appropriate in terms of siting and appearance, having regard to 
technical and operational constraints, and does not intrude into or detract from the 
landscape or urban character of the area; 
b. applicants demonstrate a sequential approach to show that development cannot be 
accommodated with less visual intrusion; 
i. on an existing building, mast or other structure; or, 
ii. on a site that already contains telecommunications equipment; before new sites 
can be considered; and, 
iii. adequate screening and/or landscape, measures are included; and, 
iv. provision is made for the removal of the facilities and reinstatement of the site as 
soon as reasonably practicable after it is no longer required for telecommunication 
purposes. 
2. The Council will support the expansion of communications networks, including 
telecommunications (5G networks and smart technologies), next generation mobile 
technology infrastructure high-speed broadband, and the provision of gigabit-
capable connectivity, especially where this addresses gaps in coverage within North 
Lincolnshire. Proposals for new residential and commercial development must 
demonstrate how they will provide future occupiers with sufficient digital connectivity. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 333 3. Development proposals must: 
a. Demonstrate early engagement with infrastructure providers; 
b. Be accompanied by a ‘Connectivity Statement’ which explains the current internet 
connectivity in the site’s locality and the potential for the site to be provided with high 
speed broadband including the future provision of “ultrafast broadband” and “Full 
fibre” solutions as and when they are made available; and, 
c. Make provision for premises to be provided with high speed (superfast) broadband or, 
if this is not feasible, ensure new development is broadband ready through the 
installation of appropriate ducting and equipment. 
4. On-site infrastructure should be provided from homes and premises to the public 
highway or other appropriate location. Where possible, viable and desirable, the 
provision of additional ducting will be supported, where it allows the expansion of the 
network. 
ADVERTISEMENTS/SHOP FRONTS 
15.44 Advertisements can play a helpful role in promoting the area’s businesses and provide 
direction to locations. However, they can sometimes have a negative impact upon the 
amenity of an area as well as public safety. As such consideration must be given to local 
characteristics and features of the street scene. The Council aims to ensure that 
advertisements are designed to a high standard and contribute to a safe and attractive 
environment. It considers that poorly designed, very bright or inappropriately sited 
advertisements can detract from the visual quality of the street or local area. 
15.45 In relation to public safety it is necessary to consider the effect of an advertisement upon 
the safe use of vehicles and operation of traffic flow, including pedestrian traffic. Control 
over outdoor advertisements should be efficient, effective and simple in concept and 
operation. 
POLICY DM5: ADVERTISEMENTS AND SHOP FRONTS 
1. Advertisements and new/alterations to shop fronts will be required to contribute to the 
visual appearance of the area’s street scenes. 
2. The Council will support proposals for advertisements where: 
a. they are well designed and sympathetic to the character and appearance of their 
location and the building to which they relate, having regard to matters such as size, 
materials, construction, location, level of illumination and cumulative impact with other 
signage on the building and within the vicinity; and, 
b. illuminated advertisements and signs will not adversely affect the amenity and/or 
safety of the surrounding area. 
3. Permission will be granted for shop fronts and signs where the following criteria is 
satisfied: 
a. the design is related to the scale and appearance of the building to which the proposal 
relates; and, 
b. the design respects the character and appearance of the location. 
4. Solid shutters which present a blank frontage to shopping streets will not be 
permitted. 
Page 334 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) 5. Proposals relating to listed buildings, within conservation areas and in areas of special 
advertisement control will be subject to the requirements of the relevant designation 
and appropriate planning policy guidance. 
15.46 A shop frontage contributes to the overall appearance of the street scene and as such 
proposals for this type of development need to ensure the changes positively enhance 
the appearance of the building as well as the immediate area and do not detract from it. 
15.47 It is now standard practice that most commercial/retail premises install security shutters. 
However, care needs to be taken in the choice as solid shutters, particularly bare 
galvanised or mill finished aluminium, can have a detrimental environmental effect, 
making areas feel desolate and forbidding once trading hours have ceased. Recessed 
shutter boxes can also assist in avoiding clutter to fascia’s. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 335 16 Delivering Infrastructure 
16.1 It is critical that North Lincolnshire receives the infrastructure it needs to support the 
delivery of housing and jobs growth, and to ensure that existing communities can be 
sustained. It is important that the growth should bring benefits to, and not adversely 
affect the quality of life of existing communities. To achieve this, it is important to have the 
correct tools in place to help implement these policies and ensure the successful delivery 
of the overall vision for this Plan. 
16.2 There are a number of ways to ensure infrastructure delivery through the planning 
system. The existing system in North Lincolnshire includes developer obligations secured 
in Section 106 Agreements, which cover on and off-site requirements including 
affordable housing, open space provision, transport measures, and education provision. 
However, this system has not adequately delivered improvements to strategic 
infrastructure impacts or addressed needs and can be accused of lacking transparency 
for developers when providing for standard off-site infrastructure in particular. 
16.3 Therefore, the Council is considering whether it shall adopt a standard charge approach 
to the delivery of infrastructure alongside Section 106 Agreements, which was brought 
into force by the Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Regulations in April 2010. This 
would permit the Council to pool developer contributions raised through the levy and 
spend on infrastructure requirements for both the settlements in which the development 
forms a part or North Lincolnshire wide, although in turn would limit the use of Section 
106 Agreements. A review of the best way forward with securing infrastructure funding 
is ongoing. 
16.4 Under the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010 (as amended), planning 
obligations are legally required to be: 
a. Necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms 
b. Directly related to the development 
c. Fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development. 
16.5 Government policy is to ensure that planning policies requiring contributions should not 
make development unviable and that policies should be supported by evidence to 
demonstrate this. Plans should also set out any circumstances in which further viability 
assessment may be required in determining individual applications. 
16.6 As a result, the Council’s Whole Plan Viability Assessment (WPVA) has taken account of 
the requirements for infrastructure projects, both those in the short term and those over 
a longer timeframe. In light of this, the WPVA concluded that based on current market 
conditions allocated sites are able to deliver their infrastructure requirements, particularly 
those critical in the short term. 
16.7 This Plan is supported by an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) which provides detail of 
the infrastructure that is essentially necessary to enable growth to occur and delivery 
issues in relation to key proposals. The IDP also includes a number of infrastructure 
projects, which although not essential to the delivery of this Plan, are desirable. Their 
inclusion within the IDP will assist the Council in its attempts to secure funding for these 
projects. The Council will keep these documents under review to measure progress. It 
should be noted that the IDP principally identifies high level strategic infrastructure and 
does not include site specific infrastructure requirements, which will be dealt with 
through individual planning applications. 
Page 336 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) POLICY ID1: DELIVERING INFRASTRUCTURE 
1. The Council will require all developments to meet the on and off-site infrastructure 
requirements needed to support the development and mitigate the impact of the 
development on the existing community and environment to make it acceptable in 
planning terms. 
2. Each development will be expected to meet site related infrastructure needs. Where 
the provision of new, or the improvement or extension of existing, off- site 
infrastructure is needed to support a new development or mitigate its impacts, and it 
is not anticipated that the infrastructure will be provided through CIL, the development 
will be required to contribute proportionately through a Section 106 Agreement 
commuted sum, or other mechanism as agreed with the Council. 
3. To address developer requirements as a whole, where development proposals on a 
large composite or naturally defined area are sub divided into multiple applications (or 
phases) over time, planning applications which form part of a more substantial 
proposed development, on the same or adjoining land will be treated as one 
application for the whole development. 
4. Section 106 Agreements will apply to all major developments and some minor 
developments but may be varied according to: 
a. the scale and nature of the development and its demonstrated viability; 
b. whether or not a planning obligation meets all of the statutory reasons (‘tests’) for 
granting planning permission; and, 
c. Where there are site specific viability concerns, development must be accompanied by 
a Viability Appraisal, the council will take a pragmatic and flexible approach to 
planning obligations and consider their genuine impact on viability of development 
proposal on an independent and case by case basis, at the applicants expense and in 
line with the following principles: 
5. Development which is unable to make the full contribution at the point at which the 
application is submitted may be supported where: 
a. A robust and fit for purpose viability assessment shows that the full contribution would 
make the development unviable; 
b. The possibilities for reduced, deferred, or phased contributions have been fully 
explored; and, 
c. It can be demonstrated that the wider benefits of the scheme outweigh its lower level 
of contribution. 
6. Where a lower level of contribution is agreed, this may be subject to reassessment 
once the development commences and/or any other suitable trigger point(s) as 
appropriate and agreed between the Council and the applicant. 
16.8 Policy ID1 aims to deliver the infrastructure required to support the growth requirements 
across North Lincolnshire. A number of pressures can be relieved through site specific 
provision such as open space, children's play areas and the provision of affordable 
housing. However, there are other infrastructure improvements and requirements that 
cannot always be accommodated onsite, or that relate to strategic off-site facilities 
serving the whole settlement or North Lincolnshire wide. 
16.9 All Planning obligations must be, necessary to make the development acceptable in 
planning terms, directly related to the development and fairly and reasonably related in 
scale and kind to the development. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 337 16.10 It is recognised that some development proposals may be unable to meet all of the 
relevant policy and planning obligation requirements while remaining economically 
viable and deliverable, either in whole or in part. In such circumstances the Council will 
consider requests to reduce the level of planning obligations to a level which ensures that 
a scheme remains viable. In these instances, preference will be given to the needs and 
priorities of an area and the wider benefits of development, such as, for example, 
regeneration and meeting housing need. 
16.11 The Council will produce a Developer Contributions SPD which will provides greater 
detail on when planning obligations will be sought, how this will be calculated and give 
further details on viability. 
Page 338 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Appendix 1: Mineral Site Details 
MIN6-1: Cove Farm, Westwoodside 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Sand & Gravel 
Site Area (ha) 31ha 
Existing Use Operational Quarry and associated infrastructure 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place as part of planning permission 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Operational site that will be expected to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
MIN6-2: Kettleby Parks Quarry 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Sand 
Site Area (ha) 29ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place as part of planning permission 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Operational site that will be expected to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans.
Based on existing extraction rates this site is expected to be worked out during the
plan period.
Wider quarry area straddles the boundary between the North Lincolnshire Council
and Lincolnshire County Council areas. The existing processing plant and further
areas for extraction are allocated in the adopted Lincolnshire Minerals & Waste Local
Plan – Site Locations document (December 2017) – Site Ref: MS07/08-CL. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 339 MIN6-3: Melton Ross Quarry 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Chalk 
Site Area (ha) 121ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry and associated infrastructure, including lime works 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity 45 million tonnes 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Operational site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning
permission, associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans.
The quarry primarily extracts chalk for industrial purposes including lime
manufacture. 
MIN6-4: South Ferriby Quarry 
Ownership Private (Cemex) 
Mineral Chalk & Shale 
Gross Site Area (ha) 63ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry and associated infrastructure 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place 
Proposed Allocation Minerals extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Operational site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning
permission, associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans.
The quarry supplies chalk and (shale) clay to nearby Cemex cement plant via a 
conveyor system. 
MIN6-5: Hibaldstow Quarry 
Ownership Private (Welton Aggregates) 
Mineral Limestone 
Gross Site Area (ha) 21ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry and associated infrastructure 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Operational site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning
permission, associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
Page 340 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) MIN6-6: Manton Quarry 
Ownership Private (Brianplant) 
Mineral Limestone 
Gross Site Area (ha) 17ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry and associated infrastructure 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Operational site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning
permission, associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
MIN6-7: Kirton Quarry 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Limestone 
Gross Site Area (ha) 107ha 
Existing Use Non-Operational quarry and associated infrastructure; Recycled aggregate
production 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
MIN6-8: Barton East 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Clay 
Gross Site Area (ha) 5.2ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 341 MIN6-9: Messingham Quarry 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Silica Sand 
Gross Site Area (ha) 13ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry and associated infrastructure 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
MIN6-10: Eastfield Farm, Winteringham 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Silica Sand 
Gross Site Area (ha) 4.4ha 
Existing Use Operational quarry and associated infrastructure 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. The original
extraction site has been granted planning for extensions to the east and west under
PA/2017/1596 and MIN/2006/0095 respectively. 
MIN6-11: Crosby Warren Oil Well 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Oil 
Gross Site Area (ha) 0.8ha (compound) 
Existing Use Operational oil well and extraction site 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
Page 342 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) MIN6-12: Low Melwood Quarry 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Clay 
Gross Site Area (ha) 26ha 
Existing Use Non-operational clay extraction site. 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigation in place. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Not applicable. 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning permission,
associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
MIN6-13: Land north of Brigg Road, Messingham 
Ownership Private (multiple ownership) 
Mineral Silica Sand 
Gross Site Area (ha) 24ha 
Existing Use Agricultural 
Constraints All constraints identified and mitigated through conditions imposed on PA/
2018/1245. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity 0.85 million tonnes 
Reports Required Not applicable 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations Site that will be expected to continue to conform to the planning permission (PA/
2018/1245), associated conditions and agreed site restoration and aftercare plans. 
MIN6-14: Hibaldstow Quarry (Extension) 
Ownership Private (Welton Aggregates) 
Mineral Limestone 
Gross Site Area (ha) 24ha 
Existing Use Agricultural 
Constraints The site forms grade 2 agricultural land and is within SFRA Flood Zone 1. The site is 
within an area of archaeological interest. The site is also within an Airfield
Safeguarding Zone and Groundwater Protection Zone. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral extraction site 
Indicative Capacity 15 million tonnes 
Reports Required Archaeological Mitigation Strategy, Flood Risk and Drainage Strategy, Transport
Assessment, Ecological Appraisal, Biodiversity and Geodiversity Management Plan,
Noise Impact Assessment, Air Quality Assessment, Dust Management Plan,
Restoration and Aftercare Plan. 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations The eastern portion of this site is consented by the local planning authority under PA/
2019/235. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 343 MIN6-15: Cove Farm, Westwoodside (Extension) 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Sand and Gravel 
Gross Site Area (ha) 22ha 
Existing Use Agricultural 
Constraints The site forms both grade 2 and 3 agricultural land. The site is within SFRA flood 
zone 2/3a and within the Doncaster Sheffield Airport Safeguarding Zone. The site is 
in close proximity to the Birds Wood Nature Reserve which forms part of an adjacent
restored extraction site. The Greenholme Bank Bridleway runs alongside the eastern 
edge. The site is also designated as being part of an Area of Special Historic
Landscape Interest. 
Proposed Allocation Area of Search 
Indicative Capacity 700,000 tonnes 
Reports Required Ecological Appraisal, Biodiversity and Geodiversity Management Plan, Transport
Assessment, Flood Risk Assessment, Drainage Strategy, Noise Impact Assessment,
Dust Management Plan, Contaminated Land Survey, Air Quality Assessment,
Archaeological Mitigation Strategy, Hydrological Assessment. 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations The site is currently safeguarded under saved policy M12-2 of the North Lincolnshire
Local Plan (2003) for future sand extraction. Adjacent land forms an operational
extraction site and consent has previously been given for its extension. 
MIN6-16: Land at Holme Lane 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Silica Sand 
Gross Site Area (ha) 118ha 
Existing Use Agricultural 
Constraints The site forms grade 3 agricultural land and is within SFRA flood zone 1. The site is 
within an Airport Safeguarding Zone. The site is also within 500m proximity to the
Manton and Twigmoor SSSI and Black Hope Plantation LWS and Holme Land Verge
LWS. A public right of way (MESS207) runs along the south west boundary of the 
site. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral Extraction Site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Noise Impact Assessment, Dust Management Plan, Land Contamination Study, Flood
Risk Assessment, Drainage Strategy, Landscape & Visual Impact Assessment,
Ecological Appraisal, Biodiversity and Geodiversity Management Plan, Transport
Assessment Heritage Statement, Archaeological Investigation and Mitigation
Strategy, Hydrological Assessment. 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations The main issue to be addressed as part of any application is access and how
excavated materials will be transported to the processing plant. Any future
application should appropriate mitigation measures to prevent adverse impact on the
surrounding area. 
Page 344 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) MIN6-17: Eastfield Farm, Winteringham 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Silica Sand 
Gross Site Area (ha) 2ha 
Existing Use Agricultural 
Constraints The site comprise of both Grade 2 and 3 Agricultural Land and is within SFRA Flood
Zone 2/3a. The site is within 20m of Scheduled Monument and is within a site of 
archaeological interest. The site is also within close proximity to the Humber Estuary
Ramsar, SPA, SAC & SSSI ecological site. 
Proposed Allocation Mineral Extraction Site 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Flood Risk and Drainage Assessment, Heritage Assessment, Archaeological
Investigation and Mitigation Strategy, Contaminated Land Survey, Dust Management
Plan, Noise Impact Assessment, Transport Assessment, Ecological Appraisal,
Biodiversity and Geodiversity Management Plan, Habitat Regulations Assessment 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations The site is within close proximity to the Humber Estuary Ramsar, SCA, SPA and SSSI
in addition to being close to a Scheduled Monument. Any future planning application
will require appropriate mitigation and sensitive working practices. The site abuts 
the eastern edge of a permitted extension of the operational extraction site at
Eastfield Farm and is to the west of the Winteringham Sewerage Treatment Works. 
MIN6-18: Land South of Composition Lane, Winteringham 
Ownership Private 
Mineral Silica Sand 
Gross Site Area (ha) 5ha 
Existing Use Agricultural 
Constraints The site comprise of both Grade 2 and 3 Agricultural Land and is within SFRA Flood
Zone 2/3a. The site is within 20m of Scheduled Monument and is within a site of 
archaeological interest. The site is also within close proximity to the Humber Estuary
Ramsar, SPA, SAC & SSSI ecological site. 
Proposed Allocation Area of Search 
Indicative Capacity Unknown 
Reports Required Flood Risk and Drainage Assessment, Heritage Assessment, Archaeological
Investigation and Mitigation Strategy, Contaminated Land Survey, Dust Management
Plan, Noise Impact Assessment, Transport Assessment, Ecological Appraisal,
Biodiversity and Geodiversity Management Plan, Habitat Regulations Assessment 
Other Site Specific 
Considerations The site is within close proximity to the Humber Estuary Ramsar, SCA, SPA and SSSI
in addition to being close to a Scheduled Monument. Any future planning application
will require appropriate mitigation and sensitive working practices. The site is to the 
of the existing operational extraction site at Eastfield Farm. 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 345 Appendix 2: Mineral Safeguarding
Exceptions 
List of Exemption Criteria 
1. Applications for Householder development. 
2. Applications for extensions or alterations to existing buildings and for change of use 
of existing development which do not fundamentally change the scale and character 
of the building/use. 
3. Applications that are in accordance with the local plan where the plan took account 
of prevention of unnecessary mineral sterilisation and determined that prior extraction 
should not be considered when development applications in a Mineral Safeguarding 
Area came forward. 
4. Applications for Advertisement Consent. 
5. Applications for reserved matters including subsequent applications after outline 
consent has been granted. 
6. Prior notifications (telecommunications; forestry; agriculture and demolition). 
7. Certificates of Lawfulness of Existing or Proposed Use or Development (CLEUDs and 
CXLOPUDs). 
8. Applications for works to trees. 
9. Applications for temporary planning permission. 
10. Relevant Demolition in a Conservation Area. 
11. Applications for Listed Buildings Consent. 
12. Applications within a development limit (as shown on the policies map). 
Page 346 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Appendix 3: Mineral Resource
Assessment Requirements 
In order for the council to assess and determine planning applications for non-mineral 
development in Mineral Safeguarding Areas, applicants are expected to provide sufficient 
information about mineral resources. This should be in the form of a Mineral Resource 
Assessment. 
It should be undertaken by a suitably qualified professional and should be proportionate to the 
scale and nature of the proposed development. The mineral resource assessment should specify 
where there are any minerals present and, if so, whether it is feasible to extract them. 
Format/Contents 
1. Presentation of geological data. This could take the form of: 
a. Desk top study of existing surface and solid geological and mineral resource 
information; or 
b. Borehole investigations 
2. Assessment of the mineral resource potential of any mineral present considering its 
ability to meet the required specification for its intended use, before or after processing 
(the relevant BSI or equivalent), and the quantity present. 
3. Assessment of the mineral recovery potential: 
a. Acceptability: 
i. Site surroundings and neighbours, and their sensitivity to impacts associated 
with working minerals) 
ii. Depth of overburden 
iii. Size of site, and the ability of the site to accommodate batters and storage of 
overburden, mineral processing facilities 
iv. Benefits such as SUDs, local vernacular, reduced visual impact 
b. Viability: 
i. Whether the prior extraction will prejudice the development of the land by: 
• Delaying the implementation of the proposed development beyond an 
acceptable timescale 
• Affecting the ability of the land to receive the proposed development 
• Significantly affecting the developments viability 
ii. Consideration should be given to the location of potential markets for the mineral, 
including on site 
iii. Does the developer hold the mineral rights 
4. Potential for proximal sterilisation : 
a. Extent of MSA around development and its development potential 
b. Impact of proposed development on current or potential future working of any nearby 
quarry and the impact of the quarry on the proposed development 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 347 Appendix 4: Mineral Extraction Sites -
Restoration Plan Requirements 
A restoration plan should, where appropriate, include: 
1. a site-based landscape strategy for the restoration scheme; 
2. the key landscape and biodiversity opportunities and constrains ensuring connectivity 
with surrounding landscape and habitats; 
3. the geological, archaeological and historic heritage and landscape features and their 
settings; 
4. the site boundaries and areas identified for soil and overburden storage; 
5. an assessment of soil resources and their removal, handling and storage; 
6. an assessment of the overburden to be removed and stored; 
7. the type and depth of workings and information relating to the water table; 
8. storage locations and quantities of waste/fill materials and quantities and types of 
waste/fill involved; 
9. proposed infilling operations, sources and types of fill material; 
10. the arrangements for monitoring and the control and management of landfill gas; 
11. consideration of land stability after restoration; 
12. directions and phasing of working and restoration and how they are integrated into the 
working scheme; 
13. the need for provision of additional screening taking account of degrees of visual 
exposure; 
14. details of the proposed final landform including pre and post settlement levels; 
15. types, quantities and source of soils or soil making materials to be used; 
16. a methodology for management of soils to ensure that the pre-development soil quality 
is maintained; 
17. proposals for meeting targets of biodiversity gain and make contributions towards 
achieving specific targets set out in the Greater Lincolnshire Biodiversity Action Plan; 
18. removal of all buildings, plant, structures, accesses and hardstanding not required for 
long term management of the site; 
19. planting of new native woodlands; 
20. installation of drainage to enable high quality resonation and after-use; 
21. measures to incorporate flood risk mitigation opportunities; 
22. details of the seeding of grass or other crops and planting of trees, shrubs and hedges; 
23. a programme of aftercare to include details of vegetation establishment, vegetation 
management, biodiversity habitat management, field drainage, irrigation and watering 
facilities; and 
24. the restoration of the majority of the site back to agriculture, if the site consists of the 
best and most versatile agricultural land. 
Page 348 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Appendix 5: North Lincolnshire Waste
Sites 
MANAGEMENT – NON HAZARDOUS 
Site Facility 
Type Permission Reference Grid Reference Capacity (tpa) Permission End 
Date 
North Moor Farm,
Crowle Anaerobic 
Digestion E: 502500 
N: 415600 28,600 
Northwold Farm,
Worlaby Top, Brigg Anaerobic Digestion WD/2014/0606 E: 479909 
N: 409196 26,500 
Bioganix, Bonby Lane
Grainstores, Bonby
Lane, Bonby Composting PA/2005/0376 &
WD/2014/0908 E: 500300 
N: 415300 74,999 
Barton Household HRC 7/1979/0235 E: 501500 2,500 
Recycling Centre,
Gravel Pit Road,
Barton upon Humber N: 422800 
Belton Household 
Recycling Centre,
Epworth Road, Belton HRC 2/1982/0616 E: 478213 
N: 405345 25,000 
Broughton Household
Recycling Centre,
Brigg Road, Broughton HRC 7/1978/0681 E: 497100 
N: 408800 2,500 
Cottage Beck HRC 6/1978/0269 E: 490591 50,000 
Household Recycling
Centre, Cottage Beck
Road, Scunthorpe N: 410701 
Goxhill Household 
Recycling Centre,
College Road, Goxhill HRC 7/1978/0280 E: 509300 
N: 420000 2,500 
Kirton in Lindsey HRC HCC4/1979/0010 E: 494200 2,500 
Household Recycling
Centre, Redbourne
Mere, Kirton in Lindsey N: 398800 
Winterton Household HRC 2/1978/1079 E: 493200 2,500 
Recycling Centre,
North Street,
Winterton N: 419500 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 349 DISPOSAL – NON HAZARDOUS 
Site Permission 
Reference Grid Reference Capacity (tpa) Permission End Date 
Campwood Landfill,
Melton Ross, Barnetby E: 508390 
N: 411140 500,000 2040 
New Crosby Landfill,
Crosby Warren,
Scunthorpe WD/2003/1092 &
WD/2008/1122 E: 491400 
N: 412550 375,000 
Roxby Landfill, Winterton
Road, Roxby 7/1990/0757 E: 490720 
N: 416460 550,000 2024 
Crosby North Landfill,
Dawes Lane, Scunthorpe E: 491050 
N: 413050 47,300 
Winterton North Landfill,
Coleby Road, Winterton 7/1997/0061 E: 491280 
N: 420230 445,000 Closed 
Kirton Lindsey Landfilll WD/1998/0426 Permission never 
implemented 
South Ferriby 
Yarborough Quarry Restricted Landfill 
Total 1,917,300 
HAZARDOUS -DISPOSAL 
Site Permission Reference Grid Reference Capacity (tpa) Permission End Date 
Winterton South Landfill,
Coleby Road, Scunthorpe 7/1977/0061 &
WD/2016/332 E: 508390 
N: 411140 500,000 2026 
Total 500,000 
Page 350 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Appendix 6: Monitoring Framework 
A Monitoring Framework has been produced to monitor the effectiveness of the Local Plan 
policies. The indicators and targets that form the Monitoring Framework have been developed to 
be flexible enough to allow for adaptation as wider conditions change or as improved methods to 
monitor policies become available. As such they will be subject to regular review. 
It is expected that the monitoring data will be available for collection on at least an annual basis, 
unless indicated otherwise. For policies where specific targets are required, such as for housing 
delivery, these have been included in the Monitoring Framework. Performance against such 
targets can help to determine how well the Plan is working, whether an annual target has been 
met and whether shortfalls exist, or what parts will require review. For policies where it is not appropriate to attach a target, the framework will use indicators that 
identify broad trends that can determine a direction of travel. This can include either an increase 
or a decrease in an indicator. For policies that provide helpful background information and where a specific target is not 
appropriate, the collected data will be labelled as a contextual indicator. The successful implementation of the allocations made in this document is dependent on the 
timely delivery of the infrastructure required to support it. As such the involvement of the 
infrastructure partners has been vital to ensure that they are aware of the level of growth 
projected to enable their identification and address any capacity issues, ensuring that allocated 
sites are deliverable. 
Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
SS1: Presumption in 
Favour of Sustainable Development SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14. GVA Per Head Overall population growth Increase in GVA Per Head 
Increase in overall 
population growth North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
SS2: Spatial Strategy for North Lincolnshire SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO11, SO12, SO13, SO14. Employment Rate aged 16-64 (%) 
Total residential net 
completions National employment rate 
419 or 416 North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
SS3: Development Principles SO2, SO6, SO7 Number of Planning Applications with Design as Being Ground(s) for Refusal Decrease North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
SS4: Neighbourhood Planning in North Lincolnshire SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO9, SO10, SO11, SO12. Number of Neighbourhood Plans made by North Lincolnshire Council Two Neighbourhood Plans to be made per annum. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
SS5: Overall Housing Provision SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7, Total residential net completions per annum 
Maintain a five year 
supply of housing land 396 dwellings 
Annually Updated North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 351 Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
SS6: Spatial 
Distribution of Housing Sites SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7, Total residential net completions per annum 
Maintain a five year 
supply of housing land 396 dwellings 
Annually Updated North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
SS7: Strategic Allocation – Lincolnshire Lakes Sustainable Villages SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7, SO8, SO9, SO10, SO11 Total residential net completions per annum 
Delivery of 
Employment Land 
Amount of floorspace 
developed by type Amount of priority habitats as a whole (in area) 
Deliver a net gain in 
biodiversity Delivering at least 2000 dwellings over the lifetime of the plan within Lincolnshire Lakes 
Delivering at least 
22ha of employment and commercial land over the lifetime of the plan within Lincolnshire Lakes 
10% increase in area 
of priority habitats as a whole over the lifetime of the plan 
100% of development 
schemes to deliver a minimum 10% net gain for biodiversity (unless national standards increase this in the future) North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
SS8: Employment Land Requirements SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 Delivery of Employment Land 
Amount of floorspace 
developed by type 
Annual amount of 
employment land developed by type at the South Humber Bank. Delivering at least 4.75 hectares of employment land within North Lincolnshire per annum to 2038. 
To deliver the South 
Humber Bank Strategic Allocation by 2038 North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
SS9: Strategic Site Allocation -South Humber Bank SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 Annual amount of employment land developed by type at the South Humber Bank. To deliver the South Humber Bank Strategic Allocation by 2038 North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
SS11: 
Development Limits SO1,
 SO2, SO3, SO5, 
SO6, SO9, SO11 Number of planning applications granted outside settlement development limits 80% of planning permissions to take place within development limits North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
Page 352 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
H1: Site Allocations SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, 
SO7 Total residential net completions per annum 
Maintain a five year 
supply of housing land 396 dwellings 
Annually Updated North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
H2: Housing Mix and Density SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Net additional dwellings approved and completed by no. of bedrooms: per annum 396 dwellings North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H3: Affordable Housing SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Annual number of Affordable Homes delivered within North Lincolnshire. 
Number of Rural 
Exception Sites Completed. 115 dwellings per annum 
The number of Rural 
Exception dwellings completed in settlements with an identified affordable housing need. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H4: Specialist and Supported Housing SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Number of approved and completed specialist and supported housing units that meet the need of the local community 100% North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H5: Housing for Older People SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Number of approved 
and completed housing units that meet the specific needs of older 100% North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H6: North Lincolnshire’s Travelling Communities SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Total number of pitches available 
New pitches and 
plots approved and provided per annum (allocations & windfall development) 15 permanent residential pitches North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H7: New Agricultural Workers or Forestry Dwellings SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 No of dwellings approved within the open countryside per annum No specific target identified North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H8: Replacement, Alteration and Extensions to Dwellings in the Open Countryside SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 % of Householder Planning Appeals dismissed per annum No specific target identified North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 353 Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
H9: Self-Build and 
Custom Build SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Numbers on the self and custom build register 
Numbers of planning 
permissions granted which are capable of delivering serviced plots No specific target identified 
More or equivalent 
planning permissions granted which are capable of delivering serviced plots than numbers on the self and custom build register North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H10: Flats above Shops and the Use of Vacant Buildings for Housing SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Appeals upheld contrary to Policy H9 None upheld at appeal North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H11: Backland and Tandem Development SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Appeals upheld contrary to Policy H10 None upheld at appeal North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
H12: Houses in Multiple Occupation SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7 Number of HMOs and flat conversions refused 
The mix of sizes of 
housing completed compared with the North Lincolnshire Local Housing and Economic Needs 
Assessment No appeals upheld contrary to Policy H12 
Annual Update North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
H13: Children’s Homes SO2, SO3, SO4, SO5, SO7, Appeals upheld contrary to Policy H12 None upheld at appeal North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
EC1: Employment Land Supply SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 Delivery of Employment Land Delivering at least 4.75 hectares of employment land within North Lincolnshire per annum to 2038. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
EC2: Existing Employment Areas SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
EC3: Defined 
Industrial Buffer Areas SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
EC4: South Humber Bank – Landscape Initiative SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
EC5: Wharves SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
EC6: Supporting the Rural Economy SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Page 354 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
EC7: A Sustainable 
Visitor Economy SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO8 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
TC1: Retail hierarchy and Town Centre and District Centre Development SO1, SO2, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO9, SO10 Number of vacant units within town and district centres. Annual decrease in the number of vacant units within the identified town and district centre North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
TC2: Placemaking and Good Urban Design SO2, SO3, SO5, SO6, SO7, SO9 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
HE1: Conserving and Enhancing the Historic Environment S05, S06, S07, S010 Number of planning applications granted contrary to Historic England objections 
Heritage at Risk Monitor 
Reduce North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
Historic England 
Heritage at Risk Register (includes Scheduled Monuments, Grade I & II* listed buildings, places of worship at risk) DMBC Numbers of Grade II listed buildings at risk 
HE2: Area of Special Historic Landscape Interest S05, S06, S07 Number of planning applications granted in the Area of Special Historic Interest. Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
RD1: Supporting Sustainable Development in the Countryside SO2, SO3, SO5 Number of Planning Applications approved in the Countryside classed as Appropriate Development Increase North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
DQE1: Protection of Landscape, Townscape and Views SO2, SO6, SO9, SO10, SO11, SO12 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE2: Landscape Enhancement SO2, SO6, SO9, SO11 Number of landscape enhancement schemes proposed by this policy that are implemented 100% of landscape enhancement schemes proposed by this policy to be implemented North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE3: Biodiversity and Geodiversity SO2, SO6, SO9, SO10, SO11, SO12 Amount of Ancient Woodland and aged or veteran trees lost (in area) No loss of irreplaceable habitats such as Ancient Woodland and aged or veteran trees North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 355 Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
DQE3: Biodiversity 
and Geodiversity SO2, SO6, SO9, SO10, SO11, SO12 Amount of individual priority habitat lost (in area) 
Amount of priority 
habitats as a whole (in area) No net loss of any individual priority habitat 
10% increase in area 
of priority habitats as a whole over the lifetime of the plan North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE4: Local Nature Reserves SO2, SO6, SO9, SO10, SO11 Amount (hectares) of Local Nature Reserve to be declared and managed for every 1,000 people 2 hectares of Local Nature Reserve to be declared and managed for every 1,000 people North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE5: Managing Flood Risk SO6, SO9, SO11, SO12 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE6: Sustainable Drainage Systems SO6, SO9, SO11, SO12 Percentage of Major Sites (of 10 dwellings or more) or equivalent non-residential or mixed development that incorporate appropriate sustainable surface water drainage systems (SuDS) appropriate to the nature of the site 100% of Major Sites (of 10 dwellings or more) or equivalent non-residential or mixed development that incorporate appropriate sustainable surface water drainage systems (SuDS) appropriate to the nature of the site North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE7: Climate Change & Low Carbon Living SO6, SO9, SO11, SO12, SO14 Percentage of residential schemes containing 11 dwellings or more meeting at least 10% of their energy needs from renewable and/or other low carbon energy sources. 
Percentage of non-
domestic developments of 1,000 square metres of floor space and above, achieve “Very Good” in BREEAM assessments. 100% of residential schemes containing 11 dwellings or more meeting at least 10% of their energy needs from renewable and/or other low carbon energy sources. 
100% of non-
domestic developments of 1,000 square metres of floor space and above, achieve “Very Good” in BREEAM assessments. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE8: Renewable Energy Proposals SO2, SO4, SO5, SO6, SO9, SO11, SO12, SO14 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE9: Local Green Space SO2, SO6, SO9, SO10, SO11 Number of Local Green Spaces that are protected from development 100% of Local Green Spaces to be protected from development North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Page 356 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
DQE10: Important 
Open Space SO2, SO6, SO9, SO10, SO11 Amount of development (in area) allowed on areas of Important Open Space contrary to this policy No development to be allowed on areas of Important Open Space contrary to this policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE11: Green Infrastructure Network SO2, SO6, SO9, SO11 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DQE12: Protection of Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows SO2, SO6, SO9, SO10, SO11 Number of trees and amount of woodland and hedgerows (in area) retained during new development 100% of trees, woodland and hedgerows to be retained during new development North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC1: Health and Wellbeing SO2, SO8, SO9 Life expectancy rates to increase 
Levels of Obesity in 
North Lincolnshire 
Percentage of 
Population who Achieve 150 minutes of Physical Activity per week Reduce 
Reduce Increase North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
Council wide Health 
initiatives 
Physical Activity 
Strategy 
CSC2: Health Care Provision S02, S08, S09 Annual number of new and expanded primary and secondary health care facilities by type. 
Number of planning 
applications which have secured S106 for health care Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC3: Protection and Provision of Open Space, Sports and Recreation Facilities S05, S09, S10 Development granted planning permission contrary to advice from Sport England. 
Increase in the 
percentage of the population taking part in sport and physical activity at least twice in the last month Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Uses data from the 
National Active Lives survey run by Sport England 
CSC4: Allotments 
CSC5: Golf Courses S02, S05, S09 
S02, S05, S09 Number of allotments 
lost 
Number of new 
allotments 
No target identified 
by policy Monitor-Year on year change. 
No target identified 
by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
North Lincolnshire 
Local Plan 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 357 Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
CSC6: Water Based 
Leisure S02, S05, S09 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC7: Commercial Horse Riding Establishments S02, S05, S09 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC8: Educational Facilities S02, S07, S08,S09 Number of Applications for New Educational Facilities Granted Increase Annual School Capacity Return (SCAP) to Department of Education 
CSC9: Nursery and Children’s Day Care Provision S02, S07, S09 Number of Applications for New Nursery and Day Care Provision Granted Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC10: Community Facilities and Services S02, S07, S09 Safeguarding of existing Community Facilities 
Improvements and 
new additions to Community Facilities Target not appropriate. 
Monitor-Year on year 
change reported. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC11: Entertainment and Cultural Facilities S02, S07, S09 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC12: Restaurants and Hot Food Takeaway Establishments S02, S09 Number of planning applications for new Hot food Takeaways. 
Within local Centres 
granted permission. Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC13: Burial Grounds and Cemetery Provision S09 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC14: Churches, Prayer Houses and other Places of Worship S09 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CS15: Tourism and Visitor Attractions S01,S08, S09, SO10 Total Number of Visitors 
Increase in Visitor 
Spend Increase North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC16: Hotel and Guest House Accommodation S01, S09, SO10 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
CSC17: Camping and Caravan Sites S01, S09, SO10 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Page 358 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
MIN1: Mineral Supply 
Requirements SO13 Production of aggregates and non-aggregates Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
MIN2: Mineral Safeguarding SO13 Number of applications accompanied by a 
mineral assessment Increase North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
MIN3: Mineral Extraction SO13 Number of mineral sites granted planning permission Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
MIN4: Recycled & Secondary Aggregates SO12, SO13 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
MIN5: Energy Minerals (Oil & Gas/ Hydrocarbons SO13 Number of energy mineral extraction sites granted planning permission Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
MIN6: Mineral Sites SO13 Mineral landbank levels Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
MIN7: Borrow Pits & Ancillary Extraction SO12, SO13 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
MIN8: Restoration, Aftercare & Afterfuse of Mineral Extraction Sites SO6, SO13 Number of applications accompanied by a site restoration, aftercare and afteruse plan Increase North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
WAS1: Waste Management Principles SO12, SO14 Percentage of waste being disposed of at landfill Decrease North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
WAS2: Waste Facilities SO14 Number of waste management facilities granted planning permission Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
WAS3: Waste Management Provision SO14 Annual permitted capacity of waste sites Monitor North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
WAS4: Safeguarding Existing Waste Sites & Infrastructure SO14 Number of waste sites that obtain planning permission for an alternative use Decrease North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
WAS5: Wastewater Treatment SO14 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
WAS6: Waste Management in Development SO12, SO14 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 359 Policy LinkstoStrategic
ObjectivesIndicator Target Implementation/DeliveryMechanism
WAS7:Restoration&
AftercareSO6,SO14 NumberofsitesaccompaniedbyarestorationandaftercareplanIncrease NorthLincolnshireLocalPlan
T1:PromotingSustainableTransportSO1,SO2,S04,SO5,SO6,SO7, SO9NotargetidentifiedbypolicyNotargetidentifiedbypolicyNorthLincolnshireLocalPlan
T2:PromotingPublicTransportSO1,SO2,S04,SO5,SO9NotargetidentifiedbypolicyNotargetidentifiedbypolicy
T3:NewDevelopmentandTransportSO1,SO2,SO3,S04,SO5, SO9NotargetidentifiedbypolicyNotargetidentifiedbypolicyNorthLincolnshireLocalPlan
T4:Parking SO1,SO2,SO3,SO4,SO9Monitoringcarparkingprovisionbytypeandsizeofscheme.Toensurethatsufficientcarparkingisprovidedwithoutadetrimentalimpactonhighwaysafety.NorthLincolnshireLocalPlan
All non-residential schemes to have EV charging points provided as per the standards established in policy T4. 100% compliance with this policy. 
T5: Cycle and Motorcycle Parking SO1, SO2, SO3, SO4, SO9 Monitoring cycle and motorcycle parking provision by type and size of scheme To ensure that sufficient parking is provided without a detrimental impact on highway safety. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
T6: Freight SO1, S04, No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
T7: Safeguarding Transport Infrastructure SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO9 Safeguard the routes and support measures as highlighted in Policy T7 ‘Safeguarding Transport Infrastructure’ 100% compliance with this policy. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
T8: safeguarding Aviation SO1, SO2, S04, SO5, SO9 Safeguard the airports/airfields and landing strips as 
highlighted in Policy T8 ‘Safeguarding Aviation’ 100% compliance with this policy. North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DM1: General Requirements SO2, SO6, SO7 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
DM2: Temporary Buildings SO1, SO2 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan Policy Links to Strategic 
Objectives Indicator Target Implementation / 
Delivery 
Mechanism 
DM3: Environmental 
Protection SO12 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
DM4: Telecommunications & Broadband SO4 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
DM5: Advertisements & Shopfronts SO1 No target identified by policy No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Made Neighbourhood 
Plans 
ID1: Delivering Infrastructure SO4 Amount of S106 contributions requested via planning application No target identified by policy North Lincolnshire Local Plan 
Developer 
Contributions SPD 
Page 360 North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Appendix 7: Housing Trajectory 
2036/2037-2037/2038
(Years17-18)2031/2032-2035-2036
(Years12-16)2026/2027-2030/2031
(Years7-11)2020/2021(Year1)2000
150025003000
2021/2022-2025/2026
(Years2-6)1000
500
0
TotalProjectedNetAdditionalDwellings NorthLincolnshireLocalHousingNeedFigure TotalActualNetAdditionalDwellings
North Lincolnshire Local Plan (2020 -2038) Page 361 