North East Derbyshire
Local Plan
2014 - 2034
Adopted
November 2021North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20342Contents
1. Introduction 6
2. Spatial Portrait 14
3. Vision and Objectives 21
4. Spatial Strategy 29
5. Living Communities 58
6. Working Communities and Economic Development 83
7. Sustainable Places 100
8. Sustainable Development and Communities  122
9. Infrastructure & Delivery  150
10. Monitoring, Review and Implementation 174
Appendix A:  List of Saved Policies from the 2005 Adopted Plan Deleted by this Plan.  181
Appendix B:  Housing Provision 184
Appendix C: Housing Trajectory (April 2020) 185
Appendix D:  Calculation of Financial Contributions for Open Space and Recreation Facilities 190
Appendix E:  Open Space, Sports and Recreation Categories and Designation 192
Glossary 193North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20343Local Plan Policy Index
Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy 29
Policy SS1: Sustainable Development 30
Policy SS2: Spatial Strategy and the Distribution of Development 38
Policy SS3: The Avenue 42
Policy SS4: Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross 45
Policy SS5: Markham Vale 47
Policy SS6: Coalite Priority Regeneration Area 49
Policy SS7: Development on Unallocated Land within Settlements with defined Settlement 
Development Limits 51
Policy SS8: Development in Very Small Villages & Hamlets 51
Policy SS9: Development in the Countryside 52
Policy SS10: North East Derbyshire Green Belt 55
Policy SS11: Local Settlement Gaps 56
Chapter 5: Living Communities 58
Policy LC1: Housing Allocations 59
Policy LC2: Affordable Housing 70
Policy LC3: Exception Sites for Affordable Housing 72
Policy LC4: Type and Mix of Housing 76
Policy LC5: Residential Extensions 77
Policy LC6: Agricultural, Forestry and Other Occupational Dwellings in the Countryside 78
Policy LC7: Removal of Agricultural and Other Occupancy Conditions 79
Policy LC8: Allocation of Traveller Sites 81
Policy LC9: Provision for Traveller Sites 82
Chapter 6: Working Communities and Economic Development 83
Policy WC1: Dronfield Regeneration Area 89
Policy WC2: Principal Employment Areas 90
Policy WC3: General Employment Areas 92
Policy WC4: Retail Hierarchy and Town Centre Uses 95
Policy WC5: Visitor and Tourism Development  98
Policy WC6: Camping, Chalets, Caravans and Lodges in the Countryside 99North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20344Chapter 7: Sustainable Places 100
Policy SP1: Dronfield 105
Policy SP2: Clay Cross 111
Policy SP3: Eckington 115
Policy SP4: Killamarsh 120
Chapter 8: Sustainable Development and Communities  122
Policy SDC1: Re-use and Conversion of Buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside 123
Policy SDC2: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows 125
Policy SDC3: Landscape Character 130
Policy SDC4: Biodiversity and Geodiversity 132
Policy SDC5: Development within Conservation Areas 133
Policy SDC6: Development affecting Listed Buildings 134
Policy SDC7: Scheduled Monuments and Archaeology 135
Policy SDC8: Registered Parks and Gardens 136
Policy SDC9: Non-designated Local Heritage Assets 136
Policy SDC10: Decentralised, Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Generation 138
Policy SDC11: Flood Risk and Drainage 141
Policy SDC12: High Quality Design and Place-Making 143
Policy SDC13: Environmental Quality 146
Policy SDC14: Land potentially affected by Contamination or Instability 147
Policy SDC15: Development near Hazardous Uses 148
Chapter 9: Infrastructure & Delivery  150
Policy ID1: Infrastructure Delivery and Developer Contributions 153
Policy ID2: Provision and Safeguarding of Transport Infrastructure 157
Policy ID3: Sustainable Travel 160
Policy ID4: New Social Infrastructure 162
Policy ID5: Loss of Existing Social Infrastructure 163
Policy ID6: Safeguarded Land for Education Facilities 164
Policy ID7: Green Infrastructure 165
Policy ID8: Greenways and Public Rights of Way 167
Policy ID9: Chesterfield Canal 168
Policy ID10: Open Space, Sports and Recreation Facilities 172North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20345List of Figures
Figure 1.1: North East Derbyshire in context 10
Figure 2.1: North East Derbyshire District Sub-Areas 16
Figure 3.1: Relationship between the Plan’s Objectives and Policies 26
Figure 4.1: Strategic Site Allocation – The Avenue 41
Figure 4.2: Strategic Site Allocation – Former Biwaters  44
Figure 4.3: Strategic Site Allocation – Markham Vale 46
Figure 4.4: Coalite Regeneration Area – Cross Boundary Strategic Site 48
Figure 4.5: Key Diagram 57
Figure 5.1: Affordable Housing – High Value Area 68
Figure 7.1: Dronfield Town Map 106
Figure 7.2: Clay Cross Town Map 112
Figure 7.3: Eckington Town Map 116
Figure 7.4: Killamarsh Town Map 121
Figure 8.1: Landscape Character Map of Derbyshire 128
Figure 8.2: Areas of Multiple Environmental Sensitivity 129
List of Tables
Table 4.1: Components of Housing Supply 32
Table 4.2: Settlement Hierarchy 37
Table 4.3: Housing Distribution by Level 1 & Level 2 Settlement 39
Table 5.1: Size Mix for New Housing 73
Table 6.1: Local Plan Employment Land Availability 88
Table 7.1: Dronfield Regeneration Framework Key Themes and Proposals 102
Table 7.2: Clay Cross Regeneration Framework Key Priorities and Projects 109
Table 7.3: Eckington Framework Strategic Objectives 114
Table 7.4: Killamarsh Regeneration Framework Key Themes and Proposals 119
Table 8.1: Landscape Character Types 127
Table 9.1: Local Quantity Standard 170
Table 9.2: Local Accessibility Standard 171
Table 10.1: Monitoring Framework 175North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203461.1 Planning shapes the places where we 
live, work, shop and spend our leisure time. North East Derbyshire District Council is required by legislation to prepare a Local Plan setting out its vision, objectives and policies to guide the future sustainable growth and development of the area. 
North East Derbyshire’s 
Local Plan
1.2 North East Derbyshire’s Local Plan 
covers the area of North East Derbyshire outside of the Peak District National Park and looks forward to 2034. The Plan will be used to guide decisions on planning applications and areas where investment should be prioritised. It forms part of the Development Plan for North East Derbyshire and replaces the ‘saved’ policies of the 2005 Adopted North East Derbyshire District Local Plan. A list of all of the saved policies from the 2005 Adopted Local Plan deleted by this Local Plan is set out in Appendix A. The Local Plan does not cover minerals and waste planning as this is the responsibility of Derbyshire County Council. Once adopted, the new Derby and Derbyshire Minerals Local Plan and the Derby and Derbyshire Waste Local Plan will form part of the Development Plan for North East Derbyshire.
1.3 The Local Plan contains a vision, objectives and a planning strategy for development. This includes policies on the scale of development and its overall pattern across the district. It also allocates sites for development needed to meet the district’s objectively assessed needs, and designates important areas to be protected and enhanced. The Plan also sets out criteria based policies on a range of planning issues to be used to determine planning applications on allocated and ‘windfall’ sites. A set of targets and indicators is included to provide the basis for monitoring the plan’s effectiveness and to indicate the need for any early review.
Format of the Local Plan
1.4 This Plan sets out:
• a description of the area and the issues that North East Derbyshire faces;
• what kind of place North East 
Derbyshire might be by 2034; and
• the Council’s policies and proposals 
to plan and manage growth and development to deal with the issues facing the district, and to achieve the Plan’s vision for North East Derbyshire.
1.5 This Plan consists of the written document, which sets out and explains the Council’s policies, and the Policies Map which shows where they apply.The written document starts with this introduction to North East Derbyshire’s Local Plan including a brief summary of the context within which the Plan is being prepared. The document structure is as follows:
•  Chapter 2  provides a short 
description of the geographic, economic, social and environmental 
characteristics of the area (called 
the Spatial Portrait) along with the 
key issues facing the district.
•  Chapter 3  sets out the Plan’s vision 
for North East Derbyshire describing the kind of place North East Derbyshire will be by 2034. A number of objectives are defined to achieve the vision and help guide the  
Plan’s strategy.1. IntroductionNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20347
•  Chapter 4  sets out the Plan’s 
strategy for housing, employment 
and retail growth together with 
overarching policies to guide the 
distribution of development. It also 
includes 3 strategic site allocations 
earmarking land for major mixed 
use developments and which are 
considered critical to achieving  
the strategy.
•  Chapter’s 5 and 6  set out policies on 
housing and economic development 
respectively. Both chapters propose further housing and employment land allocations at the district’s towns and 
other more sustainable settlements, 
and which will deliver the levels of 
growth set out in the strategy.
•  Chapter 7  sets out area based 
policies, building on the settlement and retail hierarchy policies, which focus on the sustainable growth of North East Derbyshire’s towns namely Clay Cross, Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh.
•  Chapter 8  sets out specific criteria 
based policies aimed at achieving sustainable patterns and forms of 
development including policies to 
protect and enhance the natural and 
built environment, to address 
climate change, and to ensure high quality design and place-making 
throughout North East Derbyshire.•  Chapter 9  sets out policies dealing 
with the delivery of the physical, 
social and green infrastructure 
required to support the development 
and growth set out in the Plan. 
•  Chapter 10  sets out the 
arrangements for monitoring the 
effectiveness of the Plan’s policies.
1.6 The Plan covers a wide range of planning issues and it is often the case that several policies are relevant to a development proposed. Therefore, it is important that the plan is read as a whole rather than treating each policy in isolation.
1.7 Where practicable, cross referencing 
between policies has been used where 
this makes the Plan easier to read. 
However, absence of cross references 
does not mean that other policies of 
the Plan do not apply.
1.8 Furthermore, where a policy has a list 
of criteria, all of them should be met, unless otherwise stated. Applications for planning permission will be considered against all relevant policies in the Local Plan and against the National Planning Policy Framework. Development proposals that comply with all relevant policies will be supported.
1.9 Some policies in the Plan refer to ‘Supplementary Planning Documents’ (SPDs). These documents provide detailed information on the 
implementation of certain policies and 
aim to help those preparing planning 
applications. Although not part of the Plan, SPDs may be taken into account as a ‘material consideration’ in 
considering a planning application.
WingerworthNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20348Local Plan Context
1.10 The Local Plan has been drawn up 
in accordance with the legislation 
regulating plan-making and in the 
context of the government’s planning 
policies. In addition, regard has 
been taken of the relevant plans and 
strategies of other public bodies and 
organisations insofar as they raise 
strategic planning matters of cross 
boundary significance for North East 
Derbyshire.
National Planning Policy
1.11 In terms of national planning policy, 
the Local Plan has been prepared in 
the context of national planning policy 
principally set out in the National 
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) published in March 2012, and more detailed National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG). 
1.12 The NPPF states that Local Plans must be prepared with the objective of contributing to the achievement of sustainable development
1 which 
requires the planning system to perform 
an economic, social, and environmental 
role2.
1.13 Legislation also requires that Plans 
are “sound”, namely that they have 
been positively prepared, justified, 
effective and are consistent with 
national planning policies3. In order 
to ensure “soundness” the Local Plan 
must be underpinned by an up to date 
evidence base that is proportionate to 
the economic, social and environmental 
issues facing the area4.Relationship with other Local 
Plans and the Duty to Co-operate
1.14 As a statutory consultee, the Council 
is consulted by and in turn consults 
with neighbouring authorities in the 
preparation of Local Plans. In addition, 
in order to fulfil the Duty to Co-operate 
which is both a legal requirement and 
relates to the test of soundness, the 
council along with its neighbours and 
a number of public sector bodies and 
service providers is required to engage 
constructively, actively and on an 
ongoing basis to co-operate proactively 
on strategic matters in the preparation 
of Local Plans.
1.15 North East Derbyshire wraps around 
Chesterfield and extends northwards towards Sheffield. As such there is a complex functional and physical relationship between different parts of the district and other areas outside the district in both Derbyshire and South Yorkshire. This is described in more detail in Chapter 2 – Spatial Portrait. The Council has therefore co-operated closely with all of its neighbouring authorities together with other relevant bodies in developing the Plan and in the preparation of the evidence used to underpin the Plan’s policies. This has included work on the Strategic Housing Market Assessment, the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment, the Retail Capacity Study, and a number of other technical studies on transport, and flood risk and water cycle issues, and the review of the Green Belt, for example. 
1 NPPF (2012), paragraph 151, page 37
2 NPPF (2012), paragraph 7, page 2
3 NPPF (2012), paragraph 182, page 43
4 NPPF (2012), paragraph 158. page 38North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20349
Local Enterprise Partnerships 
(LEPs)
1.16 LEPs have been established as 
collaboration between the public and 
private sectors to ensure the growth 
of a rebalanced local economy and to 
contribute significantly to the renewal 
of the national economy as a whole. 
North East Derbyshire District sits 
within the area covered by two Local 
Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs): the 
Sheffield City Region LEP , and the  
D2N2 LEP
1.17 As part of its long term economic 
plan the Government has agreed Growth Deals with both LEPs. Whilst the Sheffield City Region Growth Deal will boost the economic growth of the region with investments in key transport, infrastructure, skills and business support projects, the D2N2 Growth Deal will invest in a number of projects in the LEP’s priority sectors – including advanced transport engineering and life sciences.1.18 Taken together these LEP Growth Deals 
received £91.3 million in their first 
year, and as part of the Government’s 
on-going commitment to the LEPs 
provided an indicative award of a 
further £378.4 million of funding from 
2016/17 onwards. Both deals aim to 
help create at least 26,000 jobs, allow 
some 13,000 homes to be built, and 
bring forward at least £790 million of 
additional investment from public and 
private investment across the Sheffield 
City Region, and Derbyshire and 
Nottinghamshire area.
1.19 Within North East Derbyshire, the 
Growth Deal will directly fund the A61 
Growth Corridor Strategy, which targets 
transport infrastructure improvements along the A61 to release additional site capacity at key development sites and enable more efficient movement of goods, services and people through this important economic corridor. Figure 1.1 below shows the district’s location and its relationship with other authorities within the wider area.
TrowayNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203410Figure 1.1: North East Derbyshire in context
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203411
Local Strategies and 
Initiatives
Sustainable Community Strategy 
for Chesterfield and North East 
Derbyshire 2009-2026
1.20 Although there is no longer a statutory 
requirement to produce a Sustainable 
Community Strategy, this document 
produced by the CHART Local Strategic 
Partnership provides a framework for 
service providers who operate in the 
area to target resources effectively 
to address the needs of communities 
and improve the quality of life in the 
district for all. Its overarching strategic 
areas identified for priority actions 
relate to:
• Accessible communities
• Living communities
•  Safer, healthier and active 
communities
•  Sustainable communities
•  Working and learning communities
1.21 The Local Plan provides an important 
means of expressing the spatial aspects 
of the Sustainable Community Strategy.
North East Derbyshire District 
Corporate Plan 2015 – 2019
1.22 The Council’s Corporate Plan was 
developed following consultation with 
local community organisations. It sets 
out the Council’s main aim to unlock 
the district’s growth potential with a 
focus on supporting enterprise, realising 
the development potential of major 
employment sites, and enabling housing 
growth. It further aims to support 
healthier, cleaner and greener 
communities.North East Derbyshire Growth 
Strategy & Action Plan (2014)
1.23 North East Derbyshire District Council, 
working in partnership with Bolsover 
District Council has prepared a Growth 
Strategy which sets out the Council’s 
ambitions, priorities and approach that 
it will take to enable the growth of 
the local economy to create stability 
and prosperity. The Growth Strategy 
includes as its strategic priorities:
• supporting enterprise, 
• enabling housing growth; and 
• unlocking development potential. 
1.24 The Growth Strategy recognises that 
there needs to be significant residential 
development over the next 10 years 
to meet future requirements and to 
achieve a better balance between 
future housing and workforce growth 
and available employment. It sets 
out to align with the growth plans 
of the LEPs, specifically Sheffield 
City Region (SCR) and Derbyshire and 
Nottinghamshire (D2N2).
Linacre ReservoirNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034121.25 The Local Plan will be a key 
delivery mechanism for a number of 
transformational projects for housing 
and employment, including:
• Developing the M1 Strategic Growth 
Corridor proposal as the principal 
economic growth location, 
• Bringing forward investment and 
development along the A61 Growth 
Corridor, working with the LEPs and 
Derbyshire County Council
• Bringing forward site development 
at principal employment growth 
locations, including:
•  Callywhite Lane, Dronfield
• Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross
• The Avenue site, Wingerworth
• Markham Vale, Long Duckmanton
• Former Coalite Site, Long 
Duckmanton
• Realising major housing /mixed use 
regeneration projects at 
•  Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross
•  The Avenue site, Wingerworth
•  Former Coalite Site, Long 
Duckmanton
•  Investigating the potential for new 
strategic housing sites, including 
within the M1 Strategic Growth 
Corridor and eastern sub-area
•  Facilitating a housebuilding 
programme, including a range of 
affordable and social housing, and 
the regeneration of the Council’s 
non-traditional housing stock.
The Housing and Economic 
Development Strategy 2015-20
1.26 The Strategy identifies key challenges 
and opportunities facing the District 
over the next 5 years. From these, it 
sets a range of Key Strategic Objectives 
which will direct the delivery of the Strategy to meet the housing and 
economic needs of the District. The 
Local Plan will have a key role in 
delivering many of these objectives.
Regeneration Frameworks (Clay 
Cross, Dronfield, Eckington, and 
Killamarsh)
1.27 In order to provide a focus for the 
physical regeneration of the district’s 
main towns the Council has adopted 
Regeneration Framework documents for 
Clay Cross, Dronfield, Eckington, and 
Killamarsh. These aim to:
• identify key opportunities for 
improvement within the towns
• set a strategic approach to delivering 
improvements
• attract and manage investment
• coordinate the delivery of projects
• ensure that projects are of the 
highest quality
1.28 Many of the general planning and 
design principles within the Frameworks 
have been taken forward through the 
policies in the Local Plan, for example 
Policy SDC12 on High Quality Design 
and Place Making. In addition, the more 
specific projects and infrastructure 
improvements which are considered to 
have prospects for delivery within the 
plan period have been embedded within 
the area based policies in Chapter 7: 
Sustainable Places.
One Public Estate Programme 
(Clay Cross, Eckington, 
Killamarsh and Mill Lane at 
Wingerworth)
1.29 To further strengthen its efforts on 
regeneration the Council secured 
funding from the Government’s One 
Public Estate Programme (OPE) which 
focuses on the Council’s collective North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203413
assets. The monies will be used for 
appraisal/feasibility studies of the town 
centres in Clay Cross, Eckington and 
Killamarsh and for a masterplan for the 
Mill Lane area in Wingerworth.
Sustainability Appraisal
1.30 In drawing up a Local Plan, the local 
planning authority must carry out 
an appraisal of the sustainability of the Plan’s proposals. Consequently, a process called Sustainability Appraisal 
(hereinafter referred to as SA) has been 
carried out alongside the preparation 
of this Local Plan. The process helped the local authority to check and consider how its emerging local plan 
policies may affect the achievement of 
sustainable development. Consequently, 
SA has led to certain amendments to the plan’s policies through the process of its preparation. 
1.31 SA is an iterative process that has been undertaken throughout the development of the Local Plan as options have been explored and refined and policies of the plan produced. Habitats Regulations 
Assessment
1.32 The Local Plan has been subject to Habitats Regulation Assessment 
(HRA) to identify any aspects of the 
Plan that would have the potential 
to cause a likely significant effect on 
European Sites of nature conservation 
importance. Although this is not 
expected, the Council is committed to 
working with Natural England and other 
authorities to monitor the impacts of 
development on European sites to help 
ensure that significant effects do not 
arise unexpectedly in the future.
1.33 The designated sites of European 
interest in North East Derbyshire are the Peak District Moors Special Protection Area (SPA) and the South Pennine Moors Special Area of Conservation (SAC), albeit they are located outside of the area covered by the Local Plan. Other European sites near to North East Derbyshire, but outside of the administrative boundary, are the Peak District Dales SAC,  
and the Gang Mine SAC in Derbyshire Dales District.
TrowayNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034142. Spatial Portrait
Description of the Area
2.1 North East Derbyshire covers an 
area of 276 square kilometres, and 
has a population of just over 99,000 
people. It forms part of the North 
Derbyshire and Bassetlaw Housing 
Market Area (HMA), together with 
Bolsover, Bassetlaw and Chesterfield 
Borough; originally identified in 2008 
through the evidence on the East 
Midlands Regional Spatial Strategy. 
Because of its geographical position 
on the border of North Derbyshire and 
South Yorkshire it also sits within two 
Local Economic Partnership areas; the 
Sheffield City Region, and the D2N2 
economic area covering Derbyshire and 
Nottinghamshire.
2.2 The District wraps around Chesterfield 
and adjoins five other local authorities’ 
areas including Amber Valley to the 
south, Derbyshire Dales to the west, 
Bolsover to the east, and Sheffield City, 
and the Borough of Rotherham to the 
north. The west of the District is largely 
rural and forms part of the eastern 
edge of the Peak District National Park 
which is a local planning authority in 
its own right. The area covered by the 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan is that 
part of North East Derbyshire which 
falls outside the Peak District National 
Park. Figure 2.1 shows the Local Plan 
area and its location within the wider 
East Midlands region. It also shows 
the district’s relationship with other 
nearby towns and cities within other 
local authority areas which it has been 
important to work closely with under 
the Duty to Co-operate - see Chapter 1.
2.3 The District comprises the four 
main towns of Clay Cross, Dronfield, 
Eckington and Killamarsh, together 
with a number of large and small 
villages, and hamlets set within attractive countryside settings. The 
four towns have important roles to play 
in providing the economic and social 
hearts of communities in North East 
Derbyshire, and are home to about 
48% of the population. Clay Cross is 
located in the south of the District, 
whilst Dronfield the district’s largest 
town, and Eckington and Killamarsh are 
located in the north. Outside of these 
towns 34% of the district’s population 
live within larger villages with a good 
range of facilities, whilst the remaining 
18% are scattered within the district’s 
other smaller settlements.
2.4 North East Derbyshire being located 
in the centre of the country has good 
accessibility to high quality transport 
links, with the M1 motorway junctions 
29, 29a and 30 lying to the east of the 
District, providing communities and 
businesses with access to the motorway. 
It also has the Midland Mainline running 
through it. Whilst Dronfield is the only 
one of the four towns in the district 
with a railway station, Chesterfield, 
with fast and direct rail connections 
to Nottingham, Derby, Leicester, and 
London to the south, is easily accessible 
to residents and businesses. In addition, 
the Midland Mainline from Chesterfield 
provides access to cities in the north of 
England such as Sheffield and Leeds. 
2.5 In broad terms, North East Derbyshire 
can be subdivided into four distinct 
sub-areas. These areas display close 
physical and functional relationships, 
each having their own characteristics 
and development needs to be addressed 
in the Local Plan. The four sub-areas 
are outlined graphically on Figure 2.1, 
and described in more detail below.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203415
North Sub-Area
2.6 The north of the District contains three 
of the District’s four towns; Dronfield, 
Eckington, and Killamarsh, and a 
number of much smaller settlements 
surrounded by countryside comprising 
mainly of wooded hills and valleys. The 
rural area lies entirely in the Green Belt 
and the towns and other settlements 
have generally been developed up 
to their boundaries, meaning that 
there are few development sites still 
available within their existing built 
up areas. All three towns have a coal 
mining history, although there is 
little evidence of that today. Each of 
these towns has its own designated 
town centre, which in the main are 
relatively successful in terms of local 
shopping and service provision. There has however been a need identified to 
regenerate all three centres in order 
to improve the quality of the town centre environment. These towns relate 
closely to the Sheffield conurbation and 
just under a quarter of people commute 
out of the District to work in the city.
South Sub-Area
2.7 The south of the District contains the 
town of Clay Cross and a close grouping of other former mining settlements that includes Grassmoor, North Wingfield, Tupton, Wingerworth, and Pilsley. Set within open countryside these settlements have a strong sense of identity and community which 
is characterised by the important 
open areas between them. Clay 
Cross is currently undergoing major regeneration in and around the town centre. This will be complemented 
by the re-development of the former 
Biwaters and Avenue industrial 
sites that have both been identified as important strategic sites that will provide new homes, jobs, and 
community facilities following  
their restoration.East Sub-Area
2.8 The east of the District contains 
communities and employment locations 
which are strongly linked with 
Chesterfield and the M1 motorway, 
including Holmewood, Calow, Long 
Duckmanton, and Temple Normanton. 
The area contains the business and 
distribution park with Enterprise Zone 
status at Markham Vale, as well as a 
major area of previously developed 
land at the former Coalite works, a 
large part of which is within Bolsover 
district. Sutton Scarsdale Hall, a Grade 
1 listed Georgian ruined stately home, 
is located in the east of the District, 
and the settings of Bolsover Castle and 
Hardwick Hall, both within Bolsover, 
have cross boundary implications in the 
east of the District. It will be important that any new development in the east 
takes this into account and is sensitive 
to the need to protect these designated heritage assets.
West Sub-Area
2.9 The west of the District lies on the edge of the Peak District National Park, and is particularly attractive including some of the finest Derbyshire landscape outside of the National Park. The area contains a number of villages and farms set in a rural backdrop of dark millstone grit that has provided the stone for many of the buildings.
AshoverNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203416Figure 2.1: North East Derbyshire District Sub-Areas
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203417
2.10  A key feature that gives the District 
its distinctive character is the green 
space that separates and links its towns 
and villages. Local people have already 
identified the importance of this green 
space and a key feature of the Strategy 
will be to protect and enhance the 
most important areas and ensure that 
opportunities to access this countryside 
are increased. The District also has 
a number of other important historic 
and environmental assets that play a 
crucial role in characterising its urban 
and rural areas. These include listed 
buildings and conservation areas as well 
as a large number of important sites for 
nature conservation. 
2.11 There are 23 parish councils and 
one town council located within the District. At the time of writing, there were a number of Neighbourhood Plans which had come into effect or were in the process of preparation covering parts of the district. These include neighbourhood plans for the parishes of Ashover, Brackenfield, Brampton, Holymoorside and Walton, Wingerworth, and Wessington; and the town of Dronfield.
Key Issues
2.12 Drawing on the demographic data and information related to the District and its communities detailed within the Authority Monitoring Report, the Sustainability Appraisal, and other evidence base documents there are a range of important issues in the area that the Local Plan will seek to plan positively for or help to address. Whilst some of the issues identified are relevant at national and regional levels, the list includes both positive and negative attributes and focuses on specific issues relevant to North East Derbyshire. These key issues which are not ranked in any particular order of priority or importance are set  
out below:Population
2.13 North East Derbyshire, in common with 
many other areas, is experiencing an 
ageing population. This will have 
implications for certain types of housing 
and other infrastructure such as access 
to the health service provision. It also 
means there is a need to provide more 
family and affordable housing and job 
opportunities so as to attract and retain 
younger people which will serve to 
re-balance the district’s population 
profile.
Settlements and Separation
2.14  The District contains four main towns 
together with a number of other large 
and small settlements set within attractive countryside and landscapes which are highly valued locally.
2.15 Within the existing built up areas of settlements past development has gradually taken up most development opportunities including on previously developed land. As a consequence there will inevitably have to be some loss of countryside in order to meet the district’s development needs.
2.16 Across the south of the District the 
settlement pattern is characterised 
by a number of large villages and the 
town of Clay Cross. Some of these 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203418settlements lie in relatively close 
proximity to one another and in certain 
areas development has led to their 
coalescence such that their individual 
identity and the sense of separation 
between them is a cause for concern.
2.17 In the north of the District lie the towns of Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh. Given that these towns are surrounded by Green Belt, there are issues in 
balancing the housing needs of these 
specific areas against the impact on the 
Green Belt and the countryside.
Housing
2.18 There is a need for more housing across the District to cater for future increase in households including for affordable homes, specialist housing, and gypsies and travellers accommodation.
2.19 The high ratio of house prices to household income means that affordability of housing is a key issue for many parts of North East Derbyshire. Access to capital for a deposit and potentially some mortgage restrictions, particularly where employment is temporary, are the main barriers that limit peoples’ ability to buy their own home.
Economy & Employment
2.20 The District has a low jobs density and 
there is a need to provide employment 
locally in order to provide the 
opportunity for people to work close to 
where they live.
2.21 The District has traditionally relied on 
manufacturing and there is a need to diversify the local economy to create jobs in growth sectors such as advanced manufacturing, logistics and knowledge based sectors.2.22 North East Derbyshire has lower than 
average wage levels, and a lower 
proportion of the workforce with higher 
level qualifications when compared 
with regional and national averages.
2.23 Unemployment is high in some parts of 
the district, including within Grassmoor, 
Holmewood, Heath and Clay Cross  
south wards.
2.24 There is potential to capitalise on the district’s tourism and visitor economy given its location on the edge of the Peak District National Park and its close proximity to a number of other important tourism attractions. These include existing ones such as Chatsworth House, Hardwick Hall, Bolsover Castle, Renishaw Hall, and the potential new major leisure and visitor resorts being planned on the Birchall Estate known as Peak Resort near Unstone in Chesterfield Borough, and the Pit House West site near to  
Rother Valley Country Park in Rotherham Borough.
Town Centres
2.25 The town centres of Clay Cross, Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh are all in need of continued support and investment to build upon their strengths, and to help sustain and regenerate them into the future.
Clay CrossNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203419
2.26 Elsewhere across the District there is a 
hierarchy of smaller local centres which 
need continued support to sustain their 
role as day to day shopping 
destinations.
Deprivation
2.27 Although not a major issue across 
North East Derbyshire the Index of 
Multiple Deprivation shows that there 
are pockets of deprivation. About 10% of the District’s population live in the 
top 20% most deprived neighbourhoods 
in the country and suffer from 
challenges associated with low income, 
poor health, low employment, poor 
education and skills, and difficulties 
accessing housing and services.
Health
2.28 The level of health and life expectancy 
of people living in North East 
Derbyshire differs significantly between 
those people living in the most deprived 
areas compared with those in the least 
deprived areas.
Accessibility and Transport
2.29 North East Derbyshire is well located 
in relation to other major centres of 
population and has good access to 
national road and rail networks due to 
its proximity to Junctions 29, 29a and 
30 of the M1 motorway, and stations on 
the Midland Mainline.
2.30 Traffic congestion is an issue at specific 
locations in the District especially 
along the A61 corridor which can 
become congested during busy periods, 
particularly if there are problems on 
the M1.
2.31 Bus services are relatively frequent 
within the main towns, but more patchy 
and infrequent in the more rural parts 
of the district.
2.32 Dronfield is the only town with a 
railway station, but elsewhere residents 
and business have access to the railway 
station at Chesterfield that provides 
good services both to London and the 
north of the country. In the long term 
Chesterfield is also set to become an 
HS2 station which will improve journey 
times to the capital and other major 
towns and cities along the new route.
Civic Centre, Dronfield
Eckington
KillamarshNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203420Infrastructure
2.33 New development will generate 
a need for new or improved 
infrastructure and solutions will 
be needed, in consultation with 
infrastructure providers, to enable 
future development needs to be 
accommodated.
2.34 The District contains a network of 
green and blue infrastructure assets 
that are important for their recreation, 
landscape and biodiversity value, 
and which require safeguarding and 
improving for future generations 
to enjoy. There are significant 
opportunities to improve linkages 
between areas of open space, parks and 
the wider countryside.
Climate Change and Flooding
2.35 Although the risk of flooding is not 
widespread it is a constraint to 
development in certain locations at 
the district’s main towns and some 
of the larger villages including North 
Wingfield, Grassmoor and Wingerworth.
2.36 Ensuring that development contributes 
towards reducing flood risk through 
its location, design and layout by 
improvements to drainage infrastructure 
and the use of sustainable drainage 
systems will be a priority.
2.37 There are opportunities to increase 
the capacity of renewable energy 
generation in the district to help 
reduce emissions and climate change.
Water, Air and Soil Quality
2.38 Improvements in water quality in 
the district are required to meet 
the standards required by the Water 
Framework Directive.
2.39 The development of new and improved 
infrastructure to accompany growth has 
the potential to lead to an increase in 
soil erosion and soil loss.2.40 Overall air quality is good in North East 
Derbyshire. Although the more densely 
populated areas in the east of the 
district and close to the M1 motorway 
have the highest levels of air pollution, 
no Air Quality Management Areas are 
currently, or anticipated to be declared 
in the District during the plan period.
Natural Environment
2.41 A significant number of protected sites 
and species are present in North East 
Derbyshire. 
2.42 The District’s landscape is one of 
contrast and diversity. Woodland, hilly 
pastures, green dales and waterways all 
contribute to the District’s landscape, 
making it unique from other areas 
across the country. There are potential 
effects on the integrity of the district’s 
landscape.
2.43 Growth will place pressures and 
heighten the need to protect and 
enhance the district’s wealth of natural 
environment assets.
Built Environment
2.44 There is a wealth of heritage assets 
and archaeological remains across the 
District that adds to the character of 
the area and which is in need of long 
term protection and management to 
maintain its long term future.
2.45 Good design is a key aspect of achieving 
sustainable development in North 
East Derbyshire and new development 
should positively respect the area’s 
local distinctiveness and sense of place 
through its design especially in regard 
to heritage assets.
2.46 Archaeological remains, both seen and 
unseen which have the potential to be 
affected by growth and development in 
North East Derbyshire will need to be 
protected and where possible enhanced 
to secure their long term future.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203421
3. Vision and Objectives
3.1 This chapter sets out the underlying 
thinking behind the Plan. It consists of a Plan vision together with a set of accompanying strategic objectives. The Plan’s vision sets out how the area and places within it should develop over the long term, as well as providing a clear framework for the Plan’s policies.
Vision
3.2 In 2015 the Council published its 
Corporate Plan 2015 – 2019 following 
consultation with local community 
organisations. The Corporate Plan sets out the direction which the District Council would like to take, setting out a vision together with four main aims to help create a more vibrant and sustainable North East Derbyshire. The Council’s Corporate vision is that with a focus on the key aim of unlocking the district’s growth potential:
 “North East Derbyshire will be a 
place that is clean and attractive, a place where people are proud to live and work, where they will prosper and are safe, happy and healthy”.
3.3 The following vision for the Local Plan builds on this corporate vision and its growth aspirations, setting out how the 
Plan area will develop by 2034.
Local Plan Vision
 “By 2034, everyone in North East 
Derbyshire will enjoy a high quality of life, with residents, businesses and 
visitors all benefitting from what the 
District has to offer.”
3.4 The District will have accommodated sustainable growth whilst the distinct character of different areas and communities will have continued to be preserved and promoted, creating safe, integrated and healthy communities. This will be achieved by:
• growing and diversifying the local 
economy to create stability and 
prosperity, supporting businesses and 
regenerating the most deprived areas;
• sharing in the economic benefits of 
regeneration and sustainable growth 
in the wider Sheffield City  
Region and D2N2 Local Economic 
Partnership areas;
• encouraging rural diversification that recognises the District’s  tourism assets;
• providing new housing with a range of house types and tenures which meets the needs of a growing and ageing population, including through neighbourhood regeneration of the most deprived areas;
•  requiring high quality design in 
new development which addresses climate change, creates and maintains a sense of place, improves local people’s quality of life, and reduces the potential for crime and anti-social behaviour;
• protecting and enhancing the natural, built, and historic environment;
• protecting and creating open spaces to provide accessible green 
infrastructure and biodiversity 
networks which promote healthy 
lifestyles and provide realistic 
alternatives to the use of the  
private car.
3.5 In the North of the District, growth and 
expansion of the towns of Dronfield, 
Eckington and Killamarsh, will have met 
the development needs of communities 
in the northern part of the district North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203422helping to deliver much needed 
affordable homes, and regenerate and 
renew their towns’ centres. In planning 
for growth new high quality housing 
will have successfully integrated itself 
into these settlements minimising its 
impact upon the strategic functions 
of the Green Belt, and creating strong 
defensible boundaries for the future. 
3.6 In the West, opportunities for tourism 
and farm diversification will have 
brought economic benefits to the 
District, strengthening its role as the ‘Gateway to the Peak District’, helping to secure the area’s economic 
viability, whilst continuing to protect 
the high quality and open nature of the 
countryside. Some limited housing and employment development will have continued to support the vitality of rural villages and services, and provided affordable housing.
3.7 In the South of the District, Clay Cross will have secured its economic revival, founded on its proud heritage, and will have strengthened its role as a service centre for the surrounding network of villages. Flagship projects such as at the former Avenue and Biwaters sites will have delivered imaginative new developments to improve the local environment, enhancing facilities and providing employment benefits for local communities.
3.8 In the East of the District, sustainable growth in jobs and housing will have 
capitalised on the area’s location 
close to the M1 motorway and the 
development of the business and 
distribution park with Enterprise Zone 
status at Markham Vale.  Local Plan Objectives
3.9 The following strategic objectives 
have been derived from the key issues 
identified in the spatial portrait and 
will help deliver the Plan’s vision and 
guide development across the plan area 
to 2034. The objectives set out in more 
detail how the vision will be achieved 
providing a link between the key issues 
set out in Chapter 2, and the individual 
policies of the Plan in subsequent 
chapters.
District-wide Objectives
The Economy
D1 Sustainable Economic 
Growth:
To facilitate development and ensure sufficient land is made available that will 
support the growth of the local economy 
bringing about economic regeneration in 
North East Derbyshire, maximising the economic benefit of HS2, recognising the 
housing and employment needs of a growing 
population, supporting businesses, and 
seeking to narrow the gap between the more 
deprived areas and the more affluent areas. 
D2 Jobs & Training:
To improve employment opportunities and, where possible, seek to ensure that  
education and training are better related to skill shortages.
D3 Tourism:
To support the District’s tourism economy by developing assets, such as the Chesterfield Canal, and by strengthening the District’s  role as the gateway to the Peak District National Park.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203423
The Community
D4 Sustainable Communities:
To support communities across the District 
and meet the needs of all people, by 
promoting social inclusion, providing or 
maintaining social, cultural, sport and 
recreation facilities, and improving personal 
health and well-being.
D5 Housing for All:
To meet the objectively assessed needs 
for market and affordable housing in the 
District ensuring there is an adequate mix 
of housing types, sizes and tenures to meet 
the needs of all sectors of the District’s 
communities, including supporting housing-led neighbourhood regeneration opportunities.
The Environment
D6 Green Belt:
To protect the general area of the Green Belt 
and the purposes of including land within 
it taking account of the need to promote sustainable patterns of development across the District.
D7 Settlement Identity:
To protect the separation and identity of the District’s settlements by identifying key areas of countryside where development should  
be restricted.
D8 Addressing Climate Change:
To address, mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change on people, wildlife, and places by increasing energy efficiency, promoting renewable energy generation, securing green infrastructure, matching the vulnerability of land uses to flood risk, and managing surface water in the most sustainable way.
D9 Design and Place Making:
To create a safe, sustainable environment by ensuring that new development is well 
designed, supports sustainability principles, 
delivers timely infrastructure and uses 
opportunities to redevelop previously 
developed land to assist the restoration of 
derelict and unstable land.
D10 Heritage Assets:
To protect and enhance the District’s distinct 
historic environment and industrial heritage 
including Scheduled Ancient Monuments, Registered Parks and Gardens, Conservation Areas, Listed Buildings, archaeological sites 
and other locally important heritage assets 
and their setting.
D11 Natural Assets:
To recognise the value of natural assets by 
protecting, enhancing and expanding North East Derbyshire’s network of green and blue infrastructure including its distinctive landscape character, open spaces and nature conservation sites in part by supporting opportunities to improve countryside access. 
D12 Sustainable Transport:
To increase the opportunities for travel using sustainable forms of transport by securing improvements to public transport, walking and cycling infrastructure particularly to maintain and improve connectivity with the main urban areas within the Sheffield City Region and to the south and east of the District. 
D13 Local Amenity:
To ensure that housing and employment growth takes place in a way that protects local amenity and does not undermine environmental quality.
D14 Strategic Co-operation:
To recognise potential cross boundary issues arising from new strategic development, and ensure a co-ordinated approach to 
delivering sustainable growth, working with 
neighbouring authorities and other partners in 
a constructive way.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203424Sub-area Objectives
The North 
N1 Dronfield, Eckington and 
Killamarsh Town Centres:
To ensure the vitality and viability of Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh town centres by supporting improvements compatible with their local employment, retail and service functions and reflecting  
the scope that exists for physical change within them as defined through the Regeneration Frameworks.
N2 Countryside Recreation:
To encourage proposals that support 
countryside recreational pursuits, particularly 
those involving the provision of linear  
routes and the reinstatement of the Chesterfield Canal.
N3 Employment Land:
To improve the quality of employment land 
in the north of the District and address 
infrastructure deficiencies to allow for 
the expansion of existing sites, such as at 
Callywhite Lane, Dronfield.
The West
W1 Strong and Vibrant Communities:
To facilitate sustainable growth in settlements 
in the West of the District in order to support 
a level of service provision to meet both the 
settlement’s needs and those of the wider 
area; elsewhere development will be limited.
W2 Countryside Character: 
To conserve the character of the countryside, 
having regard to its proximity to the Peak 
District National Park.W3 Diversifying the Rural 
Economy:
To encourage opportunities for farm 
diversification and tourist related activities, 
particularly where this will help secure the 
future economic vitality and viability of  
the area.
The South
S1 Clay Cross Town Centre: 
To secure the economic regeneration of 
Clay Cross through supporting development 
which strengthens its role as a vibrant and 
successful town centre with a good range of 
everyday services and shopping requirements, 
and which promotes its unique historic 
character.
S2 Regeneration:
To recognise the role of key employment areas, including Chesterfield and the former Avenue and Biwaters strategic sites, as being pivotal in the successful regeneration of the sub area.
The East
E1 Regeneration:
To recognise and support the role that the east of the District, particularly around the A632 corridor, can play in delivering growth in 
supporting regeneration along the M1 corridor, 
including strategic sites and priority areas 
around the Markham Vale Enterprise Zone. 
E2 Land Remediation:
To secure the regeneration and remediation of previously developed land in order to support sustainable growth, working with partners and neighbouring authorities to ensure effective delivery and enhancement of the wider area. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203425E3 Environmental Quality:
To ensure that any negative environmental 
impacts arising from the development of the 
HS2 railway line are effectively mitigated.
Relationship between 
Objectives and Policies
3.10 The objectives take forward the 
planning vision for the district and 
set out in more detail what the Plan 
is seeking to do. Whilst the principle 
aim of the Plan is to seek to achieve 
sustainable development the above 
Plan objectives set the framework for 
developing the policies in more detail.3.11 The Plan’s policies are the means of 
achieving the vision and objectives 
through the development management 
process. In relation to certain cross 
cutting issues such as climate change 
and wider sustainability matters there 
may be policies which works towards 
a number of the Plan’s objectives. 
The matrix at Figure 3.1 sets out 
the relationship between the Plan’s 
objectives and the policies.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203426Figure 3.1: Relationship between the Plan’s Objectives and Policies
Plan’s ObjectivesPolicy
SS1 SS2 SS3 SS4 SS5 SS6 SS7 SS8 SS9 SS10 SS11 LC1 LC2 LC3 LC4 LC5 LC6 LC7 LC8 LC9
D1: Sustainable Economic Growth 33333333 3 3 3
D2: Jobs & Training 333333
D3: Tourism 3
D4: Sustainable Communities 33 33 3
D5: Housing for All 3333 3333 333
D6: Green Belt 33 3
D7: Settlement Identity 33 33 3
D8: Addressing Climate Change 33 333
D9: Design and Place Making 33 333 3
D10: Heritage Assets 3 33 3
D11: Natural Asset 33 33 3
D12: Sustainable Transport 33
D13: Local Amenity 33 3333 3 3
D14: Strategic Co-operation 33
N1: Dronfield, Eckington and 
Killamarsh Town Centres 33
N2: Countryside Recreation 3
N3: Employment Land 33
W1: Strong and Vibrant Communitie 33 3
W2: Countryside Character 33
W3: Diversifying the Rural Economy 33
S1: Clay Cross Town Centre 33 3
S2: Regeneration 3333
E1: Regeneration 33 33
E2: Land Remediation 33 33
E3: Environmental Quality 3North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203427Figure 3.1: Relationship between the Plan’s Objectives and Policies - continued
Plan’s ObjectivesPolicy
WC1 WC2 WC3 WC4 WC5 WC6 SP1 SP2 SP3 SP4 SDC1 SDC2 SDC3 SDC4 SDC5 SDC6 SDC7 SDC8 SDC9
D1: Sustainable Economic Growth 333333     3         
D2: Jobs & Training 333333              
D3: Tourism    333     3         
D4: Sustainable Communities 333333              
D5: Housing for All           3         
D6: Green Belt                    
D7: Settlement Identity                    
D8: Addressing Climate Change                    
D9: Design and Place Making 333333              
D10: Heritage Assets               33333
D11: Natural Asset            333      
D12: Sustainable Transport 333333              
D13: Local Amenity 333333              
D14: Strategic Co-operation                    
N1: Dronfield, Eckington and 
Killamarsh Town Centres 3333333 33         
N2: Countryside Recreation     33              
N3: Employment Land 333                 
W1: Strong and Vibrant Communitie    3       3         
W2: Countryside Character     33      33       
W3: Diversifying the Rural Economy    333     3         
S1: Clay Cross Town Centre  33333  3            
S2: Regeneration  33                 
E1: Regeneration  33                 
E2: Land Remediation  33                 
E3: Environmental Quality                    North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203428Figure 3.1: Relationship between the Plan’s Objectives and Policies - continued
Plan’s ObjectivesPolicy
SDC10 SDC11 SDC12 SDC13 SDC14 SDC15 ID1 ID2 ID3 ID4 ID5 ID6 ID7 ID8 ID9 ID10
D1: Sustainable Economic Growth       3          
D2: Jobs & Training                 
D3: Tourism                 
D4: Sustainable Communities       3 333    3
D5: Housing for All                 
D6: Green Belt                 
D7: Settlement Identity                 
D8: Addressing Climate Change 33           3    
D9: Design and Place Making   3 3           
D10: Heritage Assets                 
D11: Natural Asset             3333
D12: Sustainable Transport        33    33   
D13: Local Amenity    3 3          3
D14: Strategic Co-operation                 
N1: Dronfield, Eckington and  
Killamarsh Town Centres                
N2: Countryside Recreation             333  
N3: Employment Land                 
W1: Strong and Vibrant Communitie                 
W2: Countryside Character                 
W3: Diversifying the Rural Economy                 
S1: Clay Cross Town Centre                 
S2: Regeneration                 
E1: Regeneration                 
E2: Land Remediation     3            
E3: Environmental Quality    3             North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034294. Spatial Strategy
Introduction
4.1  The purpose of this chapter is to 
set out the Spatial Strategy that the 
Council will follow to achieve its Vision 
and Objectives. The achievement of 
sustainable development forms the 
basis of the strategy approach which 
seeks to deliver new development and 
associated supporting infrastructure 
to meet future needs of the District in 
the locations where it is most needed 
whilst at the same time protecting 
valued assets and resources.
Sustainable Development
4.2 The purpose of the planning system 
is to contribute to sustainable 
development5. The goal of sustainable 
development is to enable all people 
to satisfy their basic needs and to 
enjoy a better quality of life, without 
compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own social, 
economic and environmental needs.
4.3 The Local Plan’s vision and objectives 
are centred on sustainable growth, 
which means encouraging sustainable 
development as a means of protecting 
and enhancing the environment, 
growing the District’s economy, and 
supporting the health and wellbeing of 
the District’s communities. 
4.4 Achieving sustainable development 
to create more sustainable patterns 
and forms of development in the 
district is the fundamental principle 
underpinning each policy in the Local 
Plan. Policy SS1 sets out the economic, 
social, and environmental dimensions 
of sustainable development and what 
this means in North East Derbyshire. In 
light of the rural nature of North East Derbyshire this means focusing the 
majority of development in and around 
the most sustainable locations, where 
the best use can be made of existing 
infrastructure, services and facilities; 
whilst at the same time meeting 
the essential needs of smaller rural 
communities in an appropriate way. 
A hierarchy of settlements has been 
established to identify the relative 
sustainability of places and to focus 
development in the right places. Other 
policies in the plan clearly set out the 
scale and nature of development that 
is appropriate within the different 
settlement categories to ensure that 
development enhances the place it 
becomes part of. 
4.5  The identification of settlement 
boundaries creates a clear distinction 
between areas that are considered to 
form part of the built form or wider 
environs of a settlement and are 
therefore considered suitable for 
planned or windfall development. 
Countryside policies apply to land 
outside of these settlement boundaries 
(unless allocated for other uses). 
5 (Planning & Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 (S.39).
KillamarshNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203430Policy SS1: Sustainable Development
In order to contribute to sustainable development in North East Derbyshire, 
development proposals will:
a. Meet development needs within defined settlements or other allocated areas hav ing 
regard to the defined settlement hierarchy and the need to enhance their role as a 
focus for new services and facilities (Policy SS2 & Table 4.2);
b. Promote the efficient use of land and the re-use of previously developed 
land (including the remediation of contaminated land) buildings and existing 
infrastructure in sustainable locations (Policies SS2-4, SS6 & SS10);
c. Locate development where there is access to a broad range of jobs, services and 
facilities which are accessible by foot, cycle or public transport with reduced 
reliance on the private car (Policy SS2);
d. Support the local economy by contributing towards business expansion and growth, 
attracting and supporting a skilled labour force, and improving skills and access for 
local people to job opportunities including targeted recruitment and training, and 
the use of Local Labour Agreements (Policies WC1-3); 
e. Reduce the need for energy in new development and ensure that it can use energy 
efficiently through the life time of the development (Policy SDC12); 
f. Promote the social and economic wellbeing of North East Derbyshire’s communities 
and contribute to reducing social disadvantages and inequalities (Policies LC2-4, LC9, 
WC1, WC3, WC5 and ID10);
g. Create well designed places that are accessible, durable, adaptable and enhance 
local distinctiveness (Policy SDC12); 
h. Protect and enhance the character, quality and settings of towns and villages and 
heritage assets (Policies SS8, SDC1 & SDC5-9);
i. Protect and/or enhance the character, quality and diversity of the District’s green 
infrastructure and local landscapes, the wider countryside and ecological and 
biodiversity assets (Policies SS2, SS11,SDC3-4, ID1 and ID7-10);
j. Protect the productive potential of the District’s best quality agricultural land, and 
avoid sterilisation of mineral resources;
k. Support the provision of essential public services and infrastructure (Policies SS2, 
ID1-4 and ID10);
l. Play a positive role in adapting to and mitigating the effects of climate change, 
including through the use of sustainable drainage systems, to contribute to the 
health and wellbeing of communities and the environment through the location, 
design and operation of development (Policies SDC10-11);
m. Take account of any coal-mining related land stability and / or other public safety 
risks, and where necessary, incorporate suitable mitigation measures to address the 
risk (Policies SDC14-15).North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203431Housing, Employment and 
Retail Targets and Provision
Housing Target
4.6 The proposed housing target forms a 
central building block of the Council’s 
Spatial Strategy in that it contributes 
to explaining how much residential 
development is planned during the 
plan period. A key starting point for 
the Local Plan is to establish the 
Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) for 
market and affordable housing over the 
plan period. The NPPF indicates that 
this should relate to the Housing Market 
Area (HMA). The North Derbyshire and 
Bassetlaw Strategic Housing Market 
Area makes up the appropriate HMA 
and comprises Bassetlaw District, 
Bolsover District, Chesterfield Borough 
and North East Derbyshire District 
Councils. This area was reviewed and 
confirmed as an appropriate HMA in the 
Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA) in 2013. The 2013 SHMA was 
updated in 2017 to take account of the 
Government’s 2014-based population 
figures and household projections 
(SHMA Update, October 2017). As 
advised by the NPPF the SHMA identifies 
the full, objectively assessed need for 
housing, both across the Housing Market 
Area and for each of the component 
authority areas. 
4.7 The SHMA Update 2017 indicates a need 
for 1,184 homes per year across the 
HMA covering the period 2014-2034. 
It identifies North East Derbyshire’s 
Objectively Assessed Housing Need 
at 283 homes per year. These figures 
use a methodology similar to the 
Government’s proposed standard 
methodology. They take as a starting 
point the Government’s 2014-based 
population figures and household 
projections i.e. the demographic need 
for homes and include an upward 
adjustment of 10%, for enhanced affordable housing delivery, along 
with an uplift to account for baseline 
employment growth. 
4.8 In developing a realistic housing target 
(as opposed to baseline OAN), the 
Council must also have regard to the 
NPPF’s need for positive planning, and 
to the Vision and Objectives of the 
Plan. This requires consideration of 
the District’s ambitions for growth and 
the wider City-region and HMA context 
including the activities of the Sheffield 
City Region and D2N2 Local Enterprise 
Partnerships (LEPs). Both of the LEP 
Growth Plans and Economic Strategies 
are in development in relation to the 
understanding of their impact upon 
population and housing. However, the 
combined effects of these Growth 
Plans upon authorities which fall within 
both LEPs have not been clarified and 
there is no sub-regional breakdown. 
Consequently, it is difficult to 
determine whether there are any direct 
impacts of the LEP strategies upon 
the scale of housing in the Local Plan, 
although both strategies intend to assist 
with housing delivery. As they stand, 
their background information indicates 
that the job growth they aspire to 
would be possible from population 
growth already projected across the 
LEP areas.
4.9 The SHMA Update, 2017 modelled 
a housing provision for North East 
Derbyshire in line with Council’s 
Growth Strategy and the wider LEPs’ 
ambitions. This was based on a Scenario 
developed as part of the Council’s 
Employment Land Review evidence. 
This ‘Regeneration Scenario’ takes 
into account the potential for higher 
growth in certain key sectors reflecting 
both the Council’s and wider LEPs’ 
Economic Development Strategies. 
The assumption used is somewhat 
conservative in that growth in these 
sectors could be anticipated at rates 
close to the baseline East Midlands’ North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203432regional growth rate. This provides 
employment growth of 3,000 jobs, which is 1,000 higher than in the District’s Baseline, with a growth rate of 0.4% pa. This is still lower than the historical growth rate of 0.6% (between 1993 and 2014). The Growth Scenario in the SHMA translates these 3,000 jobs into a housing requirement of 332 dwellings per annum; this has been rounded to the nearest 10 dwellings.
4.10 The reason for adopting this ‘Regeneration Scenario’ is threefold. 
i. To reflect a realistic and reasonable future economic growth reflecting the context of the District and sub-region beyond it, including that of the LEPs.
ii. To provide support and not constraint for economic growth and delivering regeneration in the District to align with the Local Plan and Growth Strategy objectives. 
iii. Delivery of more affordable housing. The District’s OAN includes an upward adjustment to boost affordable housing delivery and a higher overall Plan figure than the OAN will deliver proportionately higher affordable housing to meet local needs.
4.11 As a result, when establishing a target for housing provision in line with the broader objectives, including a realistic level of economic growth, the Council has identified a minimum of 330 homes a year as the most appropriate target for the District, amounting to 6,600 dwellings over the plan period  
2014 – 2034. 4.12 Table 4.1 sets out the components of the housing land supply This comprises 1996 dwellings that have been built since 2014, and a further 3901 dwellings with planning permission that are considered to be deliverable and developable within the Plan period. These are also known as commitments, the majority of which are shown as allocations on the Policies Map. Some 1192 dwellings are not shown as allocations and this is due either to their small size, their location around settlements below level 2 in the settlement hierarchy, or because they secured planning permission during Examination of the Plan. 814 dwellings without planning permission are allocated (Appendix B provides a breakdown per settlement). Additional flexibility will be provided by windfalls, which are expected to provide for approximately 75 dwellings per year based upon past trends
6. This will 
provide a 11% buffer in relation to the overall housing requirement of 6600 dwellings.
Table 4.1: Components of Housing Supply
Baseline OAN – 283 per year 
Housing Target – 330 per year
6 As set out at Section 6.3 of the Housing Topic Paper, (January 2018). Components of Housing Supply Yield
Housing Completions 2014-2020 1996
Minor commitments at 31/03/2020 (minus 7% lapse rate)417
Major commitments at 31/03/2020 (not allocated)775
Allocations (with planning permission i.e commitments)2709
Allocations (without planning permission)814
TOTAL 6711North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203433Employment Land Provision
4.13  The Local Plan aims to provide 
new jobs along with new housing, 
ensuring that a range of deliverable 
and marketable employment land is 
available both for indigenous firms 
and for inward investors, but at the 
same time recognising the relationship 
of the District with the Sheffield City 
Region, particularly with Sheffield 
and Chesterfield. In particular, it 
acknowledges the 61% of people who 
commute out of the District to work. 
About 19% commute to Sheffield, 18% 
to Chesterfield, and 3% each to Amber 
Valley, Bolsover, Derbyshire Dales and 
Rotherham (2011 Census). 
4.14 In addition to the relationship with the 
Sheffield City Region which has strong 
links with the north of the District, 
the south of the District has a close 
economic relationship with the D2N2 
economic area covering Derbyshire 
and Nottinghamshire. The Strategic 
Growth Plans of the LEPs (submitted 
to Government in 2014) provide the 
strategic context for the Council’s own 
Growth Strategy, and for the Local 
Plan. The District’s Growth Strategy 
& Action Plan seeks to unlock the 
capacity of major employment sites, 
maintaining an appropriate supply of 
suitably located employment land and 
premises and working with partners 
to develop, manage and enhance key 
strategic employment areas. 
4.15 The District’s economy is diverse 
and there is a need to plan for a 
range of different sizes and types of 
employment site. The Local Plan aims 
to provide employment land of various 
scales and types across the District 
along with new housing to provide 
opportunities for people to live close 
to their places of work. In particular, 
there is a need to unlock development 
and bring forward strategic and major 
sites for development to transform economic prospects, and to support 
regeneration of the district’s towns.
4.16  The 2017 Employment Land Update 
(ELU) recommended that employment 
land provision for North East Derbyshire 
should be between 30ha & 43ha 
(2014-34). The bottom end of the 
range represents a level that links to 
‘baseline’ employment forecasts. The 
upper end reflects forecasts related 
to a ‘Regeneration’ scenario. This 
is intended to represent the growth 
associated with the Local Plan’s 
objectives and broad strategies in the 
District and beyond, including those of 
the LEPs; and is considered to be the 
most appropriate and realistic forecast 
on which to base the employment 
land target in the Plan. The target 
of 43ha would allow for significant 
losses of existing employment land 
but provide for an overall employment 
land increase in line with economic 
forecasts. 
4.17 The employment land provision also 
has regard to guidance in the NPPF 
to avoid the long term protection 
of employment allocations. The ELU 
also suggests that the Council should 
consider whether existing employment 
sites in the District are no longer 
productive for employment use and 
“could be better placed to support 
non B class employment uses in the 
future.” Consequently land allocations 
have been reviewed and certain sites, 
considered to fulfil the NPPF and ELU 
descriptions, have been reconsidered 
for how they may contribute value 
to the land portfolio for future 
employment.
4.18 The Local Plan aims to safeguard 
and improve existing successful and 
attractive employment sites, and to 
allocate new sites to improve the 
portfolio of available employment land 
within the District. New employment 
development for manufacturing North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203434and distribution will take place on 
already committed sites to regenerate 
previously developed land and, 
where necessary and sustainable, on 
Greenfield land in accessible locations. 
It is recognised also that employment 
growth is increasingly provided by 
other, non-B use commercial and public 
sectors such as leisure and the health 
service. A wider definition of economic 
development has been reflected in 
National Planning Policy Guidance 
since 20127. The Plan adopts a positive 
approach to sui generis and other non 
B class job-creating uses on certain 
employment sites, within prescribed 
criteria to ensure the use proposed is 
compatible and appropriate.
4.19 Opportunities have been explored to 
capitalise on development potential 
for new employment land in and 
adjoining employment areas with 
locational advantages of proximity to 
the M1 corridor and/or that create 
opportunities to regenerate previously 
developed land. The focus is on existing 
large sites, both within the public and 
private sectors including:
• The Avenue, Wingerworth
• Former Biwaters, Clay Cross
• Markham Vale Enterprise Zone4.20  The employment land provision target 
of 43ha (net) in policy SS2 allows for 
the improvement of the employment 
portfolio through the loss of existing, 
less marketable employment land, 
more diverse uses on some employment 
sites, and new employment land and 
mixed-use strategic sites. 
4.21 New employment will also be 
encouraged in town and local centres, 
to support the objective of improving 
and enhancing their economic role. 
Balancing Housing and Economic 
Growth
4.22 The Plan has an objective to support 
sustainable growth which brings about 
regeneration, recognising the housing 
and employment needs of a growing 
population. The North East Derbyshire 
Growth Strategy has been prepared 
in the light of the continued growth 
in population used in the Local Plan 
evidence base, including the Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment (SHMA). 
The results of the SHMA analysis of the 
housing provision and forecast growth 
in employment is that the level of 
housing planned for would be sufficient 
to accommodate the levels of economic 
growth anticipated. 
4.23 The Council’s Growth Strategy has the 
intention of raising job densities (jobs/
worker) within the District, either 
through stronger improvements in 
economic participation (associated with 
greater access to local employment 
opportunities) or through lower levels 
of people commuting out of the area 
to work (or moving to the District to 
both live and work). Due also to the 
existing significantly low job densities, 
an increased growth in jobs would not 
directly lead to the need to increase 
planned housing provision. 
7 Paragraph: 033 Reference ID: 2a-033-20140306
The Avenue, WingerworthNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034354.24 The housing and economic evidence 
presented above indicates that the 
proposed employment land provision 
and housing provision are well 
balanced, the latter providing  
sufficient population to support growth 
in the economy. 
Retail Provision
4.25  The Local Plan recognises the role of its 
town centres in forming the heart of 
their communities and includes policies for the management and growth of 
centres over the plan period to support 
their viability and vitality to ensure 
they remain competitive. The evidence underpinning these policies is derived 
from the Retail Study (January 2018) 
which provides evidence on the health 
of town centres, shopping patterns and 
future retail needs. The Study defines Town Centre boundaries for Clay Cross, Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh as 
shown on the Policies Map, and confirms 
that these also represent the Primary 
Retail Area. A Local Centre is also defined in Dronfield. The Study also informs policy on the principles for 
retail development in and outside of 
the District’s retail centres and the 
setting of local thresholds to trigger the need for retail impact assessments for any edge or out of centre retail 
proposals within the catchment of a 
designated centre, (further detail is in 
Chapter 6).4.26 In terms of future retail needs the 
Retail Study provides forecasts for the 
likely future quantitative capacity for 
Convenience Shopping (predominantly 
food) and Comparison Shopping - (E.g. 
clothes, toys, white goods) up to 
2033. These forecasts are based upon 
baseline population forecasts and 
take account of committed sites up to 
August 2016 and indicate the following: 
• By 2033 the quantitative capacity 
for additional convenience goods 
floorspace is forecast to be between 2,000m² and 2,900m² (net). This is of a scale normally associated with 
discount foodstores, rather than 
large supermarkets.
• By 2033 there is estimated to be 
a negative quantitative capacity for comparison goods floorspace of between -100m² and -200 m² (net). 
Distribution of Growth & the Settlement Hierarchy
4.27 In accordance with the fundamental principles of sustainable development and the criteria outlined in Policy SS1 the Local Plan aims to direct new growth to the district’s most sustainable settlements based on the Settlement Hierarchy; and to Strategic Sites in suitable locations that promote the re-use of previously developed 
land. This will enable the integration of 
homes, jobs, services and facilities in 
the most accessible locations. 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034364.28  Table 4.2 below shows the Settlement 
Hierarchy, this is based on the findings 
of the Settlement Hierarchy Study 
(September 2017 update), which 
analyses the roles that different 
settlements perform for their 
communities. A settlement’s position 
in the hierarchy reflects its relative 
sustainability derived from scores 
associated with population levels, 
facilities and services, employment 
opportunities and public transport 
provision. 
4.29 Level 1 Settlements  in the hierarchy 
comprise the four towns of Clay Cross, 
Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh. 
These towns are considered to be the 
most sustainable locations for new 
development in terms of the range of 
services and facilities they provide and 
support and because they generate the 
greatest needs for new housing, jobs, 
services and facilities. In 2011, these 
four towns contained almost 50% of 
the district’s housing and 48% of the 
population. 
4.30 The towns also have important roles in 
providing the economic, commercial 
and social hearts of the District and 
growth will be targeted to support and 
where possible enhance these roles. 
It is logical and reasonable therefore 
that we should look to these towns 
to maintain their importance and 
prominence and to seek to provide 
for a significant proportion of the 
District’s housing growth requirements, 
to accommodate any required retail 
growth within their town centres and 
provide a focus for new employment 
growth.
4.31 It is however recognised that there are 
specific issues affecting the location of 
employment growth and the district’s 
towns and regeneration sites do not 
necessarily provide the optimum 
locations for all types of employment 
development, particularly that which is 
attractive to a wider than local market. Sites in particularly accessible locations 
are also required in order to attract 
investment and compete effectively 
with neighbouring areas. 
4.32 Three Strategic Sites are identified at 
the Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross, 
The Avenue, Wingerworth and Markham 
Vale, Duckmanton. Between them these 
sites have the potential to deliver 
approximately 2000 dwellings, of which 
three quarters are expected to come 
forward within the lifetime of this Plan, 
along with 17.7Ha of employment land 
and approximately 2000 m2 of retail 
floorspace. 
4.33 The level 1 Towns and Strategic Sites 
will be the focus for the District’s 
growth requirements during the Plan 
period, accommodating housing and 
commercial development, including all 
the new employment land provision. 
4.34 Level 2 settlements  will provide 
the locations for the remaining 
planned housing growth. There will 
be no housing allocations in Level 3 
settlements  (over and above existing 
commitments), although windfall 
developments of appropriate scale 
may be acceptable in line with criteria 
based Policy SS7 or an adopted 
Neighbourhood Plan. 
4.35 Level 4 Settlements are generally 
small in scale and lacking in services 
and facilities, there will be no 
allocations in these settlements. 
Development will be restricted to minor 
infill development to meet local needs, 
in line with criteria in Policy SS8 or an 
adopted Neighbourhood Plan.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203437Table 4.2: Settlement Hierarchy
 Type of Settlement Place
Level 3: Settlements 
with limited 
sustainabilityApperknowle
Arkwright TownAshover
Barlow 
Commonside
Barlow VillageCutthorpeHeath
Higham
Highmoor
Holmesfield
HolymoorsideKelstedgeLong DuckmantonLower PilsleyMarsh LaneMickleyOld Brampton
Ridgeway
Spinkhill
Stretton
Temple 
Normanton
Unstone Crow 
Lane
Unstone GreenWadshelf
Walton
Wessington
Level 4: Very small 
villages and hamlets with very limited sustainabilityAlton
BolehillBrackenfieldCock AlleyFallgate
Handley near 
Stretton
Littlemoor
Sutton Scarsdale
Woolley Moor Type of Settlement Place
Level 1: Towns Clay Cross
DronfieldEckington
Killamarsh
Level 2: Settlements 
with good level of 
sustainabilityCalow
GrassmoorHolmewoodMorton
North Wingfield 
Pilsley
Renishaw
ShirlandStonebroomTuptonWingerworthNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203438Policy SS2: Spatial Strategy and the Distribution of 
Development
1. The Local Plan will promote prosperous and sustainable communities by delivering 
new development, whilst protecting the high quality environment that makes North 
East Derbyshire an attractive place to live and work. 
Housing Provision
2. The Local Plan will make provision for the delivery of a minimum of 6,600 dwellings 
over the period 2014 - 2034 
3. New housing development will be focused on:
• The four Level 1 towns of Clay Cross, Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh; 
• The Avenue and former Biwaters Strategic Sites; and 
• Level 2 settlements as defined in the Settlement Hierarchy in Table 4.2. 
Employment Provision
4. The Local Plan will make provision for 43ha of employment land for the period 2014-
2034. 
5. New employment development will be focused on Principal Employment Areas as 
identified in Policy WC2 and on Strategic Sites at: The Avenue, Former Biwaters and 
Markham Vale (Policies SS3-5). 
Retail Provision
6. New convenience floorspace will be focussed within town centre boundaries as 
identified in Policy WC4.
Settlements
7. Policies for settlements will:
a.  Support and enhance the role of the four Level 1 towns of Clay Cross, Dronfield, 
Eckington, and Killamarsh;
b. Support and facilitate the regeneration of the Level 1 towns and Level 2 
settlements; and
c. Maintain the role of settlements by supporting their ability to sustain services and 
facilities through new development that is appropriate in scale and reflects their 
position in the Settlement Hierarchy. 
Countryside
8. Land which lies outside a Settlement Development Limit and is not allocated for 
development, will be treated as ‘countryside’ where development will only be 
permitted in accordance with Policies SS1 (Sustainable Development) and SS9 
(Development in the Countryside).North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203439Housing Provision by 
Settlement
4.36  The Settlement Hierarchy is the basis 
for determining the appropriate level 
of new housing for each settlement, 
informed by the Sustainability Appraisal 
and the supply and availability of 
suitable sites in each area. The 
distribution of housing by settlement is 
also strongly influenced by the extent 
of commitments and Policies SS1 and 
SS2, in order to support regeneration 
and the creation of more sustainable 
communities. 
Level 1 & Level 2 Settlements
4.37 Table 4.3 shows the housing distribution 
by Level 1 and Level 2 settlement and Strategic Sites. This is based upon commitments and allocations, which together with dwellings built since 2014 is sufficient to meet the minimum provision of 6,600 dwellings, as set out in Policy SS2. 
Level 3 & Level 4 Settlements (Smaller Villages and Hamlets) 
4.38  No specific housing requirements are 
proposed for these settlements and therefore no allocations are proposed. The policy approach to dealing with proposals for new housing on unallocated land in these settlements is set out in Policies SS7 & SS8.Table 4.3: Housing Distribution by Level 1 & Level 2 Settlement
8
Level/
Strategic 
SitesSettlementHousing 
Provision 
2014 to 
2034
Level 1 
Settlements 
(Towns)Clay Cross  
(+ Biwaters 
Strategic Site)464 
(+825)
Dronfield 303
Eckington 213
Killamarsh 560
Towns Total 1540
Strategic 
SitesThe Avenue 731
Former Biwaters 825
Strategic Sites Total 1556
Level 2 Settlements (Large Villages)Calow 109
Grassmoor 276
Holmewood 484
Morton 156
North Wingfield 99
Pilsley 140
Renishaw -3
Shirland 193
Stonebroom 144
Tupton 362
Wingerworth (+ The Avenue Strategic Site)752 
(+731)
Large Villages Total 2712
Remaining Area
9903
TOTAL 6711
 
8 Figures are based upon completions since 2014, current commitments and allocations (see Appendix B). They do not represent targets or 
maximum levels of housing. 
9 Remaining Area – figure includes commitments in level 3 & 4 Settlements and countryside locations. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203440Strategic Site Allocations
4.39 In order to assist in the delivery of 
the Spatial Strategy (Policy SS2), the 
Plan allocates strategic sites which 
are considered critical to achieving 
the Plan’s strategy. This includes three 
Strategic Sites which are considered 
capable of delivering development 
within this plan period. A further site 
at Coalite is also identified as a Priority 
Regeneration Area. Whilst this site is of 
strategic scale and has the benefit of 
planning permission, it is not identified 
as a strategic site. This is because 
the planning permission pre-dates the 
announcement for the revised route of 
HS2, which cuts across the eastern end 
of the site, creating uncertainty over 
the site layout and timescales  
for delivery.
The Avenue, Wingerworth 
4.40 The Avenue site is located to the east of 
the A61, adjacent to Wingerworth and close to the administrative boundary with Chesterfield Borough. A significant proportion of the site comprises the former Avenue Coking Works which has been subject to a major remediation programme that completed in 2017.
4.41 The Avenue site was allocated for re-development in the previous District Local Plan (which covered the period to 2011). In 2013 the Council adopted the Avenue Area Strategic Framework as non-statutory planning guidance which is a material planning consideration in determining planning applications on the site. The Framework considers that the site is capable of delivering around 4-5 hectares of land for B1 (now E9g))
10, 
B2 and B8 employment uses (in addition to employment uses currently on site) and up to 1100 new homes, along with ancillary facilities and infrastructure, and public open space. Planning 
permissions are in place for much of 
the site and include the provision of 
approximately 700 dwellings. It is 
expected that the remaining site area 
will deliver beyond the plan period. 
4.42 Given the scale of the site and its role in delivering the strategy of the Plan over the plan period, the land is identified as a strategic site. The site is 
allocated for mixed use development, 
comprising employment, housing, 
recreation and open space uses.
4.43 The Local Transport Plan sets out future proposals for new infrastructure and includes an A61-A617 Avenue link road as a longer term County Council project. Whilst it is important that development of the site does not prejudice the construction of a link road from the A61 to A617, currently there is no defined route for this link road and no likelihood of funding before at least 2024. For these reasons a definitive route cannot be safeguarded on the Policies Map.
10 The AASF predates The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) (Amendment) (England) Regulations 2020, which deletes the B1 (Business) 
Use Class and incorporates those uses (offices, research & development and other industrial uses appropriate to a residential area) within category g of a broader use Class E – Commercial, Business and Service Uses.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203441Figure 4.1: Strategic Site Allocation – The Avenue
The Avenue, WingerworthNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203442Policy SS3: The Avenue
1. Land at the former Avenue site, as shown on the Policies Map, is allocated as a 
Strategic Site for mixed use development.
2. Proposals for the comprehensive mixed use development of this site will be guided 
by The Avenue Area Strategic Framework or any subsequent approved document and 
will be permitted where they:
a. Optimise the use of the site or make best use of land;
b. Provide up to 1100 new homes (approximately 700 within the period up to 2034);
c.  Provide for a minimum of 4 hectares of additional employment land;
d.  Include a range of local facilities, including a primary school retail, sport and 
recreation facilities;
e.  Protect and/or enhance existing open space, sport and recreation facilities;
f.  Promote and accommodate sustainable transport for pedestrians, cyclists, and 
public transport; 
g.  Provide effective pedestrian and cycle links to Chesterfield and nearby 
settlements, including through green infrastructure where this would not have an 
adverse impact on biodiversity;
h.  Do not prejudice the construction of a link road from the A61 to A617;
i.  Create development of the highest quality design and energy efficiency , with 
appropriate low carbon technologies;
j.  Maintain and improve existing known areas of wildlife habitat and species, and 
include measures for habitat creation; and
k.  Incorporate an appropriate mix of house types and tenures, to reflect housing 
need and market considerations.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203443Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross
4.44  The former Biwaters site is located 
to the north east of Clay Cross town 
centre, adjoining Bridge Street 
Industrial Estate, and is closely related 
to Coney Green and the residential 
area between it and the town centre. 
It is well located in terms of access to 
services and facilities in Clay Cross. The 
site also benefits from potential access 
to the Midland Mainline railway lines to 
Nottingham and Derby, and access to 
the M1 via the A6175. Redevelopment 
of the site will be supported for a 
mixed use scheme incorporating 
employment, residential, commercial 
recreation and leisure uses. 
4.45  Although part of the site to the 
eastern boundary lies within a high 
flood risk area, this land will not be built upon, instead creating a wildlife corridor and buffer zone to ensure minimum standards of flood defence are maintained, in accordance with the NPPF . The area of the Strategic Site has been extended to the north to enable the masterplanning for the site to respond effectively to current market conditions relating to housing density whilst retaining the overall scale and mix of land uses.
4.46 The site was originally allocated in the previous Local Plan (2001-2011). The landowner, working closely with the Council has a comprehensive strategy to bring forward development of  
the site.  4.47 Outline planning permission was first 
secured for the site in August 2010 and 
included site remediation, public open 
space, residential and employment 
development. Since then outline 
permission has also been secured 
for a foodstore and drive-through 
restaurant, as well as a full permission 
for a public house and reserved matters 
permission for the first phase of housing 
development. A revised outline scheme 
reflecting current market conditions 
was approved in August 2018 for the 
following development:
a. 825 homes,
b. Approximately 8 ha of 
employment generating uses incorporating:
i. B1 (now E9g))11, B2 & B8  
(up to 5ha),
ii. A local centre, A1, A2, A3, A4 and/or A5 (up to 2ha)
iii. Hotel/Care Home, C1 and C2 (up to 0.8ha)
c. Open Space, and
d. Associated highway works including a link road between the A61  and A6175.
4.48 Work has commenced on site with the construction of a roundabout on 
the A61, a road into the site; and a 
new public house and drive-through 
outlets and a retail store at the A61 site entrance. Construction is also underway on the housing development.
11 To reflect the updated Use Classes OrderNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203444Figure 4.2: Strategic Site Allocation – Former Biwaters  
Former Biwaters Site, Clay CrossNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203445Policy SS4: Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross
1. Land at Former Biwaters, Clay Cross, as shown on the Policies Map, is allocated as a 
Strategic Site, for mixed use development.
2. Development proposals for the comprehensive remediation and mixed use 
development of this site will:
a. Provide a high quality, sustainable, mixed use development that is well connected 
and has a functional relationship with Clay Cross; 
b.  Provide for upto 8 hectares of employment generating land uses to include 
provision for starter units and managed workspace;
c.  Provide up to 1000 new dwellings (approximately 825 within the period up to 
2034);
d.  Protect existing open space, sport and recreation facilities and provide or enhance 
additional facilities to meet additional need generated by the development;
e. Locate the residential element to maximise accessibility to existing and new local 
facilities;
f. Promote and accommodate sustainable transport for pedestrians, cyclists, and 
public transport including the provision of a route through the site to provide 
pedestrian and vehicular access to a future off-site railway station;
g. Provide effective pedestrian access to Tupton Hall School;
h. Provide a through road from the A61 to Furnace Hill/A6175;
i. Sustain and enhance the significance of heritage assets in particular the Gr ade 1 
listed St Lawrence Church in North Wingfield;
j. Provide a wildlife corridor and buffer zone along the River Rother to protect the 
biodiversity value of the river corridor and protect new development from the risk 
of flooding, and promote linkages to the wider green infrastructure network; 
k.  Provide structural landscaping, and public open space in accordance with Policies 
ID7, ID10 and SDC12; and
l.  Incorporate an appropriate mix of house types and tenures, to reflect housing 
need and market considerations. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203446Markham Vale, Long Duckmanton
4.49  The Markham Vale project is an 85 
hectare scheme based around the 
regeneration of the former Markham 
Colliery. The site area encompasses 
Bolsover District, Chesterfield Borough, 
and a 10 hectare area of land between 
Long Duckmanton and the M1 motorway 
in North East Derbyshire. Outline planning permission for the scheme 
was granted by partner authorities in 
2005, and the regeneration project 
commenced in 2006 with several phases 
of the development now completed. 
An approved joint Design Framework is 
in place to ensure development takes 
place in a manner that respects the 
location and mitigates impacts on local 
historic and environmental assets.
Figure 4.3: Strategic Site Allocation – Markham Vale
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203447Policy SS5: Markham Vale
1. Land at Markham Vale, as shown on the Policies Map, is allocated as a Strategic 
Development Site for employment use.
2. Development proposals will be guided by the approved Design Framework or any subsequent approved document and permitted where they:
a. Take place as part of the comprehensive development of the whole Markham  
Vale scheme;
b. Promote and accommodate sustainable transport for pedestrians, cyclists, and buses in accordance with Policy ID2-3; 
c. Provide structural landscaping, green infrastructure and public open space in accordance with Policies ID7 & ID10, and promote linkages to the wider green infrastructure network;
d. Incorporate sustainable design principles, in accordance with Policy SS1 and Policy SDC12; and
e. Sustain and enhance the significance of heritage assets, in particular the Gr ade 1 
Listed Bolsover Castle.
Coalite Priority Regeneration Area
4.50 The Coalite Priority Regeneration Area comprises the 61 hectare former Coalite Chemical Works site. This large area of previously developed land is located to the east of Junction 29A of the M1 motorway and the Markham Vale Enterprise Zone, straddling the administrative boundary with Bolsover District Council and in close proximity to the boundary with Chesterfield Borough Council, making it an important cross-boundary strategic site.
4.51 The site is predominately brownfield with a legacy of contamination due to its historical uses associated with coal mining, and coal oil chemical processing. The site forms part of the setting of Bolsover Castle, and includes the Doe Lea Corridor and its 
important biodiversity, both of which 
would need to be effectively protected 
in any regeneration proposals. The site is being promoted by the land owner and outline permissions were secured 
with both North East Derbyshire and Bolsover District Councils in 2016 
and 2015 respectively. The approved 
scheme includes remediation of the site, the provision of approximately 660 dwellings, 70,000 m2 employment land, a transport hub, energy centre, visitor centre/museum, local centre and land for a new primary phase school.
4.52 Since planning permission was secured 
on the site the Government has 
confirmed proposals for the realignment 
of the proposed route for HS2, such 
that it runs through the eastern end of 
the Coalite site affecting two proposed 
housing plots and a key roundabout 
access off Chesterfield Road. The 
impact of this creates significant uncertainty for the currently approved 
scheme within North East Derbyshire. 
Work has commenced on the clean-
up of the site and the land owner has 
confirmed that they remain committed to the development of the entire site, 
but indicate that a revised scheme will 
be necessary to take account of the 
impacts of HS2.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034484.53 In light of these uncertainties the 
Council cannot be confident in relying 
on the housing land proposed to 
contribute to the delivery of the Local 
Plan’s housing target. However, the 
Council still strongly supports the site’s 
remediation and development and 
in accordance with the regeneration 
ambitions of the Local Plan, the 
Council allocates the site as a Priority 
Regeneration Area. 
4.54 It is acknowledged that a revised 
scheme for the land in North East 
Derbyshire will be required. The range 
of uses that form part of the approved 
schemes for the wider site remains 
broadly appropriate, accepting that the 
quanta of development types is likely 
to change. It is therefore considered 
that the site could accommodate the 
following uses up to and/or beyond the 
plan period:• Residential development of up to 
660 dwellings, incorporating a local 
centre and land for a primary school 
where appropriate, to meet the 
needs arising from the development 
of the site and where consistent with 
other policies in the Plan;
•  Employment development within use 
classes B2, B8 and E(g) for up to 28ha 
(gross);
• Transport hub to serve the wider 
site; and
• Open space.
4.55 This policy approach has been discussed 
and formulated jointly with Bolsover 
District Council to ensure that this 
strategic cross boundary site is 
addressed appropriately in line with the 
Duty to Co-operate. 
Figure 4.4: Coalite Regeneration Area – Cross Boundary Strategic Site
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203449Policy SS6: Coalite Priority Regeneration Area
1. Land at the former Coalite Chemical Works site as defined on the Policies Map is 
allocated as a Priority Regeneration Area within the Local Plan. As such, the site 
will be safeguarded from development which would jeopardise the comprehensive 
remediation, reclamation and redevelopment of the whole site (including the land in 
Bolsover District).
2. Proposals for the development of this Priority Regeneration Area will be guided by 
the approved masterplan for the site or any subsequent approved document and 
permitted where they:
a.  Form part of a comprehensive masterplan for re-development on the whole site 
(including the land in Bolsover District) including infrastructure requirements  
and delivery; 
b. Enable the full reclamation of the site in line with an agreed programme of work 
and delivery plan which should also ensure that no residential development takes 
place until the whole of the site has been fully remediated;
c. Sustain and enhance the significance of heritage assets, in particular the Gr ade 1 
Listed Bolsover Castle and Sutton Scarsdale Hall; 
d. Protect and enhance the biodiversity value of the Doe Lea Corridor within the site 
and promote linkages to the wider green infrastructure network where possible;
e. Protect the water quality of the River Doe Lea;
f. Protect development from the risk of flooding by avoiding placing vulner able uses 
in the high risk flood zones within the site; and
g. Take account of any potential impacts arising from the implementation of High 
Speed 2.
3. The following are considered acceptable main uses for the site either individually or 
in combination, subject to meeting the requirements of 2 above:
a. Housing development for up to 660 dwellings, including where justified:
i. a local centre to serve the day to day needs of the site, and
ii. provision of a Primary School or land for a Primary School;
b. Employment development (comprising B2, B8 & E(g)) for up to 28ha;
c. Transport hub; and
d. Open space.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203450Settlement Development 
Limits
4.56  In addition to the development of sites 
allocated in the Plan, opportunities 
will exist throughout the plan period 
for additional development where 
it is sustainable development and is 
appropriate to the scale and function 
of the settlement in which it is 
located. Such opportunities will mainly 
comprise of residential development 
on previously developed land, as well 
as conversions and the redevelopment 
of existing buildings. It may also cover 
proposals for development such as live/
work units, specialist accommodation, 
small scale retailing, and employment 
uses not covered by policies elsewhere in the Plan.
4.57 Settlement Development Limits enclose the built framework of settlements and determine the extent of the countryside beyond, by taking into account existing, committed and allocated development and land uses. Within Settlement Development Limits identified on the Policies Map the principle of development is acceptable provided it is in line with Policy SS7: Development on Unallocated Land within Settlements with defined Settlement Development Limits. Outside of these main built up areas there are some smaller villages and hamlets identified within Level 4 of the settlement hierarchy which do not have a Settlement Development Limit and are considered to lie in the open countryside. Within these villages limited infill development may be appropriate in accordance with Policies SS9: Development in the Countryside and SS10: North East Derbyshire Green Belt; or where this is allocated by an adopted Neighbourhood Plan as set out in Policy SS8: Development in Very Small Villages and Hamlets. 4.58 Outside Settlement Development 
Limits, countryside and/or Green Belt 
policies apply and all proposals for 
development will be considered against 
the requirements set out in Policies 
SS9: Development in the Countryside 
and SS10: North East Derbyshire 
Green Belt. This approach provides 
certainty to all those involved in the 
development management process and 
makes it clear which policies will apply. 
4.59 This approach complies with the plan-led approach advocated in national policy (NPPF); since the Local Plan identifies sufficient housing provision 
for the District to meet both a five year 
supply of housing on adoption of the 
Plan and the development requirements for the Plan period. Further land outside Settlement Development  
Limits is therefore not required to meet this need. 
4.60 It is acknowledged that in circumstances where the Council may not be able to demonstrate a five year supply of housing land, these policies may be considered to restrict the supply of housing in terms of the provisions of paragraph 49 of the NPPF . However these are important place shaping policies that are integral to the strategy of the Local Plan and achievement of sustainable development. Their purpose is to guide development to the right places, rather than constraining development and therefore should be given due weight in decision making in the event that no five year supply is demonstrated.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203451Policy SS7: Development on Unallocated Land within 
Settlements with defined Settlement Development Limits
All development proposals on sites within Settlement Development Limits that are not 
allocated in the Local Plan or in a Neighbourhood Plan, will be permitted, provided that 
the proposed development:
a. Is appropriate in scale, design and location to the character and function of the 
settlement; and
b. Does not result in the loss of a valued facility or service unless it can be 
demonstrated that it is no longer viable, or is not the subject of a Community Right 
to Bid; and
c. Is compatible with, and does not prejudice any intended use of adjacent sites and 
land uses; and
d. Accords with other policies of the Plan.
Policy SS8: Development in Very Small Villages & Hamlets
1. Within very small villages and hamlets (defined under Level 4 in the Settlement 
Hierarchy at Table 4.2) development will be restricted to limited infill development 
in accordance with Policies SS9 and SS10, and development allocated in an adopted 
Neighbourhood Plan.
2. Such development should respect the form, scale and character of the existing 
settlement and surrounding landscape, through careful siting, scale, design and use of 
materials.
Development in the 
Countryside
4.61  As a general principle, new 
development will be directed to sites 
within Settlement Development Limits, 
or sites allocated for development, 
whilst the countryside will be protected 
from inappropriate development, in 
accordance with Policy SS1 (Sustainable 
Development). Land which is not within 
a Settlement Development Limit, if 
not allocated for development, will be 
treated as ‘countryside’.
4.62 As well as providing leisure and 
recreational opportunities the 
countryside is a constantly changing 
workplace. It is necessary to balance 
and integrate the requirement to protect the countryside with the need 
to sustain and encourage the vitality 
and viability of the rural economy, 
including agriculture and tourism. 
Whilst many of the activities in the 
countryside are outside the scope 
of planning control, there are other 
forms of development which can be 
accommodated without detrimental 
effect on the countryside.
4.63 There is a range of buildings in the 
countryside which are no longer 
suitable for their original purposes. The 
majority are likely to be agricultural 
buildings, but there may be other 
buildings which are no longer in use for 
their original purpose and for which an 
alternative use is being sought. Many 
of these buildings make a positive North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203452contribution to the character and 
appearance of the area. Provided that 
they are structurally sound, conversion 
of these buildings, for example to 
employment or community use, 
visitor accommodation or housing, 
can safeguard their future. By re-
using existing resources, conversions 
can also meet the aims of sustainable 
built development. However there are 
some buildings which are not suitable 
for conversion, including those which 
are structurally unsound, roofless, 
missing substantial sections of wall, or so ruined that only vestiges remain of 
the original structure; of temporary 
construction; eyesores which should be 
removed in the interests of landscape 
conservation; unsuitable in terms of 
size and forms of construction; or at 
risk of flooding.
4.64  New buildings should respect the style, 
and character of the locality. Proposals 
for new buildings in the countryside 
outside of existing settlements and not 
on land allocated for development will 
be strictly controlled. 
Policy SS9: Development in the Countryside
1. Development proposals in countryside locations outside the Settlement Development 
Limits will be approved where it can be demonstrated to fall within one or more of 
the following categories:
a. It involves a replacement building for the same use and is not significantly larger 
than the building it replaces;
b. It involves the re-use of buildings and accords with policy SDC1; 
c. It is necessary for the efficient or viable operation of agriculture, horticulture, 
forestry and other appropriate land based businesses, including the diversification 
of activities on an existing farm unit; 
d. It involves small scale employment uses related to local farming, forestry, 
recreation, or tourism; 
e. It involves new visitor accommodation, or extensions to existing visitor 
accommodation in accordance with Policies WC5 & WC6;
f. It involves the change of use, re-use, limited infilling or redevelopment of vacant, 
derelict or previously developed land which would not have a greater impact on 
the character of the countryside than the existing development;
g. It involves the use for a Traveller Site in accordance with Policy LC9;
h.  It involves the provision, expansion, or improvement of social infrastructure and 
accords with Policy ID4, or relates to a development which has a demonstrable 
community and/or social benefit; or
i. It is in accordance with the policies of an adopted Neighbourhood Plan.
2. In all cases, where development is considered acceptable, it will be required to 
respect the form, scale and character of the landscape, through careful siting, scale, 
design and use of materials.
3. Where development falls within the Green Belt the provisions of Policy SS10: North 
East Derbyshire Green Belt apply. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203453North East Derbyshire 
Green Belt
4.65 The fundamental aim of Green Belt policy is to prevent urban sprawl 
by keeping land permanently open. 
The essential characteristics of 
Green Belts are their openness and 
their permanence, providing long 
term protection and certainty from 
inappropriate development, which is, 
by definition, harmful to the Green 
Belt. Green Belts can also assist in 
urban regeneration by encouraging the 
recycling of derelict and other urban 
land.
4.66 The North East Derbyshire Green 
Belt covers a substantial part of the District, located between Sheffield and Chesterfield in the north, Chesterfield and Wingerworth in the south, and also the land west of Chesterfield to the Peak Park boundary. It surrounds the towns of Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh and a number of villages. It was first drawn up in 1955, adopted in 1986 and carried forward in the North East Derbyshire Local Plan, (adopted 1999). The Green Belt was subsequently reviewed in the successor Local Plan (adopted 2005). 
4.67 The North East Derbyshire Green Belt has been an effective planning policy tool assisting in focussing development on brownfield sites and undeveloped land within settlements boundaries. However over time there have been unintended impacts such as localised 
unmet housing need and demand, 
development pressure on green spaces 
and employment land, increased house prices and affordability pressures in those towns and villages constrained 
by the Green Belt. As a consequence 
pressure for growth has been redirected 
to other areas of the district. Green Belt Review
4.68 National Guidance is clear that 
Green Belt boundaries should only be 
altered in exceptional circumstances, 
through the preparation or review of 
a Local Plan. In reviewing Green Belt 
boundaries authorities should have 
regard to their intended permanence 
in the long term, so they should be 
capable of enduring beyond the  
plan period.
4.69 Early work on the Local Plan sought to distribute development in a way that did not involve a review of the Green Belt. However it became evident that there was a significant mismatch between the strategy and the proposed spatial distribution of housing, land availability and demand; such that the level of growth being planned for across the District could not be accommodated in a sustainable way or where demand and viability were highest. Detailed evidence setting out the exceptional circumstances justifying the release of Green Belt land is set out in the Green Belt Topic Paper (January 2018). The key reasoning is based upon the fact that three of the District’s four most sustainable settlements are tightly constrained by the Green Belt and evidence shows that:
• Housing land supply in these areas is limited, which combined with high demand has driven up land values and exacerbated housing affordability issues;
• Employment land in these 
settlements should be retained for 
employment use;
• Existing sports pitches and recreation facilities within these settlements are all required to be retained;
• Increasing supply in other areas of 
the district would not support the 
strategy of the Plan.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034544.70 The evidence led the Council to 
undertake a review of the Green 
Belt (Green Belt Review, 2017). This 
involved an objective assessment of 
the role of individual land parcels in 
fulfilling the purposes and objectives of 
the Green Belt. The review confirmed 
that all but a few parcels continue to 
perform a valid Green Belt function. 
Therefore in order to achieve a more 
sustainable pattern of development 
that is in line with the spatial strategy, 
and provide a sufficient level of 
development in the North of the 
District to meet needs, we must accept 
that this will have an impact on the 
Green Belt. 
4.71 Further supplementary assessment of 
the Green Belt land parcels has taken place to identify those parcels that would cause least harm to the strategic functions of the Green Belt. These sites have also been taken through the Council’s usual site assessment process and Sustainability Appraisal to ensure that they are suitable for development. The area of land removed from the Green Belt to meet the development needs of the District during this plan period (as allocated sites) or because they are not considered to perform a valid Green Belt function amounts to less than 1% of the Green Belt within North East Derbyshire. In line with the NPPF (paragraph 81) policies associated with the development of those areas of land released from the Green Belt will seek to enhance the beneficial use of the remaining Green Belt, such as looking for opportunities to provide 
access; to provide opportunities 
for outdoor sport and recreation; 
to retain and enhance landscapes, 
visual amenity and biodiversity; or to 
improve damaged and derelict land. 
The remaining area of Green Belt 
will continue to be protected from 
inappropriate development by National 
Guidance in the NPPF and by  
Policy SS10.
Safeguarded Land
4.72 National guidance requires that 
when defining Green Belt boundaries 
authorities should have regard to their permanence in the long term, so that 
they are capable of enduring beyond 
the plan period
12. The identification of 
‘safeguarded land’ between the urban area and the Green Belt can help to meet longer-term development needs that extend beyond the current plan 
period, thereby avoiding the need for 
a review of the Green Belt with each 
Local Plan review. However given the inherent uncertainty of accurately predicting development needs beyond 
the plan period, it is difficult to say 
how much land would be required and 
whether the locations selected now would be appropriate in the future. This makes it difficult to demonstrate 
exceptional circumstances for removing 
the land from the Green Belt for the 
purposes of safeguarding and therefore 
in the absence of clear evidence,  
the Plan does not identify any 
safeguarded land.
12 National Planning Policy Framework, paragraph 85.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203455Policy SS10: North East Derbyshire Green Belt
1.  Within the North East Derbyshire Green Belt as shown on the Policies Map, 
inappropriate development will not be approved except in very special 
circumstances. 
2.  The construction of new buildings will be regarded as inappropriate development 
and will not be permitted. Exceptions to this, where they accord with other policies 
in the Plan are:
a.  Buildings for the purposes of agriculture or forestry; or
b.  Provision of appropriate facilities for outdoor sport, outdoor recreation, and for 
cemeteries, which preserve the openness of the Green Belt and do not conflict 
with the purposes of including land within it; or
c.  Extension or alteration to a building that does not result in disproportionate 
additions over and above the size of the original building; or
d.  Replacement of a building provided the new building is in the same use and is not 
materially larger than the one it replaces; or
e.  Limited affordable housing for local community needs in accordance with Policy 
LC3; or
f.  Limited infilling or the partial or complete redevelopment of prev iously developed 
land which would not have a greater impact on the openness of the Green Belt 
and the purposes of including land within it than the existing development.
3.  Other forms of development which may be appropriate in the Green Belt, provided 
it preserves the openness of the Green Belt and does not conflict with its purposes 
include:
a.  Mineral extraction,
b.  Engineering operations,
c.  Local transport infrastructure which can demonstrate a requirement for a Green 
Belt location,
d.  The re-use or conversion of buildings which are of permanent and substantial 
construction, and 
e.  Development brought forward under a Community Right to Build Order.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203456Local Settlement Gaps 
4.73 Community ‘identification of place’ 
is an area of local concern and is 
a valid component of Sustainable 
Development. Issues in the south of 
the district are not strategic in extent, 
such that Green Belt designation would 
be appropriate. However, these issues 
are locally important and increasingly 
acute, such that a locally responsive 
policy mechanism is required to address 
this real and increasing threat to the 
character and identity of the plan 
area’s communities. The NPPF’s core 
principles recognise that different 
areas play different roles in supporting 
sustainable development, and within 
the plan area settlement identity and 
separation is a pressing concern which 
can be safeguarded through a positive 
plan-led approach across certain areas. 
4.74 The southern sub-area, which does not 
benefit from Green Belt designation, is 
particularly vulnerable to settlement 
coalescence and identity loss. The 
rolling terrain of this part of the district 
sometimes emphasises the narrow and 
often narrowing separation between 
settlements and can exacerbate 
the perceptual and visual erosion of 
settlement identity and separation as 
villages and towns often fall within the 
same public views from elevated areas 
or across prominent hillsides.4.75 The harm that erosion of settlement 
separation can have is not limited 
to visual character, cultural or 
historic identity effects. It can also 
erode environmental and community 
benefits afforded by accessible open 
space and outlooks from within the 
settlement. Where settlements are 
allowed to coalesce or separation is 
significantly reduced through urban 
growth, the remaining ‘sense of place’ 
can be harmed and important green 
infrastructure and recreational roles 
that green spaces around settlements 
play be eroded. 
4.76 The designation of Local Settlement 
Gaps is a policy response to the issue. 
These limited, localised areas (set 
out on the Policies Map) have been 
identified as playing important roles 
in maintaining settlement identity. 
Development within them will be 
restricted to that which would not 
erode the wider functionality of the 
settlement gap. 
4.77 The identification of these areas and 
restriction of significant development 
therein has not served to restrict or 
redirect objectively assessed need for 
development across the district nor 
result in less sustainable locations for 
growth. The protection of these Local 
Settlement Gaps helps deliver a more 
sustainable form of development across 
the plan area. 
Policy SS11: Local Settlement Gaps
Within those areas identified on the Policies Map as Local Settlement Gaps, development 
proposals will be permitted where they:
a. Maintain the functionality and undeveloped character of the Local Settlement Gap; 
b. Do not result in the coalescence of historically distinct settlements; and 
c. Do not result in the erosion of existing settlement separation and identity created by 
the undeveloped character of those spaces.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034574.78 The Key diagram summarises the key elements of the Spatial Strategy across the District.
Figure 4.5: Key Diagram
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034585. Living Communities
Introduction
5.1 The Local Plan aims to ensure that a 
wide choice of good quality housing is provided in the District to meet the needs of all sections of the community. This chapter will identify housing allocations to support the levels of sustainable growth identified in the Spatial Strategy Chapter, policies which address the range of household needs, such as affordable housing, type and mix of housing, specialist housing and agricultural, forestry and other occupational dwellings. It also addresses the needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople.
Housing Allocations
5.2 Allocating a site in the Local Plan establishes the principle that the development of the site for housing is acceptable. Site allocations provide greater certainty both to developers and local people to help understand what may happen in their neighbourhood in the future. They also help the Council and infrastructure providers to look at the cumulative impact of development and plan for future needs, such as school places, transport improvements and  
water capacity.
5.3 The Local Plan must provide for a sufficient quantity, quality, and type of housing in the right locations, taking account of need and demand. Policy SS2: Spatial Strategy and the 
Distribution of Development in Chapter 
4 sets out that the Local Plan will make 
provision for the delivery of a minimum of 6,600 dwellings over the period 2014-2034 (330 dwellings per annum), 
of which 3523 are allocated in the Plan.5.4 Sites which have been allocated in 
the Local Plan to provide the supply of sites to meet the housing land requirement are listed in Policy LC1: 
Housing Allocations. The Housing 
Trajectory at Appendix C shows how 
these housing allocations are expected to be delivered during the plan period, including in the first five years. 
5.5 Allocations have been made by balancing a range of considerations, such as the site’s availability, suitability and deliverability, and also the findings of the Sustainability Appraisal process. They include sites with or without planning permission. 
5.6 Although historically small windfalls have made a positive contribution to housing delivery in the District
13, an 
allowance for future windfalls has not been factored into the calculation of housing supply. However, as explained in Chapter 4, they provide a flexibility allowance of approximately 75 dwellings per year to the housing supply. 
13 673 dwellings have been completed on small sites between 2011 and 2020.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034595.7 The Plan will allocate only those 
housing sites which are capable of 
accommodating 10 or more dwellings. 
This threshold provides a good range of 
sites to be considered. Smaller sites can 
be allocated by Neighbourhood Plans, 
providing proposals conform to the 
relevant policies of the Local Plan.
5.8 The Council recognises that it is critical 
to monitor the delivery of allocated 
sites to ensure that sufficient housing 
is coming forward and that a five year 
supply of deliverable sites continues 
to be available.  In line with the NPPF , 
the Council should identify and update 
annually a supply of specific deliverable 
sites, sufficient to provide 5 years’ 
worth of housing against its housing 
requirement, with an additional buffer. 
This buffer may be set at 5% (moved 
forward from later in the plan period) 
to ensure choice and competition in the 
housing market, or 20% where there 
has been a record of persistent under 
delivery. 5.9  From the start of the Plan Period, there 
has been no significant underdelivery in 
relation to the Government’s Housing 
Delivery Test and therefore the housing 
trajectory in Appendix C includes a 5% 
buffer within the first five years after 
adoption. If in future monitoring years, 
the Housing Delivery Test indicates 
that there is significant under delivery 
over the previous three years (below 
85% of the requirement) the buffer 
should be increased to 20% in the five 
year housing land supply calculations. 
Where the Housing Delivery Test 
indicates that the delivery of housing 
was substantially below (less than 75% 
of) the housing requirement over the 
previous three years, or in situations 
where it is anticipated that the Council 
cannot demonstrate a rolling five year 
housing land supply, a review of the 
Local Plan, in whole or in part, will be 
triggered. 
Policy LC1: Housing Allocations
The following sites are allocated on the Policies Map for housing to deliver the housing 
land requirement set out in policy SS2: Spatial Strategy and the Distribution of 
Development:  
ContinuedSettlement SiteApproximate 
Capacity within 
Plan Period*Other policy 
requirements (not 
an exhaustive list)
Clay Cross SS4. Former Biwater Strategic 
Site730 SS4
CC1. Land at Stretton Road, 
Clay Cross120 ID2, SDC4, SDC14
CC2. Land North of Clay Lane, 
Clay Cross25 ID3, SDC3, SDC4, 
SDC11, SDC14
CC3. Land off Holmgate Road, 
Clay Cross15 ID8
CC4. Land at Broadleys, Clay 
Cross10 ID3, SDC4, SDC5North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203460Policy LC1: Housing Allocations
Settlement SiteApproximate 
Capacity within 
Plan Period*Other policy 
requirements (not 
an exhaustive list)
Dronfield DR1. Land off Shakespeare 
Crescent & Chesterfield Road, 
Dronfield160 ID2, ID3, ID7, SDC2, 
SDC3
DR2. Land at Stubley Lane, 
Stubley Hollow, Dronfield40 ID2, ID3, SDC2, SDC4
Eckington EC1. Bradley Lomas Electrolok 
Ltd, Church Street, Eckington20  
EC2. Land at Staveley Lane, 
Eckington39  
Killamarsh KL1. Land at Westthorpe, 
Killamarsh330 ID3, SDC3, SDC4, 
SDC14
KL2. Land off Rotherham 
Road, Killamarsh70 ID3, SDC14
KL3. Land off Primrose Lane, 
Killamarsh30 ID9
KL4. Land at 30 Ashley Lane, 
Killamarsh14  
KL5. The Old Station, Station 
Road, Killamarsh13  
KL6. Land off Boiley Lane, 
Killamarsh11  
Calow CA1. Land at 
Churchmeadows, Calow47 SDC4
Grassmoor GR1. Land at Windwhistle 
Farm, Grassmoor36  
Holmewood HO1. Land to the West 
of Chesterfield Road, 
Holmewood225 SDC3, SDC12
HO2. Allotments at Hunloke 
Road, Holmewood 12  
HO3. Land South of 
205 Chesterfield Road, 
Holmewood40  
HO4. Land between 205 
and 235 Chesterfield Road, 
Holmewood14  
Morton MO1. Land North of Stretton 
Road, Morton100 ID3, ID7, SDC3, 
SDC14
Pilsley PI1. Land North of Hallgate 
Lane, Pilsley87 SDC12North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203461Policy LC1: Housing Allocations 
Settlement SiteApproximate 
Capacity within 
Plan Period*Other policy 
requirements (not 
an exhaustive list)
Shirland SH1. Land at Hallfieldgate 
Lane, Shirland65  
SH2. Land North of Park Lane, 
Shirland40 ID3, SDC4, SDC14
Stonebroom ST1. Land to the rear of 
14A to 54 High Street, 
Stonebroom35 ID3, SDC4
Tupton TU1. Land at Ankerbold Road, 
Tupton203 ID3, SDC4, SDC14
TU2. Land to the Rear of 10 
to 52, Ashover Road, Old 
Tupton6  
TU3. Land South of 
Sunningdale Park, Tupton42  
Wingerworth SS3. The Avenue Strategic 
Site688 SS3
WW1. Land at Hanging Banks, 
Wingerworth176  
WW2. Land South of Mill 
Lane, Wingerworth80  
TOTAL DWELLINGS 3523
In order to off-set the effect of removing land from the Green Belt at allocation sites 
DR1, DR2, KL1 and KL2, compensatory improvements to the environmental quality or 
accessibility of the remaining Green Belt land will be required where appropriate.
*Remaining capacity at adoption of the Local Plan.
5.10 A brief description of the sites allocated 
for housing development is given below.
Clay Cross
SS4: Former Biwater Strategic Site 
5.11  This strategic site is described in more 
detail at Policy SS4: Former Biwater 
Strategic Site. 
CC1. Land at Stretton Road, Clay Cross
5.12 This site is located in the south of 
Clay Cross, is approximately 4.35 hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 120 dwellings 
towards the end of the plan period. 
The site may have potential ecological 
constraints which would need to be 
assessed. Furthermore, the site lies 
within an area that has been defined 
by the Coal Authority as high risk, 
containing potential hazards arising 
from former coal mining activity. A Coal 
Mining Assessment would need to be 
carried out.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034625.13 In line with Policy ID2, development 
will be required to provide or 
contribute towards improvements to 
the A61 corridor, where justified.
CC2. Land North of Clay Lane, Clay Cross
5.14 This site is located in the south-west 
of Clay Cross, is approximately 1.42 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 25 dwellings 
within the first ten years after adoption 
of the Local Plan. Options for the 
creation of suitable highway access 
need to be assessed. Furthermore, 
the site lies within an area that has 
been defined by the Coal Authority as 
high risk, containing potential hazards 
arising from former coal mining activity. 
A Coal Mining Assessment would need to 
be carried out. 
5.15 The eastern part of the site comprises 
a potential traditional orchard, which 
is a UK BAP priority habitat type. 
Impacts would need to be assessed 
further. To the west of the site is Press 
Brook, which has a record for water 
voles, and is within Flood Risk Zones 
2 and 3. Mitigation measures, such as 
a buffer between the brook and any 
development, should be implemented. 
CC3. Land off Holmgate Road, Clay Cross
5.16  This site is located to the west of Clay 
Cross, near Holmgate, is approximately 
0.58 hectares in size and is expected 
to deliver 15 dwellings towards the 
end of the plan period. The proposed 
Greenway running through the site will 
need to be accompanied within the 
design scheme of the development.
CC4. Land at Broadleys, Clay Cross
5.17 This building and grounds are located 
within the centre of Clay Cross, is 
approximately 0.36 hectares in size and 
is expected to deliver approximately 
10 dwellings towards the end of the 
Plan Period. Options for the creation 
of suitable highway access need to 
be assessed. The site may also have potential ecological constraints which 
would need to be assessed. It is located 
within Clay Cross Conservation Area and 
the design of any new development will 
need to reflect this. 
Dronfield
DR1. Land off Shakespeare Crescent & 
Chesterfield Road, Dronfield
5.18 This site is located to the south east 
of Dronfield, is approximately 6.52 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 160 dwellings. 
The majority is expected to be 
built within the first ten years after 
adoption of the Local Plan. The site 
has a considerable sloping gradient 
down to Chesterfield Road, as well as 
a difference in levels between the site 
and the highway. This would need to 
be given consideration in the layout 
and design of a development proposal. 
Green infrastructure should be provided 
to help new development integrate 
into the landscape. There are also 
trees protected by TPO No 7 along the 
north-western and western boundary 
of the site and in the southwest of the 
site. These should be retained within 
the layout of the development in line 
with policy SDC2. Any site layout should 
incorporate appropriate provision for 
the public right of way which is within 
the site area.
5.19 In line with Policy ID2, development 
will be required to provide or 
contribute towards improvements to 
key road junctions to support growth 
at Dronfield including the B6057 
Chesterfield Road / B6158 Green Lane 
/ Callywhite Lane, and A61 Bowshaw 
Roundabout, where justified. In order 
to off-set the effect of removing 
this land from the Green Belt, 
compensatory improvements to the 
environmental quality or accessibility of 
the remaining Green Belt land will be 
required where appropriate.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203463DR2. Land at Stubley Lane, Stubley 
Hollow, Dronfield
5.20  This site is located to the north of 
Dronfield, is approximately 1.18 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 40 dwellings 
within the first ten years after adoption 
of the Local Plan. Options for the 
creation of suitable highway access 
need to be assessed. The site may also 
have potential ecological constraints 
which would need to be assessed.
5.21 In line with Policy ID2, development 
will be required to provide or 
contribute towards improvements to 
key road junctions to support growth 
at Dronfield including the B6057 
Chesterfield Road / B6158 Green Lane 
/ Callywhite Lane, and A61 Bowshaw 
Roundabout, where justified.
5.22 In order to off-set the effect of 
removing this land from the Green Belt, 
compensatory improvements to the 
environmental quality or accessibility of 
the remaining Green Belt land will be 
required where appropriate. 
Eckington
EC1. Bradley Lomas Electrolok Ltd, 
Church Street, Eckington
5.23 This site is located within the north 
east of Eckington, is approximately 
1.3 hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver 20 dwellings within the first five 
years. The site has planning permission.
EC2. Land at Staveley Lane, Eckington
5.24 This site is located to the south of 
Eckington, is approximately 4.21 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver a further 39 dwellings within 
the first five years. The site has 
planning permission and is currently 
under construction.Killamarsh
KL1. Land at Westthorpe, Killamarsh
5.25 This site is located to the south of 
Killamarsh, is approximately 15.6 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 330 dwellings. 
The majority is expected to be built 
by the end of the Plan Period. A 
development proposal for this site 
would need to show that the nearby 
highway network has sufficient capacity 
for this scale of development, or that 
improvement works can be carried out. 
Consideration will also need to be given 
to the design of future junction(s).
5.26 The site may also have potential 
ecological constraints which would 
need to be assessed. Potential impacts 
on long distance views into the 
countryside to the south should also 
be mitigated and green space planning 
carefully considered to help integrate 
new development within the south 
of the site and the interface with the 
countryside. Furthermore, the site 
partially lies within an area that has 
been defined by the Coal Authority as 
high risk, containing potential hazards 
arising from former coal mining activity. 
A Coal Mining Assessment would need to 
be carried out.
5.27 In order to off-set the effect of 
removing this land from the Green Belt, 
compensatory improvements to the 
environmental quality or accessibility of 
the remaining Green Belt land will be 
required where appropriate. 
KL2. Land off Rotherham Road, 
Killamarsh
5.28 This site is located to the north east 
of Killamarsh, is approximately 3.06 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 70 dwellings 
within the first ten years after adoption 
of the Local Plan. A development 
proposal for this site would need to 
show that satisfactory highway access North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203464can be achieved and that the nearby 
highway network has sufficient capacity 
for this scale of development, or that 
improvement works can be carried out. 
Furthermore, the site partially lies 
within an area that has been defined 
by the Coal Authority as high risk, 
containing potential hazards arising 
from former coal mining activity. A Coal 
Mining Assessment would need to be 
carried out.
5.29 In order to off-set the effect of 
removing this land from the Green Belt, 
compensatory improvements to the 
environmental quality or accessibility of 
the remaining Green Belt land will be 
required where appropriate. 
KL3. Land off Primrose Lane, Killamarsh
5.30  This site is located to the north of 
Killamarsh, is approximately 2.87 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver 30 dwellings within the first ten 
years after adoption of the Local Plan. 
The site is located in close proximity to 
the Chesterfield Canal. Development 
should protect the route of the canal 
and encourage proposals that enable 
the reinstatement of the canal in line 
with Policy ID9: Chesterfield Canal. 
KL4. Land at 30 Ashley Lane, Killamarsh
5.31  This site is located within the east 
of Killamarsh, is approximately 0.47 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver 14 dwellings towards the end of 
the Plan Period. 
KL5. Old Station, Station Road, 
Killamarsh
5.32 This site is located within the east 
of Killamarsh, is approximately 0.43 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver 13 dwellings within the first five 
years after adoption of the Local Plan. 
The site has planning permission and a 
start has been made on site.  
 KL6. Land off Boiley Lane, Killamarsh
5.33  This site is located to the south of 
Killamarsh, is approximately 0.53 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver a further 11 dwellings within 
the first five years after adoption of 
the Local Plan. The site has planning 
permission for 13 dwellings and is 
currently under construction.
Calow
CA1. Land at Churchmeadows, Calow
5.34 This site is located to the west of 
Calow, is approximately 1.75 hectares 
in size and is expected to deliver 47 
dwellings within the first ten years after 
adoption of the Local Plan. A large part 
of the site is also designated as a Local 
Wildlife Site. However it is considered 
difficult to attribute significant weight 
to the protection of the site as a 
designated site when the grassland 
species for which it merits this status 
has been repeatedly ploughed up. The 
site has outline planning permission for 
47 dwellings.
Grassmoor
GR1. Land at Windwhistle Farm, 
Grassmoor
5.35 This site is located to the south east 
of Grassmoor, is approximately 6.82 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver a further 36 dwellings within 
the first five years. The site has 
planning permission for 163 dwellings 
and is currently under construction.
Holmewood
HO1. Land West of Chesterfield Road, 
Holmewood
5.36 This site is located to the west of 
Holmewood, is approximately 19.80 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 540 dwellings 
in total. However, it is anticipated North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203465that only 225 of these will come 
forward within the Plan Period, with 
the remaining 315 dwellings post Plan 
period. The site has partly full and 
partly outline planning permission. 
The site is visually open and offers 
long distance views across the 
countryside to the north and west. The 
potential loss of these views should 
be mitigated by the sensitive design 
and layout of the development, which 
emphasises permeability and facilitates 
intermittent views through the new 
development. The design and layout 
should also protect the perceived 
sense of separation between the two 
historically separate settlements of 
Holmewood and North Wingfield and 
not give rise to further coalescence.
HO2. Allotments at Hunloke Road, 
Holmewood
5.37 This site is located in the centre of 
Holmewood, is approximately 5.86 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver a further 12 dwellings within 
the first five years. The site has 
planning permission for 188 dwellings 
and is currently under construction.
HO3. Land to the South of, 205 
Chesterfield Road, Holmewood
5.38 This site is located to the north west 
of Holmewood, is approximately 1.74 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver 40 dwellings within the first five 
years after adoption of the Local Plan. 
The site has planning permission.
HO4. Land between 205 and 235 
Chesterfield Road, Holmewood
5.39 This site is located to the north west 
of Holmewood, is approximately 0.49 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver 14 dwellings within the first five 
years after adoption of the Local Plan. 
The site has planning permission.Morton
MO1. Land North of Stretton Road, 
Morton 
5.40 This site is located to the north west of 
Morton, is approximately 3.81 hectares 
in size and is expected to deliver 
approximately 100 dwellings within 
the first five years after adoption of 
the Local Plan. The site has outline 
planning permission.
5.41 Potential impacts on long distance 
views into the countryside to the west 
should be mitigated. Significant green 
infrastructure should be provided to 
help new development integrate into 
the landscape.
Pilsley
PI1. Land North of Hallgate Lane, Pilsley
5.42 This site is located to the north of 
Pilsley, is approximately 3.11 hectares 
in size and is expected to deliver 
approximately 87 dwellings within 
the first ten years after adoption of 
the Local Plan. The site has outline 
planning permission. High quality 
design should be provided to mitigate 
the impact of development on the 
character of the area and ‘gateway’ to 
the settlement.
Shirland
SH1. Land at Hallfieldgate Lane, Shirland
5.43 This site is located to the north 
of Hallfieldgate Lane, Shirland, is 
approximately 4.46 hectares in size 
and is expected to deliver a further 
65 dwellings within the first five years 
after adoption of the Local Plan. 
The site has planning permission for 
92 dwellings and is currently under 
construction.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203466SH2. Land North of Park Lane, Shirland
5.44 This site is located to the south east 
of Shirland, is approximately 1.43 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 40 dwellings 
within the first ten years after adoption 
of the Local Plan. The site has outline 
planning permission.
Stonebroom
ST1. Land to the rear of 14A to 54 High 
Street, Stonebroom
5.45 This site is located to the south east 
of Stonebroom, is approximately 1.8 
hectares in size and is expected to 
deliver approximately 35 dwellings. 
A development proposal for this site 
would need to show that satisfactory 
highway access can be achieved and 
that the nearby highway network has 
sufficient capacity for this scale of 
development, or that improvement 
works can be carried out. The site may 
have potential ecological constraints 
which would need to be assessed. The 
site has outline planning permission, 
with all matters reserved.
Tupton
TU1. Land at Ankerbold Road, Tupton
5.46  This site is located to the east of 
Tupton, is approximately 10.11 hectares 
in size and is expected to deliver 
approximately 203 dwellings within the 
first ten years after adoption of the 
Local Plan. The eastern part of the site 
has planning permission for 10 dwellings 
and the western part has planning 
permission for 193 dwellings.
TU2. Land to the Rear of 10 to 52, 
Ashover Road, Old Tupton
5.47  This site is located to the west of Old 
Tupton, is approximately 2.36 hectares 
in size and is expected to deliver a 
further 6 dwellings within the first five 
years after adoption of the Local Plan. The site has planning permission for 
68 dwellings and is currently under 
construction.
TU3. Land South of Sunningdale Park, 
Tupton
5.48  This site is located to the south 
of Sunningdale Park Tupton, is 
approximately 1.50 hectares in size 
and is expected to deliver a further 
42 dwellings within the first ten years 
after adoption of the Local Plan. The 
southern part of the site has planning 
permission for 32 park homes and 2 
houses. The northern part has planning 
permission for 14 dwellings and is 
currently under construction.
Wingerworth
SS3. The Avenue Strategic Site
5.49  This strategic site is described in 
more detail at Policy SS3: The Avenue 
Strategic Site. 
WW1. Land at Hanging Banks, 
Wingerworth
5.50 This site is located to the south of 
Wingerworth and to west of the 
Adlington Estate, is approximately 
10.79 hectares in size and is expected 
to deliver a further 176 dwellings 
within the first ten years. The site has 
planning permission for 222 dwellings 
and is currently under construction.
WW2. Land South of Mill Lane, 
Wingerworth
5.51 This site is located to the east of 
Wingerworth and the Adlington Estate, 
is approximately 8.94 hectares in size 
and is expected to deliver a further 80 
dwellings within the first five years. The 
western part of the site has planning 
permission for 160 dwellings and has 
been completed. The eastern part of 
the site has planning permission for 
80 dwellings and is currently under 
construction.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203467Housing Need, Range and 
Choice
5.52 National Planning Policy encourages the creation of sustainable, inclusive and 
mixed communities. This requires 
different types and tenures of housing 
to support the range of households 
expected to arise in the future; of 
different sizes, ages and incomes. 
Affordable Housing
5.53 Many households in North East 
Derbyshire who lack any type of housing or live in unsuitable housing cannot afford to buy or rent housing at market rates. These households require affordable housing. 
5.54 The Local Plan has been examined in light of the 2012 NPPF
14, which 
defines affordable housing as including social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing (both for rent and sale), provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the open market. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local  
house prices.
5.55 The Housing and Planning Act 2016 
has introduced a new legal framework 
for the delivery of Starter Homes. 
The Act defines Starter Homes as new 
dwellings only available for purchase by 
qualifying first-time buyers which are to 
be sold at a discount of at least 20 per cent of market value, and less than the price cap of £250,000 outside Greater 
London.
5.56 The Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment (SHMA) Update was 
undertaken in 2017 for all four 
authorities in the Housing Market Area, 
and should be read alongside the 2013 SHMA Report. These reports estimate what type and amount of housing is 
required in the District, including 
the need for affordable housing. The 
Updated analysis in the SHMA points to an overall need for affordable housing of 172 affordable units per annum in 
North East Derbyshire District.
5.57  In relation to the overall housing need 
for both market and affordable housing, 
the SHMA Update (2017) indicates that an adjustment to meet the full affordable housing need is neither realistically deliverable, nor justified. It therefore applies a 10% upward adjustment to the demographic need of 248 dwellings per annum in order to support enhanced affordable housing delivery, resulting in a level of 273 dwellings per annum. The District’s OAN and housing target are both above this figure. As the SHMA states, a higher housing provision will do more to support both delivery of additional affordable homes and help improve the affordability of market housing. This will in turn help address the need for affordable housing.
5.58 The Council will expect provision to 
be made for affordable housing in 
relation to new build housing schemes, 
conversions and changes of use, in line 
with policy LC2. This policy sets out a 
requirement to provide 30% affordable 
housing within the high value area, 
and 20% in the remaining area of the 
District, as informed by the Whole Plan 
Viability Assessment 2018. The high 
value area is shown on the Policies Map 
as illustrated in Figure 5.1.
14 The 2019 NPPF includes a different definition of affordable housing. This will be addressed through a review of the Plan. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203468Figure 5.1: Affordable Housing – High Value Area
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034695.59  In applying affordable housing 
requirements, the Council will allow 
consideration of the development costs 
of the proposed development and the 
impact of this on the viability of any 
proposed scheme. In circumstances 
where the viability of the scheme is 
in question, the applicant will need 
to demonstrate, through an ‘open 
book’ procedure, that the required 
percentage of affordable housing would 
not be achievable. Should the Council 
be satisfied, a lower percentage of 
affordable housing will be negotiated. 
In such circumstances, and where the 
delivery on larger development sites 
may extend over a long period, within 
which market conditions may vary, a 
re-assessment of affordable housing 
provision on the site may be required in 
line with an agreed phasing plan. The requirement would not however, extend above the percentages set out in  
Policy LC2.5.60 Affordable housing should be provided 
on site in most cases, but in some 
instances, it may not be possible or 
appropriate to do so. Examples could 
include where the provision of a very 
small number of affordable units may 
be difficult for a Registered Provider to 
manage, where off-site contributions 
would deliver more affordable housing 
than if provision is made on-site, and 
this provision is assured, or where the 
site is in an area where there is already 
an oversupply of affordable homes.
5.61 Sub-dividing a site or building so that 
the minimum threshold is not crossed 
will not avoid the requirement for 
affordable housing. Thresholds will 
be applied across the whole of the area to be developed. If there is a reasonable expectation that adjoining land will come forward, the Council will take account of the whole area in calculating any requirement, with each phase providing its share. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203470Policy LC2: Affordable Housing
1. Within the high value area identified on the Policies Map, all new housing proposals 
for 10 or more dwellings, or with a site area of 0.5 hectares or more, will be required to provide 30% affordable housing. 
2. In the remaining area of the District all new housing proposals for 10 or more dwellings, or with a site area of 0.5 hectares or more, will be required to provide 20% affordable housing. 
3.  An agreed mix of affordable housing tenures will be determined through local 
evidence of housing need at the time of granting planning permission. The affordable housing should be provided in a tenure neutral way, in small groups or clusters distributed through the site. Sub-dividing a site or building so that the minimum 
threshold is not crossed is not permitted.
4. Where it can be demonstrated that it is not possible or appropriate to build 
affordable housing on-site, the development may provide a financial contribution towards the future provision of affordable housing of ‘broadly equivalent value’ to that which would have been provided on-site.
5. The provision of affordable housing may be varied where it can be demonstrated that the level of affordable housing sought would make the development unviable in light of changing market conditions, individual site circumstances and development costs. In circumstances where the viability of the scheme is in question, the applicant will need to demonstrate, through an ‘open book’ approach, that the required percentage of affordable housing would not be achievable. Provided that the Council is satisfied with the evidence provided, a lower provision may be negotiated. In such circumstances, and where the delivery of the site may extend over a long period, a re-assessment of affordable housing will be required in line with an agreed  
phasing plan.
Exception Sites for Affordable Housing
5.62 Exception sites, where planning permission may be granted for local needs housing on sites where residential development would not normally be allowed, are an established tool to provide affordable housing. The sites can help to maintain the viability and sustainability of rural communities. However, the availability of public funding for affordable housing has been reduced significantly in recent years. This has led to viability issues for registered providers. Therefore in order to bring about the delivery of affordable housing, in some limited circumstances it may be appropriate to allow a small element of market housing in order to cross-subsidise the provision of affordable housing where this meets a local housing need. This will contribute to addressing the high level of affordable housing need identified in the SHMA Update.
5.63 Housing on rural exception sites must meet a genuine identified local need in areas where no other appropriate sites are available within the defined boundaries of the settlement. This need will have to be confirmed by an up to date
15 survey carried out by the 
developer, in conjunction with the Council’s Housing service, prior to the submission of a planning application. A 
15 Not more than 5 years.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203471local survey may also include (parts of) 
settlements in neighbouring authorities, 
where appropriate. 
5.64 Housing provided on exception sites 
must remain available for affordable 
local need in perpetuity. Planning 
Conditions and/or Section 106 
agreements will be required to ensure 
this. As well as meeting local needs, 
exception housing should also reflect 
demand for particular sizes, types and 
tenure of houses, and be affordable 
in perpetuity16. The justification for 
housing development on such sites can 
only be made on the basis of pressing 
local need for affordable housing 
which cannot be met in other ways 
or elsewhere within the Settlement 
Development Limit.5.65 Whilst Policy LC3: Exception Sites For 
Affordable Housing seeks to provide 
100% affordable exception sites, it also 
allows for a subsidiary element of 
market housing on sites outside the 
Green Belt and in circumstances where 
it can be satisfactorily proven that this 
would facilitate the delivery of an 
identified local affordable housing need 
through a registered provider. Proposals 
for an element of market housing must 
be supported by a viability assessment 
which will be reviewed by the District 
Valuer to ensure that the proportion of 
market housing provided is no greater 
than that required to deliver the agreed 
amount of affordable housing without 
the need for public subsidy. The market 
units must at all times be subsidiary to 
the affordable housing element and 
therefore shall be less than 50% of the 
total number of dwellings on the 
development scheme. 
16 This relates to all types of affordable housing, unless specifically exempted by the National Planning Policy Framework.
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203472Policy LC3: Exception Sites for Affordable Housing
1.  Development proposals for affordable housing which would be contrary to Policy 
SS9 (Development in the Countryside), and for limited affordable housing within the 
Green Belt will be permitted where:
a. They would provide affordable housing which would meet a proven need which is 
supported by an up to date local housing needs survey; and
b. It can be demonstrated that there are no suitable alternative development 
locations within the Settlement Development Limit; and
c. They are of a size, type, tenure, occupancy and cost suitable to meet identified 
local needs; and 
d. They have a close association with the built up part of settlements within level 1 
to 3 or neighbouring authority areas; and are in keeping with the form, size and 
character of the settlement, and local landscape setting; and 
e. It can be demonstrated that the properties will be allocated to those who are in 
local housing need, and will remain affordable in perpetuity*; and
2.  A subsidiary element of market housing of less than 50% of the total number of 
dwellings on the development scheme may be permitted on sites outside of the 
Green Belt, where it can be demonstrated that:
a. The market housing element is limited in proportion to that which is essential to 
enable the delivery of a viable affordable housing scheme to meet local needs, as 
demonstrated through a viability assessment; and
b. Proposals are of a size, type, tenure, occupancy and cost suitable to meet 
identified local needs and (where applicable) be designed to ensure the 
integration of affordable and market housing such that they differ only in terms of 
tenure, i.e. not design, type or size.
*This applies to all types of affordable housing, unless specifically exempted by the National Planning Policy Framework.
Type and Mix of Housing
5.66 There is a need for a mix of homes of 
different types and tenures to meet the 
requirements of a range of household 
sizes, ages, and incomes across the 
District. There may also be an over or 
under supply of a particular house type 
in an area. 
5.67 National policy is that local authorities 
should deliver a wide choice of high 
quality homes, widen opportunities 
for home ownership, and create 
sustainable, inclusive and mixed 
communities.Mix of Housing
5.68 The joint Strategic Housing Market 
Assessment update (SHMA) identifies 
the need for specific types of housing 
and makes recommendations in relation 
to the mix of housing. It identifies that 
the key issue to buying a home in the 
Housing Market Area is about access 
to capital (eg for deposits, stamp 
duty, legal costs) as well as potentially 
some mortgage restrictions (eg where 
employment is temporary). North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034735.69 Although this Local Plan has been 
examined in light of the 2012 NPPF , 
the SHMA looked to foresee some of 
the requirements of the 2019 NPPF 
in relation to the provision of 10% 
of new housing for affordable home 
ownership17. In this situation, the SHMA 
analysis would suggest that shared 
ownership is the most appropriate 
option in the Housing Market Area. 
This is due to the lower deposit 
requirements and lower overall costs. 
However, the implications of securing 
a proportion of affordable housing as 
home ownership for scheme viability 
has not been tested through the Whole 
Plan Viability Assessment and it is anticipated that a future Plan Review 
will address this. In addition to the 
10% of affordable home ownership, 
the Council would seek to provide 
additional rented housing, as this is 
cheaper than that available in the 
open market. The SHMA analysis does 
not suggest that there would be much 
difference between the cost to the 
occupant of either social or affordable 
rented housing. The actual tenure 
choice could possibly be determined by 
the availability of funding. 
5.70 The SHMA recommends the following 
size mix for market housing, affordable 
home ownership and affordable rented 
housing.
17 As suggested in the 2017 Housing White Paper.Table 5.1: Size Mix for New Housing
Bedrooms Market HousingAffordable home 
ownershipAffordable rented 
housing
1 bedroom 0-5% 10-15% 25-30%
2 bedrooms 30% 40-45% 45%
3 bedrooms 50% 35-40% 20%
4 bedrooms 15-20% 5-10% 5-10%
5.71 It should be noted that these figures 
are indicators against which delivery is 
monitored rather than a target for each 
individual site. On some sites, it will 
not be appropriate to be prescriptive 
on the housing composition for a 
single scheme, particularly on smaller 
sites where it may be impractical, or 
where there are specific physical site 
constraints that may limit the range of 
housing that is possible, or where there 
may be market demand or viability 
issues. Such issues will always be 
considered and explored in negotiation 
with developers using the latest 
information from housing need studies 
as a basis.5.72  In cases where mobile homes, 
residential caravans and chalets are 
occupied as a main residence, it 
will be subject to the same planning 
considerations as conventional housing. 
These dwellings require essentially 
the same range of services and 
utilities for their proper functioning 
as conventional housing. As a result, 
planning applications for this type 
of accommodation will be judged 
against the same Local Plan policies as 
applications for conventional dwellings 
in similar locations.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203474Specialist Housing
5.73 The District has an ageing population, 
with large increases predicted in the 
population of over 65 years and 
particularly those over 85 years to 
2035, with the total number of people 
aged 65 and over expected to increase 
by 40.6%. The number of people with 
dementia and mobility problems is 
expected to increase significantly in the 
future as a result of the growing older 
population. There is a projected 86% 
rise in the number of people with 
dementia along with a 65% increase in 
the number with mobility problems up 
to 2035. Furthermore, the number of 
people with a long-term health problem 
or disability is expected to rise by 20%.
5.74 Given this ageing population and higher 
levels of disability and health problems 
amongst older people, there is likely 
to be an increased need for specialist 
housing options for older people. Within 
the overall housing need, the SHMA 
identifies a need of 61 units per annum 
for the District, and a suggested broad 
tenure split of 40% rented housing 
(affordable housing) and 60% in the 
market. The SHMA further identifies a 
need for 23 registered care bedspaces 
per annum.5.75 The Council will seek to ensure that 
the housing needs of older people and 
people with disabilities are met, across 
tenure, and that these groups are not 
restricted in their choice of housing. 
This can include level access dwellings, 
sheltered housing or extra care 
schemes, nursing homes and residential 
facilities. Due to the high need for 
specialist housing for older people, the 
Council would, as an exception, allow 
for specialist housing in countryside 
locations. Proposals for specialist 
housing which would not meet any of 
the categories set out in Policy SS9 
would be allowed if they meet the 
criteria in Policy LC4(2). 
Accessible and Adaptable homes
5.76  Many older people, or people with 
disabilities, wish to be cared for in 
their own homes. This is increasingly 
made possible, particularly with the 
development of assistive technology 
such as telecare, use of appropriate 
aids or adaptations to the dwellings 
and new models of housing related 
care and/or support services. In order 
to support this further, the Council 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203475encourages all new dwellings to be 
made accessible and adaptable.  
For development proposals of 10 or more dwellings, the council expects 
20% of all homes to be accessible and 
adaptable by meeting requirement 
M4(2) of the Building Regulations, 
unless viability evidence indicates it is 
not possible. 
5.77 The Council will also be sympathetic to 
households needing to extend or adapt 
their existing homes in order to care 
for older relatives, where any related impacts are acceptable. 
Self and Custom Build Homes
5.78 The Council is keen to encourage self and custom build development within the District. The Self-Build and 
Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as 
amended by the Housing and Planning 
Act 2016) defines self-build and custom housebuilding as the building or 
completion by individuals, associations of individuals or persons working for 
them.  These individuals or groups of 
individuals should be directly involved in the design process of their house, 
rather than decisions being made for 
them. 
5.79 The Council has set up a register of individuals and associations who are looking for serviced plots of land in the district on which to build their own 
homes. At August 2017, only 7 people 
expressed an interest in this type of 
house building in North East Derbyshire. As the register has only recently been set up (April 2016), the demand 
information shown by it should be 
treated with some caution. It is 
expected that most new delivery would be on small windfall sites. However, the Council also encourages developers of larger schemes to designate parts of these as plots available for self and custom build. 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203476Policy LC4: Type and Mix of Housing
Mix of housing
1. Development proposals for new housing should seek to ensure an appropriate mix 
of dwelling types, tenures and sizes, taking account of existing imbalances in the 
housing stock, site characteristics, and viability and market considerations.
Specialist Housing
2. The Council will support the provision of housing for older people and specialist 
housing provision, across all tenures, including level access dwellings, sheltered 
housing or extra care schemes, nursing homes and residential facilities, in 
appropriate locations, close to services and facilities. Development proposals for 
specialist housing in the countryside will be permitted where there is an identified 
need and where they have a close association with the built up part of settlements 
within levels 1 to 3 of the settlement hierarchy or neighbouring authority areas; and 
are modest in scale, in keeping with the form and character of the settlement, and 
local landscape setting.
Accessible and Adaptable Homes
3. Development proposals for 10 or more dwellings should provide 20% accessible 
and adaptable dwellings. These accessible and adaptable dwellings should meet 
requirement M4(2) of the Building Regulations 2015 or any subsequent government 
standard. 
Self and Custom Build Homes
4. The development of self and custom build dwellings will be encouraged, in line with 
Council’s Self and Custom Build Register. 
Residential Extensions 
5.80  Additional space created by an 
extension to a dwelling and the 
erection or alteration to outbuildings 
and other structures, are recognised as 
acceptable means of meeting changes 
in household space requirements. 
However, extensions can also have a 
significant impact on the neighbours’ 
enjoyment of their property, as well 
as having an impact on character and 
appearance of the area.
5.81 Extensions should be properly 
integrated with the existing 
dwelling and respect the character 
of neighbouring properties and 
the street scene in general, whilst 
safeguarding the privacy and amenity of 
neighbouring properties. 5.82 In some instances, additional 
accommodation is required for a 
dependant person to enable them 
to live alongside a carer. This can 
take the form of an extension to the 
carer’s dwelling, the conversion of a 
suitable outbuilding or the erection 
of a separate self-contained unit of 
accommodation. All the normal policy 
provisions will apply to all applications 
for ancillary accommodation. However, 
standards of privacy and amenity 
may be relaxed in relation to the 
main dwelling, but not in relation 
to neighbouring properties. In such 
circumstances the occupation of 
the accommodation will be tied by 
condition to the occupation of the main 
dwelling.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203477Policy LC5: Residential Extensions
1.  Extensions and alterations to dwellings or outbuildings which are ancillary to the 
main residential use, will be permitted provided that the proposals:
a. Respect the scale, proportions, materials and overall design and character of the 
existing property; 
b. Do not harm the street scene or local area, including the loss of characteristic 
boundary features and landscaping; 
c. Avoid significant loss of privacy and amenity for the residents of neighbouring 
properties; and
d. Do not significantly and demonstrably harm highway safety.
2. Outside Settlement Development Limits, proposals which either individually or 
cumulatively involve a significant change in the scale and character of the original 
dwelling will be assessed as a proposal for a new dwelling.
Agricultural, Forestry, and 
other Occupational Dwellings 
in the Countryside
5.83  Much of the district is rural in 
character. In many instances it will 
be possible for workers in agricultural 
and land-based occupations to live in 
a town or village near to their business 
location. However, occasionally the 
nature of agricultural and other 
rural businesses make it essential 
for someone to live on, or in close 
proximity to the business.
5.84 Such dwellings should be commensurate 
with the needs of the holding 
and not the person requiring the 
accommodation. Unusually large 
dwellings in relation to the needs of 
the unit, or expensive construction in 
relation to the income it can sustain, 
will not be permitted.5.85 Where a new dwelling is permitted, this 
will be the subject of a condition 
ensuring the occupation will be limited 
to a person solely or mainly working, or 
last working in the locality in 
agriculture, horticulture, forestry, 
equestrian activities or other rural 
business (or a surviving partner of such 
a person, and any resident 
dependents). 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203478Policy LC6: Agricultural, Forestry and Other Occupational 
Dwellings in the Countryside
1. Planning permission for a new dwelling in the countryside based upon the essential 
needs of rural businesses shall be permitted where all of the following criteria  
are met:
a. An independent appraisal is submitted with the application demonstrating that 
there is a functional need for the proposed dwelling which cannot be met by 
existing suitable accommodation available in the area;
b. The size of the proposed dwelling is appropriate to its functional need;
c. A financial test is submitted to demonstrate the viability of the business proposed 
or as proposed to be expanded;
d. The dwelling cannot be provided by adapting or converting an existing building on 
the holding;
e. The proposed dwelling is located on the holding;
f. The proposed dwelling does not involve replacing a dwelling disposed of as general 
market housing;
g. The design of the proposed dwelling is in keeping with the landscape character 
type and appearance of the countryside; and
h. Occupancy is limited by way of a planning condition or obligation. 
2.  Any proposal for an occupational dwelling shall be subject to planning obligations 
to tie the dwelling to the adjacent land and buildings to prevent them being sold 
separately.
5.86 In order to retain the property for its 
intended use, a restrictive condition 
will be included on any planning 
approval for a dwelling allowed under 
Policy LC6: Agricultural, Forestry and 
Other Occupational Dwellings in the 
Countryside limiting its occupation to a 
person solely or mainly, or last working 
in agriculture, forestry or a rural 
enterprise.
5.87 However, it is accepted that there 
will be circumstances where these 
dwellings are no longer required for the 
purpose for which they were originally 
intended. Any application to remove 
a restrictive occupancy condition for 
any dwelling in the countryside will 
need to demonstrate that the need for which the dwelling was approved 
originally, no longer exists. Policy LC7 
below sets out the criteria the Council 
will apply to any application to remove 
a restrictive condition to ensure that 
such dwellings can remain available. 
An applicant would be expected to 
appropriately market the dwelling for a 
reasonable period at a realistic market 
price for an agricultural tied dwelling 
to establish whether it could meet the 
existing functional needs of another 
local farm or rural business. Evidence 
demonstrating how this requirement 
has been investigated will need to be 
included to support any application to 
vary or remove a restrictive occupancy 
condition.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203479Policy LC7: Removal of Agricultural and Other Occupancy 
Conditions
Planning permission for the removal of a restrictive occupancy condition for an agricultural, forestry or other similar worker on a dwelling will only be given where it can be evidentially shown: 
a. That there is no longer a continued need for the property on the holding or for the business;
b. There is no long term need for a dwelling with restricted occupancy to serve a need 
in the locality;
c. The property has been marketed locally for an appropriate period (minimum 
12 months) at an appropriate price and evidence of appropriate marketing is demonstrated. 
Traveller Sites
5.88 National Policy, ‘Planning Policy for 
Traveller Sites’ (PPTS) aims to ensure 
that local authorities increase the number of sites in suitable locations in their plan making; principally to 
address under provision, but also with 
the intention of reducing unauthorised 
encampments, and tensions between the settled community and traveller communities.
5.89 Local Plans need to provide for the likely permanent and transit site accommodation needs of travellers in their area, working collaboratively with neighbouring authorities. In producing the Plan a local authority should identify a five year supply of deliverable sites and a six to ten year supply of developable sites. The Local Plan also should include fair, realistic and inclusive policies. 
5.90 The estimated need for Gypsies, Travellers, and Travelling Showpeople in North East Derbyshire is set out in the Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (GTAA)
18, a study prepared 
jointly with neighbouring local 
authorities. It sets out a requirement 
for 15 additional pitches between 
2014-2034; of these, 6 will be needed 
between 2014-2019, with 3 for each 
five-year period to 2034. The evidence recommends smaller, family-sized sites 
with 3 to 4 pitches
19 to accommodate 
single or extended family groupings 
with good access to the strategic road 
network, services and facilities.
Allocation of Traveller Sites
5.91 Land ownership and owners’ intentions are critical to identifying deliverable sites. Experience in the District and feedback from the Derbyshire 
Gypsy Liaison Group (DGLG) confirm 
that potential, viable and available 
traveller sites are generally identified from within the traveller community or on public land. The viability of 
site development is also problematic 
without subsidy or a commitment from 
the land owner. For these reasons the pool of potential sites is limited. 
18 Derby, Derbyshire, Peak District National Park Authority and East Staffordshire Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment 2014, 
Final Report, June 2015.
19 GTAA pitch definition: A pitch size of at least 500sqm would accommodate the following on-pitch facilities:  
hard standing for 1 touring/mobile caravan and 1 static caravan; 2 car parking spaces; 1 amenity block; Hard standing for storage shed and drying; garden/amenity area.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034805.92 The Council in consultation with the 
Derbyshire Gypsy Liaison Group (DGLG) 
has explored the suitability of potential 
sites and general locations from the 
traveller community’s perspective. 
Of the sites subjected to detailed 
assessment, some were put forward 
by the traveller community and others 
were identified following a review 
of Council-owned land (including 
Derbyshire County Council). In addition, 
opportunities to increase capacity at or 
adjoining existing Traveller sites have 
been investigated.
5.93 Policy LC8 of the Plan allocates two 
traveller sites, a brief description of 
these sites is given below.
The Old Potato Store, Dark Lane, Calow:
5.94 This site is located to the south of 
Calow and is expected to deliver 2 
pitches. The allocation would be an 
extension to the existing traveller site 
at Dark Lane and is expected to be 
developed within the first five years 
after adoption of the Local Plan. The 
following mitigation measures will need 
to be addressed through the planning 
application process:
• Measures to identify and address the 
risk of surface water flooding from 
the site;
• Additional screening along site 
boundaries is required to minimise 
impacts on adjoining residential 
properties;
• No commercial activities on the site 
to minimise impacts on adjoining 
residential properties; 
• Careful design and layout of pitches 
due to the presence of high voltage 
overhead cables;• Improved visibility splays at the 
access; and 
• A Phase 1 contaminated land 
assessment should be undertaken 
due to potential risks arising from 
any contamination that may be 
present.
Dark Lane, North Wingfield:
5.95 The site is situated to the east of North 
Wingfield in close proximity to the edge 
of the settlement. The site lies opposite 
an existing traveller site and is expected 
to deliver 3 pitches. It is expected to 
be developed within the first five years 
after adoption of the Local Plan. The 
following mitigation measures will need 
to be addressed through the planning 
application process:
• Improvements to the existing access 
track including the provision of 
passing places;
•  Surface water runoff from the site to 
be addressed to protect a brook to 
the east of the site;
• A bat assessment to be undertaken 
if the existing buildings are to be 
demolished or renovated;
• If the hedgerows bordering the site 
are likely to be adversely affected 
a survey should be undertaken and 
measures identified to minimise any 
adverse impact; 
• A Phase 1 extended habitat survey 
may be required to ensure that no 
protected species or habitats are 
affected; and
• A Phase 1 contaminated land 
assessment should be undertaken 
due to potential risks arising from 
any contamination that may be 
present.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203481Policy LC8: Allocation of Traveller Sites
The following sites are allocated for Traveller Sites as shown on the Policies Map to 
provide towards the requirement as established in the current Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Assessment:
Site: Expected pitch provision:
a. The Old Potato Store, Dark Lane, Calow 2
b. Dark Lane, North Wingfield 3
Provision for Traveller Sites
5.96 Policy LC8 of the Plan allocates two 
traveller sites with a combined capacity 
for 5 pitches. Whilst this does not 
meet the full requirement for traveller 
sites established by the GTAA, there 
is a recognition of the difficulties in 
identifying specific deliverable sites in 
National Policy Guidance. The Council 
will also therefore, rely on a positive 
criteria based policy as set out in Policy 
LC9: ‘Provision for Traveller Sites’ to 
meet the full identified needs.
5.97 Where development proposals for 
traveller sites are in countryside 
locations, i.e. outside the Settlement 
Development Limits, Policy LC9 should 
be read in conjunction with Policy SS9: 
Development in the Countryside, which 
clarifies that such uses are acceptable in 
principle. This however, is provided they 
are not located in the open countryside 
away from an existing settlement or 
in Green Belt locations as indicated 
in the PPTS (paragraphs 24 & 25) and 
addressed in paragraph 3 of Policy SS9.
5.98 In terms of accessibility to local 
amenities and services including 
schools, shops, health services, 
public transport and other community 
facilities, the Council considers that the 
quality of the surrounding road network 
plays an important role. The Council 
will consider development proposals to 
be ‘reasonably accessible’ where the 
existing road network is appropriate 
for caravans in terms of road width 
and for walkers and cyclists in terms of 
pavements, road lighting, etc.5.99 The effect of proposals on the amenity 
of occupiers of dwellings in the vicinity 
of the site will be addressed through 
Policy SDC12: High Quality Design and 
Place Making.
5.100  In assessing a development proposal, 
the Council will also consider the 
location of a new or extended 
traveller site in relation to the settled 
community. Regardless of the proposal’s 
location within or outside a Settlement 
(with or without a Settlement 
Development Limit), the scale of 
the proposal in terms of area will be 
considered in relation to the nearest 
settled community or surrounding built-
up area.
5.101 Proposals for traveller provision will 
need to be considered against other 
policies in the plan, including those 
aimed at achieving sustainable patterns 
and forms of development (Chapter 8).
5.102 Where traveller sites are to be 
allocated or permission is sought for 
new or extended sites consideration 
will be given to measures to mitigate 
the impact of the proposal in order 
to overcome any issues that might 
otherwise prevent that use of the 
site. This process may include 
consultation with the travelling 
community, discussion with applicants 
and community representatives and 
solutions may include legal agreements 
(for example relating to access 
arrangements or limits on activities).North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203482Policy LC9: Provision for Traveller Sites
1. The Council will seek to ensure the provision of further sufficient pitches within 
the District to meet the full accommodation needs of gypsies and travellers as 
assessed through the current Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment (or its 
replacement). 
2.  Development proposals will be granted for sites for travellers including gypsies and 
travelling showpeople where the proposed development:
a. Is reasonably accessible to local amenities and services including schools, shops, 
health services, public transport and other community facilities;
b. Provides adequate space for on-site facilities, including storage, in particular for 
equipment for Travelling Showpeople and, where appropriate, mixed use yards to 
allow for on-site business use; and
c. Is reasonable in scale in relation to the nearest settled community or surrounding 
built-up area.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034836. Working Communities and 
Economic Development
Introduction
6.1 The Local Plan aims to support the 
District’s economy, an important 
contributor to the sustainable 
development of the District and the 
prosperity and quality of life of its 
residents. Economic development 
can help increase employment 
opportunities, regenerate communities 
and economic investment. As well 
as identifying new locations for 
employment and the means of 
protecting existing employment of 
all types, the Plan also supports the 
District’s town centres and tourism 
economy. Evidence for this chapter of 
the Plan has been provided primarily 
by reports commissioned by the Council 
from 2013 through to 201720 as well as 
papers produced by the Council21.
6.2 The Plan sets a target of 43 hectares 
(ha) of employment land including that 
within the strategic sites identified in 
Chapter 4: Spatial Strategy. Existing 
employment sites will be protected 
for such uses, with some safeguarded 
principally for B2, B8 and E(g) uses 
under Policy WC2, reflecting the 
importance of the industrial sector 
to the District’s economy. In general 
non-employment uses on protected 
employment sites will not be allowed. 
Town centre uses will be encouraged 
in town centres, and elsewhere only 
where it would support the economic, 
community, and social role of town 
centres. In rural areas policies will 
support small-scale development aimed 
at diversification of the economy. It 
is also recognised that development 
can benefit the local labour market and economy, by raising skills and 
supporting the local workforce. 
Measures can be attached to planning 
permissions through local labour 
agreements to help deliver a wide 
range assistance, including vocational 
opportunities and apprenticeships, work 
placements and childcare. Policy SS1 
allows for such agreements in support 
of the local economy.
Background 
6.3 North East Derbyshire is part of the 
Sheffield City Region which has strong 
links with the north of the District, 
and the D2N2 economic area covering 
Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire. The 
Strategic Growth Plans of the LEPs 
(submitted to Government in 2014) 
provide the strategic context for the 
Council’s own Growth Strategy, and for 
the Local Plan. North East Derbyshire 
also surrounds Chesterfield, which 
effectively acts as a commercial centre 
to the District.
6.4 There have been significant changes 
to the local economy and business 
base following the decline of 
traditional engineering and mining-
related activities in the 1980s, 
although the District’s economy still 
contains significant manufacturing, 
construction and agricultural sectors. 
There has been growth in the business, 
professional services and the public 
sector (Education and Health), but 
starting from a low base. Thus, 
overall, the percentage of North East 
Derbyshire’s workforce based in these 
sectors is still relatively low.
20 These are the 2008 Employment Land Review, the 2013 and 2017 Employment Land Update and the 2014 and 2017 Employment Sites Review. 
21 Employment Report and Employment Land Assessment (NEDDC) 2017.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034846.5 North East Derbyshire District lost a 
net total of 500 workforce jobs in the 
15 years to 2015, made up of losses 
in the B2 industrial sectors, public 
administration and construction, but 
with growth elsewhere, including land 
transport, storage and administration 
& professional services. However this is 
in a local economy with a relatively low 
base of employment. The significance 
of local workplace jobs is tempered 
by the low job density figure22 which 
reflects that many residents take up 
jobs in nearby employment centres 
such as Sheffield, Chesterfield and the 
M1 corridor.
6.6 Take-up of employment land since 
1991 has totalled 53 ha but tailed off 
significantly between 2008 & 2013, 
recovering since then, with around 
7.5 ha developed in the past 3 years. 
Almost all of the take-up since 2008 has 
been at Coney Green, Clay Cross. This 
is all in the context of earlier significant 
losses of large industrial and mining 
sites recognised in the allocations made 
in the 2005 Local Plan.
6.7 In terms of commercial demand there 
are strong levels of demand particularly 
driven by local SMEs looking for 
existing new and secondary premises 
to purchase or lease, rather than 
development plots. A shortage in supply 
is keeping vacancy levels low, despite 
companies ‘making do’ in poor quality 
secondary stock. The picture for office 
space is more mixed, though again 
there is poor quality secondary office 
space. 
6.8 In terms of policy and strategy the 
District’s Growth Strategy & Action 
Plan (2014)(a)23 and its Housing and 
Economic Development Strategy 2015-
2020 (b) together aim to support growth 
in the District. Relevant objectives from 
these strategies include:• Developing and promoting the 
districts as competitive business 
locations (a);
• Work towards maintaining an 
appropriate supply of suitably 
located employment land and 
premises (a).
• Unlocking the potential of major 
employment and housing sites (b);
•  Town centres: realise the vitality and 
viability of town centres (b);
• Supporting the rural economy, 
including tourism (b).
6.9 These strategies identify major 
employment sites and locations for 
employment along the M1 Strategic 
Growth Corridor, the A61 Growth 
Corridor and at:
• Callywhite Lane, Dronfield
• Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross
• The Avenue site, Wingerworth
•  Markham Vale
•  Former Coalite Site
6.10 The Local Plan will therefore need to 
provide for economic development that 
meets the objectives of the strategies 
by identifying sufficient land for 
anticipated growth in attractive and 
sustainable locations; and protecting 
sites in order to maintain and improve 
the attractiveness of the Council’s 
employment land portfolio. Recognising 
the advice in the NPPF a review of land 
used and allocated for employment 
has been carried out through an 
Employment Land Availability 
Assessment, informed by the 2014 & 
2017 Employment Sites Review. 
22 North East Derbyshire’s job density is 0.50, compared to 0.75 for the East Midlands.
23 Joint with Bolsover District Council. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203485Economic Growth and 
Employment Land Provision
6.11  As described in Chapter 4 the Local 
Plan and its employment land provision 
will accommodate growth in line with 
wider strategies providing more positive 
support and not constraining economic 
growth but delivering regeneration 
in the District. The Plan accounts for 
the Council’s Economic Development 
Strategy and also acknowledges the 
wider market, City-region and HMA 
context, wherein the District serves 
other nearby employment centres. 
6.12 The 2017 Employment Land Update 
assessed likely future growth reflecting 
the context of the District and sub-
region beyond it, including that of 
the LEPs. This is considered to be a 
realistic and reasonable forecast and 
the most appropriate for the Plan 
to adopt. The forecast identified 
several core growth sectors to be 
promoted and supported in the years 
ahead in North East Derbyshire. These 
are Digital and Creative Industries, 
Advanced Manufacturing, Food and 
Drink, Construction and Environmental 
Industries, and finally Social 
Enterprises. By uplifting growth in 
these sectors a ‘regeneration’ forecast 
was prepared as the one most closely 
reflecting the District’s strategy and 
a reasonable assessment of future 
growth. This has indicated growth 
of around 3,000 jobs. Based on this 
forecasting the 2017 Update Report 
identified a likely future net increase 
in B1 (now E(g)), B2 & B8 employment 
land of 18ha (2014-34). 
6.13 An employment land provision, of 
around 42.66 ha was recommended by 
the 2017 Employment Land Update. 
This would allow for the significant 
(20ha) anticipated losses of existing 
employment land but still provide for 
this overall employment land increase. It would also allow for a small flexibility 
margin of 3.9ha which is equivalent to 
2 year’s supply. This figure reflects the 
forecast related to the ‘Regeneration’ 
scenario24. Chapter 4 describes how this 
level of employment land is aligned 
with the housing provision in the Plan. 
This recommended figure (rounded 
to 43 ha) is being used as the starting 
point for establishing the employment 
land provision. 
6.14 Take-up for the period 2014-17 has 
provided an increase of 3.49 ha and 
losses of 0.81 ha, giving a net change of 
2.68 ha.
Available Employment Land
6.15 The Clay Cross/Holmewood Corridor 
is currently the main location for 
industrial and commercial development 
land in the South & East. Markham Vale 
is the most significant sub-regional 
employment location, of which the 
employment land allocation within 
the District (approx. 7ha) remains 
mostly undeveloped, whereas outside 
the District, in Chesterfield and 
Bolsover, almost all of the available 
land has been developed. Dronfield 
and Killamarsh are the main focus for 
employment (E(g) & B2) in the North, 
but with limited land immediately 
available.
Providing for losses in the 
Provision & Protection of 
Employment Land 
6.16 The most significant element of the 
recommended range of employment 
land requirement in the District is to 
address anticipated losses. The 2017 
update estimates a losses figure of 
approximately 20 ha for the 20 year 
plan period. This is based on previous 
trends, and as the report states, this 
reflects low rates of losses in recent 
24 Other scenarios are presented in the Report to provide a context/reality check.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203486years (compared to the previous 
report). The Employment Land Update 
suggests that “the Council should 
also consider the scope to which 
existing legacy estates and sites in 
the District are no longer productive 
for employment use and could be 
better placed to support non B-class 
employment uses in the future.”25 
6.17 The employment land provision also 
has regard to the guidance in the NPPF 
to “avoid the long term protection of 
sites allocated for employment use where there is no reasonable prospect of a site being used for that purpose.” 
Consequently land allocations have 
been reviewed and certain sites that 
could fulfil the NPPF description, or with limited value to the land portfolio have been considered with regard to their future employment use. 
6.18 As a result some sites are recognised as having a variety of development issues relating to access, flood risk, marketability, etc and while they are currently retained as employment allocations, development for B2, B8 or E(g) uses over the Plan period is uncertain. While not providing for the loss of any specific sites, it is recognised that better quality, more sustainable replacement sites may be considered in any future review of the Plan provision, with undeveloped sites appropriate for de-allocation. This is not considered appropriate at the present time as no suitable sites have presented themselves through  
the Assessment of prospective employment land.
26
6.19 Employment opportunities are not 
confined to B2, B8 and E(g) uses, and 
employment growth is increasingly 
provided by other commercial and 
public sectors such as leisure and the 
health services. This wider definition of 
economic development was reflected in the NPPF and National Planning Policy 
Guidance in 2012.27 The 2005 Local 
Plan pre-dated this change and policies limited such uses on employment 
sites. In adjoining districts more 
recent Local Plans reflect the National 
Planning Policy Guidance relating to 
the increasing diversity of employment 
generating uses. 
6.20 The types of location sought after by 
different sectors, including each non–
B/E(g) use class will differ according 
to the needs of each use. It is possible that such uses will seek to locate on either allocated employment land, 
or to recycle sites within existing 
employment areas. The Plan aims 
to adopt a positive approach to sui generis and other non-B/E(g) use class job-creating uses on employment sites provided the use proposed is compatible with the predominant uses on the site, and it is appropriate in terms of its scale, nature and form. Such employment uses would be considered under Policy WC3 (General Employment Areas). 
6.21 In light of the above it is not possible to predict where or how much loss of employment land to non-employment uses will occur. The Plan, recognises this, and guided by the Employment Land Update, makes provision accordingly. Fewer losses than anticipated may occur in future, or there may be significantly more losses than anticipated. In addition, suitable land, currently not identified, may come forward in strategic and sustainable locations to improve the District’s employment land portfolio. Any of these situations could trigger a review of employment provision and policy, and this situation will  
be monitored.
25 2017 Employment Land Update para 6.13 (pt). 
26 2017 Employment Land Assessment, NE-Derbyshire. 
27 Paragraph: 033 Reference ID: 2a-033-20140306 and NPPF Glossary.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034876.22 The employment land provision target 
of 43ha set out in Policy SS2 would 
allow for up to 20 ha of losses of B2, 
B8 and E(g) uses, as estimated in the 
Employment Land Review Update 
in order to achieve the anticipated 
net increase in (B2, B8 and E(g)) 
employment land over the Plan period 
of 18 ha.
Employment Land Provision
6.23  To meet the future additional provision 
for office and industrial space in 
North East Derbyshire, the Council 
is guided by the employment studies 
referred to above. These reports 
have identified issues with poor 
quality stock and an imbalance in 
the location of the portfolio of sites, 
with further land needed in areas of 
stronger demand (such as in closer 
proximity to the M1 junction); and to 
cater for the continued demand for B2 
floorspace (particularly from indigenous 
companies). 
6.24 The NPPF and Planning Practice 
Guidance suggest a policy approach to 
positively plan to support the District’s 
employment needs so that the local 
economy is not unduly constrained over 
the plan period, but also recognises 
the issues around land supply and 
competing pressures on available 
development sites. The 2017 reports 
have also highlighted the physical 
constraints of the District’s potential 
land supply which would preclude a 
step-change in delivery.28
6.25 The Employment Land Update refers to 
both indigenous growth needs as well as 
a degree of footloose demand within a 
wider sub-regional market. It suggests 
that the Plan needs to consider how 
the delivery of B-class employment 
land (including former B1 uses now 
within Class E(g)) can be prioritised in particular areas and for particular uses, 
drawing upon the growth opportunities 
provided by the principal employment 
centres with good access to the 
strategic road network. These are 
Markham Vale, including the former 
Coalite cross-boundary site, plus the 
strategic sites of the Avenue and the 
former Biwater site.29
6.26 Additional employment sites, mostly 
brought forward through consultation, 
have been assessed by the Council. 
Additional employment sites have 
been assessed on their availability, 
suitability and deliverability through 
the Employment Land Availability 
Assessment, and as part of the 
Sustainability Appraisal. None have 
been demonstrated to meet the 
sustainability requirements of the Plan. 
Further information on the process 
can be found in the Employment Land 
Assessment.30
6.27 The Plan allocations provide for 35.74 
ha of employment land on the sites 
described at Table 6.1. A proportion of 
this provision is on the strategic sites 
set out in Chapter 4. The strategic 
sites in particular will provide a 
significant improvement to the quality 
of the employment land portfolio of 
the District. A number of sites are 
within existing partially developed 
employment areas, the most significant 
of which is Coney Green, Clay Cross. 
There is also further potential 
employment supply associated with 
the Dronfield Regeneration Area (Policy 
WC1) which is safeguarded for long-
term employment provision in the 
North of the District; and the Coalite 
Priority Regeneration Area (Policy SS6) 
which has potential for the delivery of 
significant levels of employment land. 
However, these sites are not included 
in the supply within Table 6.1 due to 
uncertainties over delivery. 
28 2017 Employment Land Update.
29 2017 Employment Land Update para 6.13 (pt).
30 2017 Employment Land Assessment; NE-Derbyshire.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034886.28 The amount of employment land 
allocated in Policy WC2 and set out in 
Table 6.1 amounts to 35.74ha. Taking 
account of 2.68ha net take-up from 
2014-17 there is a shortfall of 4.58ha 
against the Plan target of 43ha. As 
stated above, the potential that further land may come forward adds some 
flexibility to supply. Consequently 
the Council will undertake robust 
monitoring of employment land supply 
and losses on an annual basis to ensure 
sufficient land is available to meet 
identified needs. 
Table 6.1: Local Plan Employment Land Availability
Existing Employment Sites 
and Strategic Sites Sites Area (Ha)
Existing Employment Sites and 
allocations with development 
land remainingConey Green, Clay Cross 9.03
Derby Rd, Upper Mantle Close, Clay Cross 0.89
Westthorpe Business Centre, Killamarsh 0.35
Land adj Norwood Industrial Estate 5.40
Markham Vale (West of M1), Long Duckmanton 4.00
Markham Vale (Part former Coalite land) Long 
Duckmanton1.25
Renishaw Industrial Estate 2.50
Hepthorne Lane, Tupton 3.32
Sub-Total 26.74
Strategic Sites The Avenue, Wingerworth 4.00
Former Biwaters Site, Clay Cross 5.00
Sub-Total 9.00
Total Provision 35.74
6.29 The following employment land was 
considered for allocation and retention:
• The Strategic Sites at the Avenue and 
the Biwaters Site are described in 
Chapter 4.
• Coney Green, Clay Cross: Remaining 
plots from a large, successful 
mixed employment area. Recent 
development in this location 
constitutes the whole of the 
District’s take-up, 2009-16.
•  Derby Rd, Upper Mantle Close, Clay 
Cross: Lying to the North of Clay 
Cross town centre, this plot remains 
undeveloped within a small estate containing a broad mix of industrial 
uses. 
• Westthorpe Business Park, 
Killamarsh: The remaining single 
plot of a Derbyshire CC employment 
estate.
• Markham Vale (Part former Coalite): 
This site is an area remaining from 
the large cross boundary Markham 
Vale Economic Growth Zone, covered 
by an outline planning permission. It 
is partly developed.
•  Markham Vale (South-West of 
M1J29a): This site is an area 
remaining from the large cross North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203489boundary Markham Vale Economic 
Growth Zone, covered by an outline 
planning permission. It is partly 
developed.
• Renishaw Industrial Estate (Part): 
Two parts of a long-established 
employment area. The Western part 
(known also as Renishaw Business 
Park or Ravenshorne Commercial 
Park) contains small-scale workshop 
units, and includes permissions for 
non-B employment uses. The larger 
employment area was submitted as a 
potential housing site (ECK/902) but 
is considered unsuitable.
• Land South of Norwood Industrial 
Estate: This is the amount of 
employment land remaining from 
a 2005 Plan mixed-use allocation, 
partly developed with housing. A 
satisfactory access cannot easily be 
achieved for the remainder of the 
land. The development of the site 
may also impinge on education and 
recreation land.
• Hepthorne Lane, Tupton: This 
remaining section of a former 
railway sidings adjoins North 
Wingfield but lies mostly within a 
flood plain & has some access issues. 
Although suitable employment uses 
would be acceptable prospects for 
development are limited.• Former Callywhite Lane Extension, 
Dronfield: This is a long-standing 
allocation from the 2005 Adopted 
Plan, the northern end of which has 
been partly developed. Despite lack 
of progress on this site it represents 
an important extension to a valuable 
industrial area and a potential 
significant business park opportunity 
in the North Sub-Area. Issues over 
access in particular need to be 
resolved and were, until recently 
associated with the electrification 
of the East Midlands Main Line. As 
this work through Dronfield is now 
associated with the longer term HS2 
project, such issues will be resolved 
much later. The development of 
the site will have to account for 
designated flood risk areas associated 
with the River Drone which runs 
through the area. Development is 
only likely towards or beyond the end 
of the Plan period. The land is thus 
safeguarded under Policy WC1 as a 
regeneration area and it is expected 
to contribute around 6ha of land 
in employment use. In view of the 
nature of prospective development, 
any future employment use on the 
land will be protected under Policy 
WC3 (General Employment Areas). 
Consequently this land is not included 
in the Plan’s employment land supply 
at Table 6.1.
Policy WC1: Dronfield Regeneration Area
1. Land shown on the Policies Map for the extension of Callywhite Lane Industrial 
Estate, Dronfield is safeguarded as a Regeneration Area within the Local Plan. 
As such, the land will be safeguarded for development in order to deliver the 
comprehensive development of the area. It will be protected for future employment 
use under Policy WC3 (General Employment Areas). 
2. Any development area will take account of impact and vulnerability to flood risk in 
relation to designated flood risk areas in the vicinity. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203490Protection of Principal 
Employment Sites
6.30 Although future losses of employment land are accounted for in the overall 
employment land target set in Policy 
SS2 these losses must nevertheless 
be subject to some control. The Plan 
recognises that many existing sites 
provide an important contribution 
to the local and strategic portfolio 
of employment sites and should be 
retained.
6.31 The Plan seeks to secure and retain 
the sites identified for employment use. These areas, which are existing employment sites and allocations, have been identified as the most appropriate employment locations and will be safeguarded from potential redevelopment or change of use to a non-employment use, for example housing or retail. Certain sites, listed under Policy WC2, are identified as 
being particularly important for the 
retention of the District’s B-class employment base, either strategically, 
or locally for a particular settlement.
Ancillary Development on 
Employment Sites
6.32 The Council will support development 
proposals which are ancillary to, or support the economic viability 
of employment sites and the local 
economy. Therefore ancillary 
development including workplace nurseries and catering facilities, education and training facilities, and 
other sui-generis uses which create jobs 
will be supported. However care will 
be taken to ensure such development does not prejudice the operation of neighbouring employment activities  
and sites.
Policy WC2: Principal Employment Areas
1. The following sites as shown on the Policies Map are protected for general industrial 
uses (Use Class B2), storage and distribution uses (Use Class B8) and office, industrial 
and research and development uses (Use Class E(g)):
Clay Cross/Danesmoor
• CC/01: Coney Green Industrial Estate
• CC/02: Bridge Street Industrial Estate/Upper Mantle Close
• CC/03: Pilsley Road
• SS4: Former Biwaters Site
Corbriggs
• CO/01: Industrial Estate, Mansfield Road
Dronfield
• DR/01: Callywhite Lane Industrial Estate 
• DR/02: Stubley Lane/Wreakes Lane Industrial Estate
Eckington
• EC/01: Rotherside RoadNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203491Holmewood
• HO/01: Holmewood Industrial Estate
• HO/02: Holmewood Industrial Park
• HO/03: Holmewood Business Park
Killamarsh
• KL/01: Norwood Industrial Estate
• KL/02: Rotherham Close
• KL/03: Westthorpe Fields, off Green Lane
• KL/04: Sheffield Road Industrial Area 
Long Duckmanton
• LD/01: Markham Vale, NE of Chesterfield Road (part former Coalite works) 
• SS5: Markham Vale
Renishaw
• RW/01: Renishaw Industrial Estate (Ravenshorn Commercial Park)
Temple Normanton
• TN/01: Temple Normanton Business Park
Wingerworth
• SS3: The Avenue
2. Within the above areas proposals for other employment generating uses (not falling 
within Use Classes B2, B8 and E(g)) will only be permitted where the proposed use:
a.  Would be ancillary to the main use on site; and
b. Would not prejudice the future functioning or viability of employment uses on 
the site or nearby employment sites by reason of conflicting activ ities, access 
arrangements or movements of traffic or people. 
General Employment Sites
6.33 Other sites currently in use are 
considered appropriate for employment 
uses using a broader definition, rather 
than to retain solely for B2, B8 or E(g) 
uses. This is for two main reasons; to 
be in line with Government Guidance 
and the NPPF , which introduced 
a wider definition of economic 
development, and accounting for the Plan’s Objectives to support the 
District and local economy. Therefore, 
redevelopment for other appropriate 
employment generating uses will be 
considered under Policy WC3. These 
uses are specifically to include care 
homes (if sufficient employment is 
provided) and traveller sites, where 
it is accepted that an element of 
employment is incorporated in the use 
of land.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034926.34 Importantly, proposals for main town 
centre uses will need to support, rather 
than damage, the vitality and viability 
of the District’s, and other nearby town 
centres. In this respect, the scale of 
the proposal and size of settlement, and the market being served by the 
proposal would be considered. Planning 
decisions would therefore need to take 
account of policy WC4, Retail Hierarchy 
and Town Centre Uses.
Policy WC3: General Employment Areas
1. The following areas on the Policies Map are protected as General Employment Areas 
for employment uses31.
Clay Cross 
• CC/04: Derby Rd (East & South)
• CC/05: West of Derby Road
• SS4: Former Biwaters Site*
Dronfield 
• WC1: Dronfield Regeneration Area
• DR/03: Gunstones Bakery, Stubley Lane
• DR/04: Sheffield Road
Eckington
• EC/02: Littlemoor Business Park
Killamarsh
• KL/05: Land South of Norwood Industrial Estate
Morton 
• MO/01: Morton Industrial Estate 
Stonebroom
• ST/01: Stonebroom Industrial Estate 
Tupton
• TU/01: Hepthorne Lane
Wingerworth
• SS3: The Avenue*
31 As defined in the Plan Glossary as Economic Development.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034932.  Within these General Employment Areas the Council will support development 
proposals for employment uses where:
a. They demonstrate that they will maintain or increase local employment 
opportunities and maximise opportunities for developing skills; or
b. The proposed use would be ancillary to, or will directly support the functioning of 
the application site, or an adjoining, related site for employment purposes.
In all cases proposals must not significantly prejudice the future functioning or 
viability of existing uses on the site or nearby employment sites by reason of 
conflicting activities, access arrangements or movements of traffic or people.
3.  Proposals for Main Town Centre Uses on these sites will also be considered against 
policy WC4.
4. Development involving the full or partial loss of sites or buildings to a non-
employment use within ‘General Employment Areas’ will only be permitted if the 
applicant can demonstrate that:
a. The land or building is no longer physically suitable for employment uses and 
there is no realistic prospect of re-use or redevelopment for such uses, this should 
include evidence that describes measures taken and explains how development 
problems that prohibit re-use for employment cannot be overcome; and 
b.  There is no demand for the building or redevelopment of the site by providing 
evidence of unsuccessful active marketing for employment use over a period of 2 
years, including an advertising board placed in a visible location on the site and 
online marketing, a list of reasons as to why enquirers found the site unsuitable; 
and
c. The proposed use does not prejudice the future development of the viable 
existing uses on the site or nearby employment sites by reason of conflicting 
activities, access arrangements or movements of traffic or people.
*The precise areas of land set aside for general employment purposes on The Avenue 
and Former Biwaters Site are not identified by a boundary on the Policies Map, to allow 
for flexibility of layout.
Retail and Town Centres
6.35 Strong, vibrant town and local centres 
are vital to creating a thriving District. 
It is important to have a good retail 
offer in the District to reduce leakage 
of retail expenditure to shops outside 
of the District, whilst recognising the 
role of the District’s centres within a 
wider network, including Sheffield and 
Chesterfield. The retail sector provides 
a plentiful supply of employment which 
needs to be utilised for the District’s 
local economy. 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034946.36 The National Planning Policy 
Framework requires local authorities 
to quantify the need for additional 
retail development and then identify 
locations for such development by 
applying a sequential approach which 
prioritises town centre locations, 
in order to ensure the vitality and 
vibrancy of town centres. 
6.37 A Retail and Centres Study for 
Chesterfield, Bolsover and North East 
Derbyshire was produced in 2018.32 
This report has modelled future retail 
expenditure growth for the District up to 2021, 2026, 2031 and 2033 and 
the potential implications of new 
floorspace. 
6.38 The Retail and Centres Study is 
important in developing policies and defining the limits for the town centres of Dronfield, Clay Cross, Eckington and Killamarsh. The study reveals capacity figures for the whole of the district; it states that for Convenience Goods
33 
there would be a potential floorspace capacity of at least 2,000 sq. m up to 2,900 sq. m until the end of the plan period. However, for Comparison Goods there would be a negative floorspace capacity which ranges from -100 sq. m to -200 sq. m. In order to provide for additional capacity for convenience goods. To address this the study identifies the ‘Bridge Street Triangle’ in Clay Cross as the most suitable opportunity to deliver a retail-led development in the district. This area is bounded by the A61 to the west, Harris Way to the north-east and Eldon Street to the south. Extending the Town Centre into this area would help deliver a key priority of the Clay Cross Regeneration Framework as a modern retail and services area, including town centre uses, a combination of comparison goods retailers or a further foodstore.Town Centre and Local Centre Boundaries
6.39 The town centre boundaries of the 
four main towns in the 2005 adopted 
Local Plan were re-assessed through 
the Retail Study and are to be amended 
following further detailed work by the 
Council. In all four town centres the 
study recommends that amended town 
centres should also serve as the primary 
shopping area and would not require 
separately designated primary and 
secondary frontages. 
6.40 The Study indicates that Dronfield’s town centre boundary should be significantly refined, on the basis that “Dronfield does not provide a compact or coherent centre”. The study suggests contracting the town centre boundary to cover the proposed area from the Sainsbury’s in the north-west, to the Forge Shopping Centre in the east. The town centre boundary is amended accordingly. The shopping parade along Sheffield Road/Chesterfield Road, as shown on the Policies Map is designated as a ‘Local Centre’.
6.41 The Clay Cross town centre boundary is amended accordingly to include the Bridge Street Triangle in the north-west and the former Clay Cross Junior School and an undeveloped field next to it to the south. 
6.42 Eckington’s town centre boundary 
will be retained subject to minor 
amendments. Killamarsh’s town centre 
boundary will be extended in the east 
to include the Community Campus with 
Killamarsh Sports Centre, the library 
and church.
32 Bolsover, Chesterfield and North East Derbyshire: Retail and Centres Study, January 2018. 
33 Superseded Planning Policy Statement PPS 5: Retailing and Town Centre defines ‘Convenience Goods’ broadly as ‘food, drinks, tobacco, 
newspapers, magazines, cleaning materials, toilet articles.’ ‘Comparison Goods’ are therefore ‘Other goods not classified as convenience goods.’North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203495Retail Development outside 
Centres
6.43 In line with the overall approach 
to support economic growth and 
sustainable communities, the Plan 
allows small scale retail and other town 
centre use development to serve the 
needs of local communities in locations outside centres. Evidence set out in the 
Retail Study update has not identified 
any further retail centres, but has 
set out local thresholds for retail and 
leisure development, beyond which an 
impact assessment would be required 
to ensure that development is of a 
scale appropriate to its location. 
Policy WC4: Retail Hierarchy and Town Centre Uses
Retail Hierarchy
1. The Council will support the following hierarchy of Towns, and Local Centres in the 
District:
a. Town Centres – Dronfield, Clay Cross, Eckington and Killamarsh.
b. Local Centre – Sheffield Road/Chesterfield Road, Dronfield
Development in Centres
2. To ensure the vibrancy and economic health of the District’s centres, development 
will be permitted where it will:
a. Contribute to the diversity of leisure and cultural attractions;
b.  Help to create an active, well used and safe evening environment, with acceptable 
impacts on residential amenity;
c.  Help to address vacant, under-used or derelict buildings within centres; and
d. Contribute to an appropriate mix of licensed premises.
3. Proposals for retail and other town centre uses in the District’s Centres should 
contribute to their vitality and viability and:
a.  Be consistent in scale with the size and function of the centre; and
b.  Safeguard the retail character and function of the centre.
4. Any quantitative expansion or new provision within the District’s Centres should 
contribute to enhancing their public realm.
Development outside Centres
5. A sequential approach will be taken to assessing development proposals for the main 
town centre uses as defined in the NPPF, in line with the retail hierarchy set out in 
this policy and in accordance with the local thresholds for impact assessment.
6. Small scale retail and other town centre use developments, serving the day to day 
needs of local communities, will be permitted within Settlement Development Limits 
where they are below the local thresholds for impact assessment set out below.
7. The loss of shops and other services will be resisted, in line with Policy ID5 (Social 
Infrastructure).
continuedNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203496Local Thresholds for Impact Assessment
8. An impact assessment will be required for retail and leisure proposals in edge-of 
centre or out-of-centre locations which propose additional floorspace above the following thresholds:
a. 200 m² (gross) for proposals within the catchment (500m) of the Local Centre 
defined above;
b. 280 m² (gross) for proposals within the catchment (500m) of the Town Centres 
defined above; and 
c. 500 m² (gross) for proposals across the remainder of the District.
Tourism and Rural Employment
6.44 The Plan aims to support the District’s role as a visitor/tourist destination, building on and adding to, the strength of existing attractions, townscapes and landscapes, encouraging the development of new visitor attractions and accommodation, capitalising on the District’s role and location on the Peak Fringe. Sustainable rural employment and diversification will be supported in villages and within the countryside where this does not conflict with other local plan policies. Employment generating developments of a scale appropriate to a small settlement and / or rural surroundings will be supported in rural areas where the development or activities are related to farming, forestry and other activities which need a rural location. Proposals will also be supported where the business has no negative implications for the area and will help to support a sustainable rural economy and contribute to rural environmental or social regeneration. Proposals for employment development in the countryside other than for tourism will be considered under Policy SS9: Development in the Countryside; that policy and Policy SDC1: Re-use of Buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside may also be apply to certain minor tourist developments. 
6.45 A healthy tourism economy can help sustainable economic growth in the District, building on both North East Derbyshire’s proud heritage and its location on the fringe of the Peak District. The visitor economy is a significant, growing and a resilient part of the District’s economy, supporting around 1,800 jobs and with annual expenditure well in excess of £100m.
34 
A strong tourism economy will help to support and maintain communities and community facilities, especially in rural areas, and maintain attractive environments. 
34 North East Derbyshire Housing & Economic Development Strategy 2015-2020. 
Renishaw HallNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034976.46 The Local Enterprise Partnership 
strategies both give attention to 
growing the tourism economy. In 
particular the visitor economy is 
one of eight key sectors of the D2N2 
Growth Plan. D2N2 is working on 
developing the visitor economy by 
increasing opportunities and markets. 
It is supporting ‘Visit Peak District and 
Derbyshire’ which has developed 6 aims 
within its own Growth Strategy.
6.47 The rural and tranquil nature of much of the District’s countryside is an important asset for residents and visitors. Therefore, development within 
the countryside needs to be compatible 
with its location in order to protect the 
area’s special character. It is important to ensure that all heritage and environmental assets are both protected and supported in appropriate ways to enable them to flourish. In particular, proposals should have regard to Policies in Chapter 8, Sustainable Development and Communities.
6.48 New tourist attractions will be directed to accessible and sustainable locations, particularly the main towns and larger settlements in order to expand the tourism offer in the District and encourage visitors to stay longer. Tourist development in settlements and on employment sites will be 
considered in the same way as other 
development, according to appropriate policies. Where it is appropriate, tourism development in less accessible locations will be resisted, except for small-scale accommodation, which should be focussed on the conversion of existing buildings and developments that contribute to rural diversification, enjoyment of the countryside, and access to heritage.
6.49 The Local Plan seeks to support sustainable rural tourism development which can be shown to benefit rural 
communities and businesses, and 
which respect the character of the 
countryside. Planning for tourism in rural areas of the District should make the most of the area’s rural assets, enriching and enhancing them, rather than harming the very character, quality and beauty that makes them attractive to visitors and residents. This can be achieved by ensuring that developments and levels of visitor activity are not likely to significantly affect key assets, including protected sites and species, landscape  
character and historic buildings and conservation area.
6.50 Visitor accommodation in rural areas, in suitable locations, can have a positive impact on the local economy. Appropriate conditions restricting this accommodation to holiday use will be applied, to avoid unsustainable residential development, or the provision of owner occupied second homes which are economically less beneficial and do not positively contribute to sustainable communities. 
Sutton Scarsdale HallNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203498Policy WC5: Visitor and Tourism Development 
1. Proposals for visitor and tourism development will be permitted where they would:
a.  Enhance the tourism offer within towns and villages;
b. Assist in the restoration and enhancement of the Chesterfield Canal;
c. Support the promotion of the District’s industrial heritage;
d. Support links with the Peak District National Park;
e.  Extend and/or upgrade the District’s Green Infrastructure and network of multi-
user trails; or
f.  Provide a viable and appropriate use for under-used buildings.
2. In all cases proposals will be expected to:
a. Be well located in relation to the local transport network and accessible by public 
transport;
b. Be of a scale that is compatible with the role of any nearby settlement;
c. Ensure that visitor numbers can be accommodated without detriment to the 
environment or the vitality of existing centres; 
d.  Respect local landscape character and the character and appearance of the open 
countryside; 
e.  Respect the site’s location through careful siting, scale, design and use of 
materials; and 
f. Not have a significant adverse impact on any environmental designation.
3.  Outside the Settlement Development Limits in countryside locations, proposals for 
new or extensions to existing visitor accommodation will be permitted where it is 
not used for permanent residential occupation.
4. Where development falls within the Green Belt the provisions of Policy SS10: North 
East Derbyshire Green Belt apply. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203499Policy WC6: Camping, Chalets, Caravans and Lodges in the 
Countryside
In addition to the requirements of Policy WC5, proposals for new and extensions to 
existing sites for camping, chalets, static (non-dwelling) and touring caravans, lodges 
and for caravan storage, will only be permitted where:
a. They are adequately screened all year round; and
b. They are laid out in a manner which would not adversely affect the character of the 
area; and
c. The materials and colour of the chalets and caravans, services and infrastructure are 
appropriately designed to reduce the visual impact of the proposal on the landscape; 
and
d. They do not significantly adversely affect the amenity of local residents. Camping, Chalets, Caravans and 
Lodges
6.51 The provision of visitor accommodation 
in the form of camping, chalets, lodges 
and caravans is an appropriate use 
within the Countryside and is subject to 
policy WC6. However, sites need to be 
well screened throughout the year, and 
designed and laid out to reduce their impact upon the countryside, landscape 
and neighbouring residents. They should 
ideally be located in areas that provide 
easy access to nearby settlements, 
which can also help to support local 
shops and services. Storage sites 
for touring caravans help to remove 
caravans from residential properties 
where they are often unsightly.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341007. Sustainable Places
Introduction
7.1 This chapter presents the most 
sustainable places within the district 
which are the towns of Clay Cross and 
Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh. It 
shows their specific characteristics and 
needs and points out their strengths 
and challenges.
Dronfield
7.2 Dronfield is the largest town in North 
East Derbyshire, and the only one with 
a railway station. Historically, Dronfield 
developed as two settlements; the 
principal one being on the hillside 
around the Parish Church and the 
secondary, more industrialised 
township, in the valley below, 
strung out along the River Drone and 
Chesterfield Road/Sheffield Road. It 
is highly constrained by the Green 
Belt that helps prevent Dronfield from 
merging with Unstone and in the wider 
context with Chesterfield, to the south, 
and Sheffield, to the north. As a retail 
and service centre it serves the needs 
of local residents and residents of the 
villages between the two major centres 
of Chesterfield and Sheffield. Dronfield 
also attracts passing trade from the 
B6057, although this is limited due to 
the A61 Dronfield-Unstone bypass. 
7.3 Dronfield has many positive assets, 
including two Conservation Areas 
(the town centre and a small area in 
Dronfield Woodhouse), together with 
a further Conservation Area in Coal 
Aston. The town also has a significant 
number of listed buildings, and low 
levels of deprivation, which together 
with the countryside setting make it 
an attractive place to live and work. 
The railway station is a highly valued 
transport facility both within Dronfield and for the district as a whole, 
providing excellent links to Sheffield 
and Chesterfield as well as locations 
further afield.
7.4 The Local Plan aims to direct 
new growth to the district’s most 
sustainable settlements based on the 
Settlement Hierarchy, and to Strategic 
Sites in suitable locations. Dronfield is 
the largest of the four towns within the 
district, and is an area of high demand 
for growth.  The tight constraints 
of the Green Belt have restricted 
development in recent years leading to 
rising house prices and unmet housing 
needs. The lack of available land within 
the existing settlement means that 
meaningful levels of housing growth 
could only be accommodated by looking 
around the edge of the town within 
the Green Belt. Two land parcels have 
been released from the Green Belt on 
the basis that they would cause least 
harm to the strategic functions of the 
Green Belt while delivering around 
200 dwellings by 2034. When adding 
completions and commitments this will 
amount to approximately 300 dwellings 
in total within the plan period.
DronfieldNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341017.5 Dronfield has got a reasonable mix of 
house types, although is perhaps lacking 
smaller properties (the proportion of 
terrace housing is below the district 
average). In terms of tenure, there 
is an imbalance, with only 10% social 
rented which is half the district 
average. This will be addressed through 
housing provision in order to establish 
a more balanced mixed and sustainable 
community.
7.6 The Recreation Survey 2017 shows that 
Dronfield is lacking in green space, 
children’s play spaces, outdoor youth 
facilities and allotment provision. This 
means that existing green spaces and 
recreation sites including large green 
spaces such as Sindelfingen Park, will 
need to be protected and new provision 
encouraged.
7.7 The Playing Pitch Strategy 2017 reveals 
for this area that present and future 
demand for all formal pitch sports 
either can be met or there is a small 
shortfall. In particular, there is no 
surplus of grass pitch provision in 
the north analysis area. In the main, 
shortfalls expressed can be met by 
improving pitch quality and through 
pitch reconfiguration. This means that 
existing outdoor sport facilities should 
be protected and in some cases the 
quality of sport facilities should be 
improved. 
7.8  Dronfield Sports Centre was refurbished 
in early 2017 when the existing 
leisure facilities were extended by 
a new two-storey fitness suite. This 
helps to meet increasing demand for 
health and fitness activities from local 
residents. The Indoor Sports Facilities 
Strategy 2017 recommends a continued 
programme of investment at Dronfield 
Sports Centre to ensure facilities 
remain as good as they can for as long 
as possible. Dronfield Town Centre
7.9 Based on Experian GOAD35 Data 2016, 
the Retail and Centres Study36 assessed 
the vitality and viability of Dronfield 
Town Centre in November 2016 which 
includes 34 retail units. Within the 
redefined town centre boundary as 
shown on the Policies Map, there are 5 
convenience stores which provide for 
more than half of all retail floorspace 
due to the large Sainsbury’s which is 
popular across the area. Dronfield also 
provides 12 comparison units and 15 
service units. There were only two 
vacant units with 2.7% of the total 
floorspace recorded which is below the 
UK average of 9%. The Dronfield Sports 
Centre is particularly popular which is 
the second most popular leisure centre 
across the study area. 
7.10 Almost 33% of respondents from Zone 
4 (Dronfield) of the NEMS household 
survey37 identified that they undertook 
their last main food and grocery 
shopping at the Sainsbury’s. Dronfield’s 
town centre is also popular for going 
out to bars, pubs, nightclubs and social 
clubs which is demonstrated by the fact 
that Dronfield is identified as the third 
most popular location in this category, 
behind Chesterfield and Sheffield. 
74.5% of the respondents said that they 
would travel to Dronfield by car, 5.5% 
by bus and 14.7% walked into the town 
centre. 
7.11 Dronfield Heritage Trust and the 
Town Council are both active and the 
initiatives such as the Barn project 
are positive additions to the town’s 
heritage and attractions. The market 
and historic aspects to the town are 
real opportunities, but the condition 
of the civic centre needs addressing 
in order to maintain the vitality and 
viability of the town centre.
35 Experian GOAD is a retail property intelligence system. 
36 Bolsover, Chesterfield and North East Derbyshire: Retail and Centres Study, January 2018.
37 NEMS Market Research Ltd household survey, November 2016.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034102Dronfield Regeneration 
Framework
7.12 In January 2017 the Council adopted a 
Regeneration Framework for Dronfield. 
This document was prepared together 
with local residents and identifies key 
opportunities for improvement within 
the town, sets a strategic approach to delivering improvements and attracting 
investment. It will also be used to 
coordinate the delivery of projects and 
ensure that they are of the highest 
quality. The Local Plan draws on the 
recommendations of the Regeneration 
Framework. Table 7.1 shows the 
Framework’s key themes and proposals:
Table 7.1: Dronfield Regeneration Framework Key Themes and 
Proposals
1. Access and movement
• Improvement of public transport through linked ticketing and timetabling between 
bus and rail as well as review of bus services within the town
• Improvements to Callywhite Lane Industrial Estate through improvement of the 
junction at Callywhite Lane/Chesterfield Road and provision of a new link road 
between the eastern end of Callywhite Lane and Chesterfield Road.
• Improvement of routes for safe walking and cycling.
• Improved public realm for High Street and Church Street, the Civic Centre and 
Dronfield Bottom – Station and Sheffield Road.
• Improved balance between car space and pedestrian space. This could be achieved 
through audit of vehicle speeds in town centre, improved facilities for pedestrians 
and an increase of the number of pedestrian crossings.
• Improvement of car parking through connection of the two town centre car parks 
and work with Network Rail to facilitate improvement of the station car park.
2. Green routes and spaces
•  Improve green routes and facilities through 
•  Mapping and auditing of existing cycleways and greenways 
•  Developing a ‘Connection Strategy’
•  Improved lighting and surfaces
•  Carrying out a feasibility study for a cycle route to new attractions such as Peak 
Resort
•  Improvement of the walking/cycling route to the stationNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341033. The Town Centre
•  Improve the Civic Square through:
• Improving the market offer
• Moving the Post Office to the Civic Centre
•  Re-surfacing and considering the planting of trees and shrubs
• New street furniture and improved lighting
• A new canopy to the shopping precinct.
• An increase of social use of the Civic Square.
• A wholesale redevelopment of the shopping precinct.
4. Heritage and Character
• Make more of existing heritage assets through:
• Review and consolidation of previous audits and studies of the town’s historic 
assets.
• Identifying historic buildings and spaces that would benefit from new uses.
• Making Dronfield’s history come alive for children and other residents and visitors, 
using on-line and other resources.
• Make the heritage assets work together through:
• Improving connections between the key clusters of buildings and spaces in the 
historic centre of Dronfield,
• Improvement of quality of streets and spaces to match the quality of historic 
buildings.
5. Community and Social Networks
• Raise awareness and increase participation through:
• A town team to maximise the benefits arising from the Peak Resort and Callywhite 
Lane Industrial Estate expansion proposals.
•  Improve co-ordination for smarter working through:
• Development of a virtual ‘platform’ for groups and networks to book rooms and 
physical space
• Connecting groups to allow more integration between them and to share/use 
resources more efficiently.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341047.13  Within the Dronfield Regeneration 
Framework new walking and cycling 
routes were considered which could run 
from the town centre to surrounding 
areas and within Dronfield to improve 
connectivity of the settlement. In 
line with that, Derbyshire’s Key Cycle 
Network identified two potential 
walking and cycling routes which are 
considered for delivery through the 
D2N2 Sustainable Travel Programme.  
These new routes are:
• East-west alignment from Callywhite 
Lane to Sindelfingen Park. This route would provide good connectivity 
between residential neighbourhoods, 
the town centre, railway station and 
Callywhite Lane Industrial Estate.
• North-south alignment along the B6057 between Dronfield and Unstone. This route would provide good connectivity between the town centre, Unstone and the planned Peak Resort. It could potentially link into the Callywhite Lane extension.
Peel Monument, DronfieldNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034105Policy SP1: Dronfield
1.  Dronfield will maintain its role as the social and economic focus of the North of the 
District. 
2. Provision for new housing will be made in line with Policy SS2 and employment land 
in accordance with Policies WC1, WC2 and WC3. 
3.  The efficient reuse of previously developed land within Dronfield will be encouraged, 
including sites within the Town Centre where such development would help to meet 
housing needs, including living above shops.
4. The Council will seek to facilitate the development of land for housing and 
employment, and will support proposals that provide infrastructure improvements 
required to unlock the development potential of sites.
5.  In order to maintain Dronfield’s role, the Council will: 
a.  Support proposals that maximise the benefits from, and protect and improve 
access to, the railway station;
b. Help to re-balance the local housing market through the provision of affordable 
housing in line with Affordable Housing Policies (LC2 & LC3);
c. Protect and enhance existing green space, children’s play spaces, outdoor youth 
facilities and allotments and outdoor and indoor sport facilities to meet identified 
demand;
d. Encourage proposals that facilitate the provision of new green space, children’s 
play spaces, outdoor youth facilities and allotments to meet identified shortfalls; 
and 
e. Encourage uses within the town centre that enhance the offer of the town as an 
evening destination, particularly leisure facilities.
6. Where appropriate development proposals will be expected to demonstrate how 
they contribute to the successful delivery of the Dronfield Regener ation Framework’s 
key themes and proposals set out in Table 7.1. In particular, the Council will support 
proposals that:
a. Improve the highway junctions at B6057 Chesterfield Road / B6158 Green Lane 
/ Callywhite Lane and A61 Bowshaw Roundabout and provide a new link road 
between the eastern end of Callywhite Lane and Chesterfield Road to improve 
access to Callywhite Lane;
b. Improve the public realm for High Street and Church Street, the Civic Centre/
Square and Dronfield Bottom – Station and Sheffield Road;
c. Extend the existing station car park and connect the lower civic centre car park so 
it becomes the town centre main parking area; 
d. Improve the existing network of footpaths and cycleways and link into the north-
south alignment along the B6057 between Dronfield and Unstone and the east-
west alignment from Callywhite Lane to Sindelfingen Park; and
e. Encourage suitable new uses for historic buildings which are unused or underused. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034106Figure 7.1: Dronfield Town Map
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034107Clay Cross
7.14 Clay Cross is located on the main A61 
corridor between Chesterfield and 
Alfreton, bordered to the east by the 
Midland Mainline railway, and the 
River Rother. To the west, there is very 
attractive and sensitive Peak fringe 
landscape, which is a recreational, 
visual and biodiversity asset.
7.15 Clay Cross has many positive assets 
with a good range of services and 
facilities, excellent bus routes 
and frequency of services, local 
employment opportunities, and a 
choice of development sites. It is a 
relatively modern town but with a rich 
heritage dating back to the nineteenth 
century and the development of 
coal mining and its links with George 
Stephenson. The town benefits from a 
historic core of Victorian buildings, with 
the best preserved historic buildings 
along High Street and Market Street, 
together with Clay Cross Hall and 
its parkland setting, protected with 
Conservation Area designation. There 
are larger commercial buildings to the 
north of the town which is where the 
former Biwaters site is located. The 
eastern and south eastern areas of 
the settlement are mainly residential 
in character. Sharley Park is a large 
attractive green space to the east 
of the town centre and a focus for 
recreation, containing a leisure centre, 
and sports facilities. It is also the 
location of a community hospital. 
7.16 The A61 is subject to congestion as it 
passes through Clay Cross, especially 
during peak hours and whenever there 
is congestion or disruption on the M1 
motorway. In 2010 protected schemes 
(in the Local Transport Plan) for a 
Market Street diversion in Clay Cross 
were ‘rescinded’, meaning that the 
County Council no longer intends to 
promote them and will not seek the 
protection of any land against other 
forms of development. 7.17 Whilst Clay Cross Railway Station is 
included in the Local Transport Plan 3 
as a project for further appraisal as a 
County Council scheme, it is not being 
actively pursued and is not included 
in the Derbyshire Infrastructure Plan. 
However, there may be opportunity to 
review the business case and realise 
the long term aspirations for a station 
at Clay Cross as the town grows in 
the future. As such the Plan through 
Policy SS4 seeks to ensure that the 
development of the Strategic Site 
Allocation at the former Biwaters site 
does not preclude the provision of rail 
access should the case for the station 
be established in the future. 
7.18 Clay Cross is the second largest town 
within the district and is an area of high 
demand for growth. Future residential 
development would also support and 
accelerate the regeneration of the 
town centre as laid out in the Clay 
Cross Regeneration Framework. A 
meaningful level of growth can be 
achieved by allocating housing sites 
within the settlement in close proximity 
to the town centre. When adding 
completions and commitments this 
will amount to approx. 460 dwellings 
until the end of the plan period. This 
figure excludes 825 new houses on the 
Biwaters Strategic Site.
Clay CrossNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341087.19 There is a significantly above average 
(District and national) percentage 
(31.4%) of social rented housing in Clay 
Cross, as set out in the Settlement Role 
and Function Study (2013 Update). A 
good balance of different housing types 
and tenures is important in maintaining 
a sustainable community. This could be 
achieved through implementation of 
the Biwaters scheme to the north and 
new housing development proposed in 
the south of Clay Cross. The town falls 
within the top 20% nationally of most 
deprived communities as identified 
in the national Indices of Multiple 
Deprivation. There are also issues 
that need addressing, including high 
unemployment despite the proximity 
of jobs, traffic congestion and better 
management and maintenance of some 
areas.
7.20 Clay Cross has an open space and 
recreation provision of 3.48 ha per 1000 
population. This figure is well above 
the district wide average. Clay Cross 
has a surplus of provision in terms of 
allotment gardens and green spaces; 
however, there is a shortfall in terms 
of informal recreational fields (and a 
slight shortfall of children play spaces 
and outdoor youth facilities). With the 
exception of Rugby Union, current and 
future demand for playing pitches is 
being met within the south analysis 
area. At Sharley Park, there is a new 
football playing pitch available for 
community use. However, overall there 
is not a surplus of provision. 
7.21 At present Sharley Park Leisure Centre 
is adequate in terms of its quantitative 
provision meeting community needs 
today; however, quality and condition 
are another matter.  The current 
facility is old and in need of investment 
if the Council is to maintain the current 
level of provision in the future.  This 
might mean refurbishment or provision 
of a new facility.Clay Cross Town Centre
7.22  In 2016, there were 84 retail units 
in the Town Centre of Clay Cross, 
compared to a total of 97 shops and 
services in 2008. Both, the numbers 
of convenience units (food) and 
comparison shops (non-food) have gone 
down. However, these figures do not 
include the latest retail developments 
of Tesco Extra at Bridge Street and the 
Aldi foodstore at High Street as they 
are not included in the Experian GOAD 
data map. Tesco Extra is a larger store 
which attracts many customers from 
Clay Cross and the surrounding area 
and was identified as being busier than 
the rest of the town centre. Currently, 
there are 44 service units in the centre 
which is a reduction of 3 units since 
2008. The leisure services sector is the 
strongest, particularly food and drink 
provision (19 units). The retail study 
identified that the number of vacant 
units has reduced from 9 to 7 units 
(8.3%) since 2008 but found that there 
were still some areas which were run 
down. 
7.23  However, local people asked about the 
town centre were generally content 
with shopping in the town. Almost 
half of the respondents of the NEMS 
household survey said that the main 
reason for visiting the town centre 
was the choice and range of shops. 
89% of respondents indicated that 
they travelled by car to Clay Cross. 
When asked about what measures 
would encourage visits to Clay Cross 
more often, 11.4% identified a better 
environment.
Clay Cross Regeneration 
Framework
7.24 In 2013, the Council adopted the 
updated Regeneration Framework for 
Clay Cross, with the vision that “Clay 
Cross will capitalise upon its unique 
location within the Sheffield City Region North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034109and proximity to the Peak District 
National Park to create a successful 
independent town.” The Local Plan 
draws on the recommendations of 
the Regeneration Framework which 
identified 5 action areas:
1. Town Centre: consolidating 
strengths.2. High Street: reinforcing gateways.
3. Bridge Street Triangle: develop 
potential.
4. The former Biwaters site: delivering 
21st century communities.
5. Coney Green: growing employment 
opportunities.
Table 7.2: Clay Cross Regeneration Framework Key Priorities and 
Projects
• Regeneration of the land and buildings north of Market Street.
•  Revision and improvement to the bus station to create an enhanced pedestrian 
environment.
•  Provision of a market square to create a hub to pedestrian routes.
•  Better physical links between public buildings - adult education centre, library, job 
centre and Citizens Advice Bureau.
•  Creation of a ‘Community Campus’ – grouping of civic and amenity facilities, hospital and 
leisure centre provide an important community hub facing onto Market Street. 
•  Arts/cultural and heritage/youth facilities if viable and sustainable.
•  Protection of existing urban quality in the conservation area. 
• High quality landscaping.
•  Quality office space to maintain existing and attract new businesses.
•  Implement town centre pedestrian priority.
•  Implement town centre parking accessed directly off A61.
•  A new route for the A6175 through the former Biwaters site to provide a direct link to the 
Coney Green end of Market Street.
• Developing town centre gateways on the A61 and Market Street.
•  Opportunity to improve the public realm and the shop fronts including personalising shops 
and restoring advertising signs.
•  Proposals for short term/temporary uses for vacant sites and shops will be encouraged 
and a flexible approach to uses will be taken where proposals offer street scene 
improvements.
•  Protection of the church of St. Bartholomew’s, including views.
•  Address the narrowness of the pavements on High Street.
•  Consistent improvements to boundary treatments and a common approach to business 
signage.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034110•  Develop Bridge Street Triangle as a retail and services area.
•  Develop additional outdoor sports and leisure facilities at Sharley Park.
•  Build upon the sports role of Egstow Park.
•  Extend Kenning Park up to Clay Lane providing improved connections to the town centre.
•  Secure the Railway Esplanade to deliver a high quality public realm spine planted with an 
avenue of trees that recreate the railway tunnel through the town.
• Focus public realm improvements including public spaces on the key movement routes, 
regeneration areas, and parks. 
• Preparation of development briefs for key sites.
One Public Estate Programme
7.25 The One Public Estate initiative is a 
national programme funded by the 
Cabinet Office and the Government 
Property Unit and delivered in 
partnership with the Local Government 
Association. It aims at supporting and 
funding councils to deliver property-
focused programmes and getting more 
from a Council’s collective assets. 
The programme’s main objectives are 
creating economic growth, delivering 
more integrated, customer-focused 
services and generating efficiencies 
through capital receipts and reduction 
of running costs. Derbyshire County 
Council is the lead authority for the 
North Midlands One Public Estate 
Programme (OPE) which also covers 
North East Derbyshire.
7.26 In October 2017, North East Derbyshire 
District Council and Derbyshire County 
Council secured funding for the OPE 
programme for an appraisal/feasibility 
study for Clay Cross Town Centre. 
The project area is centred around 
the town centre with the majority 
of the land and buildings in public 
ownership. It brings together the 
relevant public stakeholders (DCC, 
NEDDC, Clay Cross Parish Council, 
Rykneld Homes, Derbyshire Community 
Health Service, etc.) and looks at the 
existing services including the Leisure Centre, Library, Social Services, Adult 
Education, Countryside Services, 
Thriving Communities, Health and the 
Third Sector. It is considered that OPE 
funding presents an opportunity to 
rationalise the public estate through a 
locality review.
7.27 This work could be delivered through an 
appraisal/feasibility study which would 
be based on the findings of the 
Regeneration Framework. It would fully 
take into account the town centre’s 
heritage assets whilst welcoming 
potential contemporary additions to the 
built environment. The appraisal/
feasibility study would not only be 
about service delivery but will also 
have a strong focus on place-making 
and town centre regeneration.
Clay CrossNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034111Policy SP2: Clay Cross
1.  Clay Cross will maintain its role as the main social and economic focus of the South of 
the District.
2.  Provision for new housing will be made in line with Policy SS2 and employment land 
in accordance with Policies WC2 and WC3.
3.  Where appropriate, development proposals will be expected to demonstrate 
how they contribute to the successful delivery of the Clay Cross Regeneration 
Framework’s key priorities and projects set out in Table 7.2 and the One Public 
Estate’s regeneration and service programme. In particular, the Council will support 
proposals that:
a.  Reuse previously developed land within and on the edge of Clay Cross where 
appropriate, including sites within the Town Centre and living above shops; 
b.  Contribute to the refurbishment or re-development of Sharley Park Leisure 
Centre;
c.  Protect and provide outdoor sport facilities, children play spaces and outdoor 
youth facilities to reduce current shortfall;
d.  Protect, implement and maintain the route of the esplanade as shown on Map 7.2;
e.  Promote public transport and do not preclude the future provision of rail access;
f.  Protect and enhance the church of St Bartholomew’s including views to and from 
the church;
g.  Protect the existing urban quality within the conservation area;
h. Increase accessibility to town centre parking from the A61;
i.  Develop Bridge Street triangle as a retail-led opportunity area in accordance with 
Policy WC4;
j.  Take a flexible approach to uses to encourage proposals for development that will 
help to secure the regeneration of land north of Market Street;
k.  Improve the Public Realm by focusing on key movement routes, regeneration 
areas and the bus station;
l.  Encourage uses within the town centre that enhance the offer of the town as an 
evening destination, particularly arts and cultural uses and social/leisure facilities 
for young people; and
m. Continue to work with partners to deliver regeneration and place-making projects 
and innovative service delivery for the town centre to benefit the most deprived 
members of the community.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034112Figure 7.2: Clay Cross Town Map
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034113Eckington
7.28 Eckington is a small town, located 
to the east of Dronfield, close to the 
boundary with Sheffield to the north. 
The town centre serves the retail and 
service needs of residents from the 
town itself, as well as surrounding 
villages including Mosborough, Renishaw 
and Marsh Lane. The town centre has 
benefited in recent years from many 
improvements, including the resurfaced 
market street. The town also benefits 
from many historic buildings, protected 
by the Eckington and Renishaw 
Conservation Area. The town is 
surrounded by the Green Belt which 
limits development opportunities. 
7.29 Although there is a significant need for 
affordable housing in the Northern sub 
area, there is above average (District 
and national) percentage (29%) of social 
rented housing in Eckington, as set out 
in the Settlement Role and Function 
Study 2013 Update. There is a good 
balance of house types in Eckington, 
which will need to be maintained. In 
order to try to redress the imbalance in 
tenures it is very important to achieve 
the best mix on any sites that do 
come forward, either as allocations or 
windfalls.
7.30 Eckington is an area of high demand for 
growth.  The tight constraints of the 
Green Belt have restricted development 
in recent years leading to rising house 
prices and unmet housing needs. The 
lack of available land within the 
existing settlement means that 
meaningful levels of housing growth 
could only be accommodated by looking 
around the edge of the town within the 
Green Belt. Allocations, completions 
and commitments within the 
settlement will amount to 
approximately 210 dwellings within the 
plan period.7.31 Eckington has an open space and 
recreation provision of 3.03 ha per 
1000 population which is above the 
district wide average. The town has 
a surplus with regards to allotment 
provision and informal recreational 
fields compared to the Local Standard 
but a slight deficit of green space, 
children’s play spaces and outdoor 
youth facilities. For all pitch sports 
current and future demand is either 
being met or there is a small shortfall 
(at present only for Cricket). There is 
no surplus of grass pitch provision in 
the north analysis area. This means that 
the existing green space, recreation 
sites and outdoor sport facilities will 
need to be protected. The Playing Pitch 
Strategy also shows that the quality of 
some pitches should be improved in the 
future.
7.32 In Spring 2017, Eckington Swimming 
Pool was refurbished and re-opened to 
the public. The Indoor Sports Facilities 
Strategy recommends ensuring that 
programming at Eckington Swimming 
Pool complements other water facilities 
in the area (by focusing on swimming 
clubs, etc.) and that investment is 
continued to ensure that the facility is 
improved to better cater for modern 
standards. 
EckingtonNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034114Eckington Town Centre
7.33 Since the 2008 Retail Study the 
total number of shops and services 
dropped from 65 in 2008 to 51 in 
2016. Despite losses of convenience 
shops and comparison units, retail 
services (mainly within the health 
and beauty category) have gone up by 
three units. Eckington’s town centre 
is anchored by a single Co-operative 
Food Supermarket store which is one of 
only three convenience units (food) in 
the town centre. In the same period, 
the amount of vacant units has gone 
down from 16 units in 2008 to 7 units 
in 2016. Overall, Eckington has a well-
structured pedestrian focused main 
street which creates a welcoming urban 
environment. 
7.34 The NEMS household survey reflects the 
limits of the Eckington convenience 
and comparison offer; only 1.7% of 
respondents from Zone 5 (Eckington/ 
Killamarsh) said that they last went to the Co-operative Food Supermarket 
in town. The majority of respondents 
travelled to Eckington by car as the 
driver (66.9%) but notably 17.7% walked 
to the town centre. NEMS identified 
that the main reasons for visiting the 
town centre was choice of services 
(33.6%), how close it was to home 
(20.1%) and the choice or range of 
shops (19%).
Eckington Town Centre 
Development Framework
7.35 The Eckington Town Centre 
Development Framework, adopted as 
a Supplementary Planning Document 
(SPD) in May 2012, provides the context 
for the spatial approach to new 
development in the town centre taken 
by the Local Plan. The revitalisation of 
the town centre is the principal aim of 
the Eckington Framework. The Local 
Plan builds on the recommendations of 
the Framework and Table 7.3 shows the 
Framework’s Strategic Objectives.
Table 7.3: Eckington Framework Strategic Objectives
• To encourage the revitalisation of Eckington town centre with a distinctive and robust 
retail core.
•  To promote the heritage and tourism offer within Eckington whilst strengthening local 
identity and civic pride.
•  To create an attractive and legible network of streets, footpaths and spaces.
•  To encourage activity throughout the day within the town centre.
•  To promote a democratic centre - accessible to all and with facilities for all.
•  To provide diversity of compatible uses within the town centre.
•  To support local employers and employment initiatives which can stimulate development.
•  To integrate the town into its context through public transport and green links.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341157.36 The Eckington Framework identifies 
the main town centre development 
opportunities as the redevelopment 
of Northgate House, a reorganisation 
of the bus station to free up land off 
Pinfold Street, perhaps incorporating 
this with the land to the rear of Market Street, the Market Street (Foxes Yard) 
car park and rationalisation of the 
‘civic campus’ area (library, swimming 
pool etc.). It is important that these 
opportunities are capitalised upon 
within the Local Plan.
Policy SP3: Eckington
1.  Eckington will maintain its role as one of the towns in the northern sub-area of the 
District providing local services to its wider rural catchment area.
2.  Provision for new housing will be made in line with Policy SS2 and employment land 
in accordance with Policies WC2 and WC3.
3.  In order to maintain Eckington as a sustainable town, the Council will support 
proposals that: 
a. Protect and enhance existing green space, children’s play spaces and outdoor 
youth facilities; and
b.  Protect and enhance indoor and outdoor sports facilities
4.  Where appropriate development proposals will be expected to demonstrate how they 
contribute to the successful delivery of the Eckington Town Centre Development 
Framework’s Strategic Objectives set out in Table 7.3. In particular, the Council will 
support proposals that:
a.  Provide a mix of housing tenures including open market, private rented and 
affordable housing;
b.  Improve the accessibility of the town centre for pedestrians and cyclists;
c.  Incorporate public realm improvements within the town centre;
d.  Protect and enhance the role of the Civic Campus; 
e.  Facilitate the regeneration of Northgate House; and
f.  Promote, protect and enhance heritage assets including historic buildings and sites 
and their setting. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034116Figure 7.3: Eckington Town Map
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034117Killamarsh
7.37  Killamarsh is a small town, located in 
the north-east of the district, close 
to the boundaries with Sheffield and 
Rotherham. The town is well served by 
public transport, with regular buses to 
and from surrounding large urban areas 
of Sheffield, Rotherham, Chesterfield 
and Worksop. There are good links to 
the Super Tram network with buses to 
Crystal Peaks and Halfway in Sheffield.
7.38 The Chesterfield Canal, which was 
routed through Killamarsh, opened in 
1777 and played an important part in 
the social and economic development 
of Killamarsh up until its closure in 
the 1950’s. Currently, the canal route 
through Killamarsh is not navigable 
and some sections have been built 
upon. However it continues to act as 
an important recreation and green 
infrastructure route, along with the 
Trans Pennine Trail to the west of 
Killamarsh. The Council alongside other 
Partners (through the Chesterfield 
Canal Partnership) is committed to 
protecting the Chesterfield Canal as 
a recreational route and restoring it 
to full navigation, acknowledging the 
economic and regeneration benefits 
this can bring to communities along its 
length. 
7.39 In 2004, the Chesterfield Canal 
Partnership commissioned a study to 
analyse the social, environmental and 
economic costs and benefits of possible 
alternative routes through Killamarsh. 
Following extensive public consultation 
a preferred route to the east of the 
town centre was identified and was 
subsequently safeguarded in the 2005 
Local Plan, in order to protect the 
route from development that could 
prejudice the restoration of the 
Chesterfield Canal. 
7.40  The Chesterfield Canal Partnership 
has subsequently assessed the eastern 
alternative route which showed that problematic and extensive engineering 
requirements would be necessary. 
Consequently, a western alternative 
route has been identified which takes 
advantage of the re-development of 
the Tarran Bungalows. Following public 
consultation the Chesterfield Canal 
Partnership confirmed its preference for 
the new ‘western’ alternative route. As 
a consequence, both the original route 
through Killamarsh and the western 
alternative route are safeguarded in 
line with Policy ID9.
7.41  Killamarsh is an area of high demand 
for growth due to its close proximity to 
Sheffield. The tight constraints of the 
Green Belt have restricted development 
in recent years leading to rising house 
prices and unmet housing needs. The 
lack of sufficient available land within 
the existing settlement means that 
meaningful levels of housing growth 
could only be accommodated by looking 
around the edge of the town within the 
Green Belt. Following a review of the 
Green Belt a selection of land parcels 
have been released from the Green 
Belt.  These were selected on the basis 
that they would cause least harm to 
the strategic functions of the Green 
Belt while delivering approximately 
400 dwellings by 2034. When adding 
allocations within the settlement as 
well as completions and commitments 
this will amount to approximately 
KillamarshNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034118560 dwellings in total within the plan 
period.
7.42  The current housing stock is well 
balanced, with both type and tenure 
broadly in line with the district 
average. It is important to maintain 
this balance to ensure a sustainable 
community.
7.43 With regards to open space and 
recreation Killamarsh shows the lowest 
provision figures of the four towns with 
1.57 ha per 1000 population. Except 
for informal recreational fields and 
children’s play spaces which are above 
or in line with the Local Standard 
there is a considerable shortfall in 
green space, outdoor youth facilities 
and allotment provision. For all pitch 
sports current and future demand is 
either being met or there is a small 
shortfall. There is no surplus of grass 
pitch provision within the north analysis 
area. This means that the existing 
green space, outdoor youth facilities, 
allotments and playing pitches will 
need to be protected and if possible 
new provision added. 
7.44  Within the Indoor Sport Facilities 
Strategy Killamarsh Leisure Centre is 
rated as above average quality. The 
primary issue is ensuring its ongoing 
availability to the general public at 
the requisite level of quality and 
maintaining the quality and variety of 
the programme of activities provided.
Killamarsh Town Centre
7.45 The Retail and Centres Study states 
that since 2008, retail and service units 
in Killamarsh Town Centre have gone 
up slightly from 53 to 55 in 2016. There 
were five convenience shops in the 
town centre which is relatively small 
in size; the main foodstores were the 
Co-operative Food Supermarket, Aldi 
and Fulton Foods. 14.3% of respondents 
within Zone 5 of the NEMS household 
survey said that they last undertook their main food and grocery shopping 
at Aldi. Compared to 2008, the number 
of comparison shops (non-food) has 
dropped from 14 to 9 units (16.4%; UK 
average: 32.0%) which shows a lack of 
comparison goods variety. The town 
centre provides 31 services units in 
total; 11 of 17 retail service units are 
accounted to the health and beauty 
category. In 2008, there were 9 retail 
and service units vacant compared to 
only 6 vacant units in 2016.
7.46 81.8% of respondents of the NEMS 
household survey travelled by car to 
the town centre compared to 12.4% 
who travelled by foot. NEMS identified 
that the main reasons for visiting 
Killamarsh were the choice and range 
of shops (31.5%), the strength of the 
supermarket provision (25.7%) and how 
close it was to home (21.6%).
Killamarsh Regeneration 
Framework
7.47  In January 2017 the Council adopted a 
Regeneration Framework for Killamarsh. 
This document was prepared together 
with local residents and identifies key 
opportunities for improvement within 
the town, sets a strategic approach to 
delivering improvements and attracts 
investment. It will also be used to 
coordinate the delivery of projects and 
ensure that they are of the highest 
quality. The Local Plan draws on the 
recommendations of the Regeneration 
Framework. Table 7.4 shows the 
Framework’s key themes and proposals.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034119Table 7.4: Killamarsh Regeneration Framework Key Themes and 
Proposals
1. Access and movement
• Improved public realm for Sheffield Road and Bridge Street through removal of 
clutter, improved lightening/street furniture and re-surfacing.
• Speed reduction measures to the east and south of the town.
• Improvement of car parking in the town centre.
• Improvement of footpath quality through housing areas through review of condition 
of surfaces and maintenance, lightening and litter.
• Improvement of facilities for pedestrians and cyclists through audit of pavements 
and pedestrians crossings, improvement of access for people with mobility issues and 
identification of improvements of the street scene.
2. Green routes and spaces
•  Improvement of access to Rother Valley Country Park through audit of existing routes 
and identification of improvements.
•  Creating and connecting greenways through and around the village, in particular a 
major new greenway around the western edge of the town.
•  Improvement of parks and green spaces through audit of green spaces and play 
spaces, preparation of a programme of improvements and creation of a “family 
activity” area on the east side of the town.
3. The Town Centre
•  Improvement of appearance and attraction of the centre through promoting the 
‘Cleaner Killamarsh’ campaign, increase of police presence, promotion of a face-lift 
of the precinct and local business support.
• Improved environment of the Community Campus through re-introduction of a direct 
access to the Sports and Community Centre from Sheffield Road, new street furniture, 
signs and lighting and preparation of a tree planting and landscape scheme.
•  Comprehensive re-development of the Community Campus. This could be achieved if 
other uses such as affordable or sheltered housing would be included.
•  Provision of additional facilities for younger people through a new youth shelter at 
the skate park and creation of a drop-in centre/youth club/skills and training centre.
4. Heritage and Character
•  Promotion and interpretation of Killamarsh’s heritage through co-ordination of local 
knowledge.
•  Improvement of key aspects of Killamarsh’s industrial heritage to bring historic 
buildings back in to use and identify funding.
• Development of a western greenway to interpret the heritage of the town.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341205. Community and social networks
•  Raising awareness, connecting groups and increasing participation.
•  Link levels of local government and other service providers.
• Support community action to preserve local history and heritage.
•  Address environmentally and socially negative behaviour.
Policy SP4: Killamarsh
1.  Killamarsh will maintain its role as one of the towns in the northern sub-area of the 
District providing local services to its wider rural catchment area.
2.  Provision for new housing will be made in line with Policy SS2 and for employment 
land in accordance with Policies WC2 and WC3.
3.  In order to maintain Killamarsh as a sustainable town with a healthy vibrant centre, 
the Council will support proposals that: 
a. Protect and facilitate the provision and improvement of green space, outdoor 
youth facilities, allotments and outdoor sport facilities to address identified 
deficiencies; and
b.  Facilitate the restoration of the Chesterfield Canal and upgrade the towpath 
through Killamarsh along the original route or the western alternative route as 
defined by Policy ID9.
4. Where appropriate development proposals will be expected to demonstrate how they 
contribute to the successful delivery of the Killamarsh Regeneration Framework’s 
key priorities and projects set out in Table 7.4. In particular, the Council will support 
development that would:
a.  Improve the public realm for Sheffield Road, Bridge Street and the Community 
Campus; 
b.  Improve the appearance and maintenance of the Town Centre;
c.  Support new social infrastructure on or the comprehensive redevelopment of the 
Community Campus; 
d.  Promote more efficient use of car parking in the town centre;
e.  Secure improvements to pavements, pedestrian crossings, footpaths and cycleways 
to encourage walking and cycling in and around the town centre and connect to 
the Canal and Rother Valley Country Park;
f.  Secure a major new greenway around the western edge of Killamarsh; and
g.  Support initiatives/projects to bring historic buildings back into use.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034121Figure 7.4: Killamarsh Town Map
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341228. Sustainable Development 
and Communities 
Introduction
8.1 National planning policy makes it clear 
that local plans should reflect the 
presumption in favour of sustainable 
development and Policy SS1 in Chapter 
4 responds to this requirement.
8.2 This chapter supplements this 
policy by setting out the Council’s 
planning approach on a range of 
issues underpinned by the principles 
of sustainable development. This 
includes a number of policies in 
relation to protecting and enhancing 
the environment, addressing climate 
change, and delivering successful 
development to achieve sustainable 
patterns and forms of development at 
the local level.
Protecting & Enhancing the 
Environment
Re-Use and Conversion of 
Buildings in the Green Belt and 
Countryside
8.3 The re-use and conversion of existing 
buildings can help to provide new job 
opportunities and homes in rural areas. 
It also re-uses existing resources and 
reduces the pressure for new buildings 
in the countryside. Consequently, as 
an exception to the restrictions on 
development in the Green Belt and the 
countryside the re-use, conversion or 
adaptation of agricultural and other 
rural buildings for new uses will be 
acceptable in principle provided that 
the criteria in Policy SDC1 are met. 
Proposals involving the re-use and conversion of buildings within the 
Green Belt will also need to comply 
with Policy SS10.
8.4 However, not all buildings in the 
Green Belt and countryside are 
suitable for conversion as they may 
be of in-substantial construction, of 
poor design or not in keeping with 
their surroundings. Buildings to be 
converted should be structurally 
sound and proposals which require 
major alterations, adaptations or re-
construction will not be acceptable. 
Structural surveys may be required in 
order to demonstrate that a building 
is structurally sound and capable of 
re-use. Where re-use is appropriate in 
principle, it is important to ensure that 
the resultant form, bulk and general 
design of the building is in keeping 
with its surroundings and the overall 
character and quality of the building 
is retained. Proposals which involve 
rebuilding, rather than re-use, will 
be regarded as new dwellings in the 
countryside and will not be permitted.
8.5 The conversion of buildings in rural 
areas to uses not originally intended 
in their design can result in visual 
intrusion and/or increased traffic and 
activity with consequential adverse 
impacts on the countryside. The council 
will seek to ensure that any proposal is 
appropriate for both the building itself 
and the area in which it is located. 
Proposed new uses should preserve the 
openness and character of the Green 
Belt or countryside. 
8.6 The reuse of agricultural buildings 
can result in the need for new farm 
buildings elsewhere on a farm or North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034123inappropriate outside storage of 
materials, machinery and/or vehicles. 
In certain areas new farm buildings and 
outside storage can adversely affect the 
landscape and it may be appropriate 
to control their proliferation by using 
planning conditions or negotiating a 
planning obligation.
8.7 Many rural buildings can also be 
habitats for a variety of wildlife 
including bats and barn owls. These 
species are sensitive to disturbance and 
therefore at risk from building works. 
They are also protected under separate 
legislation38, with bats being afforded 
additional protection39. Therefore, an 
ecological survey will be required 
where species are protected by 
legislation or priority species listed 
under law40 have the potential to be 
present.
38 Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. 
39 Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2010. 
40 Section 41 of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006.
Policy SDC1: Re-use and Conversion of Buildings in the 
Green Belt and Countryside
Proposals for the re-use and conversion of buildings in the Green Belt and Countryside 
will be permitted provided that:
a. they are of permanent and substantial construction;
b. they are structurally sound, and capable of re-use without major alterations, 
adaptations or re-construction;
c. their form, bulk and design is, or can be made to be, in keeping with their 
surroundings;
d. conversion or adaptation will not be detrimental to the character of the building 
itself or its setting;
e. they preserve the openness and character of the Green Belt and Countryside;
f. the new use would not result in replacement farm buildings or inappropriate outside 
storage of any materials, machinery and / or vehicles that would cause harm to the 
Green Belt and Countryside; and
g. provision is made for nesting boxes and roosts for protected species such as barn 
owls and bats, where appropriate.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034124Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows
8.8 Trees, woodland and hedgerows are key 
features which can define landscape 
character and contribute to the quality 
and enjoyment of the environment. 
They can have great nature 
conservation, amenity and recreational 
value, as well as help to reduce noise 
and atmospheric pollution.
8.9 The district contains areas of woodland 
including ancient woodland (semi- 
natural and replanted) dating from the 
Middle Ages or earlier, and a substantial 
number of scattered trees in rural 
and urban areas. Some of the most 
important concentrations of ancient 
semi-natural woodland are within the 
Moss Valley, which is designated as a 
SSSI, around Ogston Reservoir, and to 
the south of Holymoorside. Trees and 
woodlands take many years to mature 
and so ancient woodlands, aged and 
veteran trees, and wooded pasture 
and parkland in particular are an 
irreplaceable resource. Development 
proposals that would result in the loss, 
or damage, to aged or veteran trees, or 
areas of mature or ancient woodland, 
or wooded pasture and parkland will 
not normally be permitted. 
8.10 Other individual trees, tree groups 
and woodland can also be, and often 
are, protected by Tree Preservation 
Orders. Protection is also given if they 
are located in a Conservation Area. 
When necessary, the Council will use 
Tree Preservation Orders as a means 
of protection if their loss would be 
significant in landscape, visual amenity 
or nature conservation terms. In 
addition, the Hedgerow Regulations 
1997 afford special protection to 
substantial hedgerows which are 
considered to be ‘irreplaceable’ due 
to their age, and their archaeological, 
historical, landscape or wildlife 
significance.8.11  Other trees, woodlands and 
hedgerows worthy of protection are 
similarly sensitive to the impacts of 
development, either directly through 
their removal or indirectly through 
the impacts of construction. Due to 
the contribution they can make to the 
quality of development, they should 
always be considered at the outset of 
the design process, and retained and 
protected, wherever possible.
8.12 Where their loss is unavoidable they 
should be replaced with suitable new 
planting either within the site or in the 
locality, if this is more appropriate. 
Development can make a positive 
contribution to the local tree and 
hedgerow resource through new 
planting or the restoration and 
improved management of existing 
features. Planting schemes which use 
species and varieties native to the 
area, of local provenance wherever 
possible, and that maximise the 
benefits to the local landscape, 
wildlife, and air quality will be 
preferred.
Ridgeway/ Moss ValleyNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034125Policy SDC2: Trees, Woodland and Hedgerows
1.  Proposals for development should provide for the protection and integration of 
existing trees, woodland and hedgerows for their wildlife, landscape, and/or amenity 
value.
2.  Development that would result in the unacceptable loss of, or damage to, or threaten 
the continued well-being of protected trees, hedgerows, orchards, veteran trees or 
woodland (including those not protected but considered worthy of protection), will 
not be permitted.
3.  Where trees, woodland or hedgerows will be lost to development and this is 
considered to be acceptable, suitable replacement planting on-site where it is 
practicable to do so, or off-site if not, will be required.
4.  New planting which uses species and varieties native to the area, of local provenance 
wherever possible, and that maximise the benefits to the local landscape, wildlife 
and air quality will be preferred.
Landscape Character
8.13 The character of the District’s 
landscape is one of contrast and 
diversity. The western part of the 
District extends up to and into the edge 
of the Peak District National Park, and 
comprises a highly scenic landscape 
with rolling hills, river valleys, 
extensive woodland and small 
attractive villages, including some of 
the finest Derbyshire landscape outside 
the National Park. In contrast the 
eastern part of the District contains 
larger settlements and alongside 
evidence of their industrial past are 
large areas of attractive countryside 
where the landscape has its own 
distinctive local character.
8.14  The beauty and diversity are 
important both to the quality of 
life of local communities and the 
economic prosperity of the District as 
a whole often being a central factor 
in attracting business and tourism. 
National policy states that valued 
landscapes should be protected and 
enhanced41, and requires Local Plans to include criteria based policies against 
which proposals for any development 
on or affecting local landscape areas 
will be judged42.
8.15  The characteristics of the District’s 
landscape are assessed in detail in ‘The 
Landscape Character of Derbyshire’ 
which is supported by the ‘Derbyshire 
Historic Landscape Characterisation 
Study’. The assessment systematically 
classifies the landscape into distinctive 
areas based on the interaction between 
a range of factors including topography, 
geology, ecology, soils, land use and 
tree cover. The Derbyshire Landscape 
Character Area Assessment subdivides 
41 NPPF(2012), paragraph 109, 1st bullet.
42 NPPF(2012), paragraph 113.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034126the district into 12 Landscape Character 
Types (LCT’s) over 4 National Character 
Areas (NCA’s) (see Table 8.1 & Figure 
8.1).
8.16  A part of the far west of the District lies 
within the Peak District National Park 
which has its own separate landscape 
character assessment. If the special 
qualities of the National Park are to be 
protected, careful control needs to be 
exercised over development outside, 
but which may have a harmful impact 
upon it. Proposals should therefore take 
account of the adopted Peak District 
National Park Authority Landscape 
Strategy and Action Plan, and will not 
be permitted when it is considered to 
be harmful to the valued characteristics 
of the National Park, or its statutory 
purposes namely to conserve and 
enhance its natural beauty, wildlife and 
cultural heritage, and to promote 
opportunities for the understanding and 
enjoyment of the special qualities of 
national parks by the public. Where 
proposals would result in conflict 
between the two purposes, the council 
will attach greater weight to the 
former.8.17 Using the approach of Landscape 
Character Assessment, Derbyshire 
County Council has identified ‘Areas 
of Multiple Environmental Sensitivity’ 
(AMES) based upon three key indicators 
- ecology, historical landscape and 
visual unity. 
8.18 The Study identifies Areas of ‘Primary 
Sensitivity’43, considered to be the 
most sensitive areas of landscape, and 
which are most likely to be negatively 
affected by change or development. In 
these areas, there will be a strong focus 
on the protection and conservation 
of their environmental assets. Areas 
of ‘Secondary Sensitivity’ are still 
considered to have environmental 
sensitivities but are potentially weaker 
in one area. In these areas, the focus 
will be on management (conservation 
and enhancement), maintaining 
those features of existing value but 
also addressing those in decline 
(e.g. through landscape restoration 
and habitat creation). In North East 
Derbyshire, the AMES study identifies 
the key areas of primary sensitivity in 
the Peak Fringe. In addition within this 
landscape context Derbyshire County 
Council has prepared a tranquillity 
map for Derbyshire44. This map 
which expresses locally the spread 
of tranquillity will be a material 
consideration when determining 
proposals under Policy SDC3.
8.19 For proposals where it is considered 
the development would be sensitive in 
the landscape the council will expect 
applicants to submit a Landscape and 
Visual Impact Assessment with planning 
applications; in order to demonstrate 
how the development would impact 
upon the local and wider landscape. 
43 Where a Landscape Description Unit is recorded as significant for all three of the data sets (ecology , historic landscape environment and 
visual unity) then it is considered to be of Primary Sensitivity . If a Landscape Description Unit is recorded as being significant in 2 data sets than 
it is considered to be of Secondary Sensitivity. 
44 Technical Support Document 2: Tranquillity (2013).Big MoorNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034127Table 8.1: Landscape Character Types
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034128Figure 8.1: Landscape Character Map of Derbyshire
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034129Figure 8.2: Areas of Multiple Environmental Sensitivity
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034130Policy SDC3: Landscape Character
1.  Proposals for new development will only be permitted where they would not cause 
significant harm to the character, quality, distinctiveness or sensitivity of the 
landscape, or to important features or views, or other perceptual qualities such as 
tranquillity.
2.  Development proposals should be informed by, and be sympathetic to, the distinctive 
landscape areas identified in the Derbyshire Landscape Character Assessment and the 
Areas of Multiple Environmental Sensitivity (AMES), or any successor document(s), 
and contribute, where appropriate, to the conservation and enhancement, or 
restoration and re-creation of the local landscape taking into account its wider 
landscape character type.
3.  Planning permission will not be granted for development outside the Peak District 
National Park which would damage or significantly affect the National Park purposes 
or its valued characteristics.
Biodiversity and Geodiversity
8.20  Biodiversity is defined as the variety 
and diversity of life-forms and the 
role that they play in the natural 
world. Biodiversity includes all 
species of plants and animals and the 
natural systems that support them. 
Geodiversity is the variety of rocks, 
minerals, fossils, landforms, sediments 
and soils, together with the natural 
processes which form and alter them.
8.21  The NPPF states that the planning 
system should contribute to and 
enhance the natural and local 
environment by:
• Recognising the wider benefits of 
ecosystems services (i.e. in terms 
of food, water, and recreation, for 
example);
•  Minimising the impact of 
development on biodiversity, and 
•  Providing net gains in biodiversity, 
where possible, so as to contribute 
to halting the overall decline in 
biodiversity.458.22 The Plan area has a rich biodiversity 
which comprises a network of 
nationally, regionally, and locally 
designated sites important for their 
nature conservation and geodiversity 
value. It contains:-
•  7 Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI) - which are nationally 
recognised for their wildlife and 
geological interest;
• Just over 200 Local Wildlife 
Sites (LWS) – which are the most 
important non-statutory wildlife 
sites in Derbyshire and cover a wide 
variety of habitats such as ancient 
woodland, grassland and wetlands - 
the value of which is recognised in 
the Lowland Derbyshire Biodiversity 
Action Plan. The Action Plan 
identifies the most important species 
and habitats in Derbyshire outside 
the Peak Park and is a key document 
to underpin the application of Policy 
SDC4.
45 NPPF(2012), paragraph 109, 2nd & 3rd bullet pointsNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034131• 2 Local Nature Reserves (LNR’s) – 
Williamthorpe Ponds on the edge 
of Holmewood, and The Green 
at Wessington – which have been 
declared for the benefit of both 
people and wildlife, and offer 
convenient access for people to 
enjoy and learn about nature. Both 
are also LWS’s; and
• A number of Regionally Important 
Geological Sites (RIGS) identified 
by Derbyshire County Council as 
the most important places for geology and geomorphology outside statutorily protected sites such 
as SSSI’s. Like wildlife sites they 
are important as an educational, 
historical and recreational resource.
8.23 In order to prevent the degradation of the district’s biodiversity and geodiversity resource, designated sites will be protected, and development proposals must demonstrate they do not cause adverse impacts, whilst contributing to their qualitative improvements through better access or on-site improvements. Proposals for development should seek to conserve biodiversity and geodiversity, and actively enhance biodiversity in order to provide quantifiable net gains wherever possible and avoid a net loss in biodiversity. The Council will therefore seek to ensure new development maintains, enhances and extends the district’s ecological network and avoids the fragmentation and isolation of natural habitats. Maintaining and planting trees and creating new habitats through green infrastructure will be supported.8.24  In addition, outside the Plan area 
are designated sites of international 
importance for nature conservation 
including the Peak District Moors 
Special Protection Area (SPA), the 
South Pennine Moors Special Area of 
Conservation, and the Peak District 
Dales SAC. These SPA’s and SAC’s are 
afforded the highest level of protection 
in order to conserve the priority 
habitats and species that exist within 
them. Although falling outside the Plan 
area the council has a duty to ensure 
that all the activities it regulates have 
no adverse effects on the integrity of 
these internationally designated sites. 
8.25 Policy SDC4 therefore applies to all development proposals within the district affecting biodiversity and geodiversity including sites of international importance for nature conservation located outside the district. All statutory and non-statutory sites within the Plan area covered  
by Policy SDC4 are shown on the Policies Map.
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034132Policy SDC4: Biodiversity and Geodiversity
The Council will protect and enhance the District’s natural environment and seek to 
increase the quantity and quality of biodiversity and geodiversity by:
a.  Protecting designated national and local sites of nature conservation importance and 
geodiversity value including SSSI’s, LNR’s, LWS’s, and RIGS’s as shown on the Policies 
Map. Development proposals affecting designated sites will not be permitted unless 
it can be demonstrated that significant harm can be avoided, mitigated, or as a last 
resort, compensated for by the development. Any proposed development that would 
be likely to adversely affect designated SSSI’s will not be permitted. 
b.  Promoting the qualitative enhancement of all sites of biodiversity and geodiversity 
value (including designated SSSI’s, LNR’s, LWS’s and RIGS’s, and other sites with 
protected and priority species) by supporting measures that improve wildlife 
habitat connectivity and create new wildlife habitats. Such measures could include 
maintaining trees, native vegetation and improving green infrastructure for the 
benefit of wildlife. 
c.  Not permitting development which would adversely affect the integrity of designated 
sites of international importance for nature conservation (SPA’s and SAC’s) located 
outside of the Plan area; except for imperative reasons of overriding public interest, 
and only where adequate compensatory measures are provided. 
The Historic Environment
8.26  National planning guidance advises that 
local planning authorities should set out 
a positive strategy for the conservation 
and enjoyment of the historic 
environment, including heritage assets 
most at risk through neglect, decay or 
other threats.
8.27  North East Derbyshire is fortunate to 
have a wealth of heritage assets which 
are a unique and irreplaceable resource 
and valued by local communities 
throughout the District. An overview 
of the historic environment is set 
out in the 2012 Historic Environment 
Study and the subsequent addendum 
to it. Statutory designation requires 
the assessment of the importance 
of specific heritage values such as 
those relating to architectural or 
historical interest; but decisions 
about day to day management need 
to take account of all the values that contribute to significance. Moreover, 
all aspects of significance, including 
aesthetic and communal values should 
influence decisions about the historic 
environment. 
8.28  The Derbyshire County Council 
maintained Historic Environment 
Record also contains a large number 
of known non-designated assets that 
contribute to the local distinctiveness 
of the district. It is important to 
recognise that these heritage assets are 
an irreplaceable resource which should 
be conserved in a manner appropriate 
to their significance. The Council 
believes that a positive and proactive 
strategy should be established for 
the conservation, enjoyment and 
if possible enhancement of the 
historic environment which includes 
both designated and non-designated 
heritage assets, and industrial heritage, 
including those considered most at risk 
of neglect, decay and other threats.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034133Conservation Areas
8.29 Conservation areas are those parts of 
the district which have been recognised 
as having special architectural or 
historic interest which is worthy of 
preservation and enhancement. When 
considering planning applications for 
developments within them, a duty is 
placed on the local planning authority 
to pay special attention to the 
desirability of preserving or enhancing 
the character or appearance of the 
conservation area.
8.30 Designation of an area as a 
conservation area does not mean 
that no change or development will 
be allowed, but rather that new 
buildings and uses should respect the established character of the 
area. In making judgements about 
the impact of development on the 
significance of a conservation area 
the council will use its Conservation 
Area Appraisal where one has been 
prepared. Such an appraisal will have 
considered those features that make 
a positive or negative contribution to 
the significance of the conservation 
area and will be a useful tool to 
identify the opportunities for beneficial 
change or the need for protection 
within them. Policy SDC5 aims to 
ensure that conservation areas do 
not stifle development, but that new 
development complements the existing 
character of these special townscapes.
Policy SDC5: Development within Conservation Areas
1. Development proposals within or impacting upon Conservation Areas will be 
permitted where they preserve or enhance the character or appearance of the area 
and its setting.
2. Development proposals will be considered in relation to how well the design and 
location of the proposal has taken account of:
a. The development characteristics and context of the area, in terms of important 
buildings, spaces, landscapes, walls, trees, and views within, into or out of the 
area; and
b. The form, scale, size and massing of nearby buildings, together with materials of 
construction.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034134Listed Buildings
8.31 Listed Buildings are those that appear 
on the Secretary of State’s ‘List of 
Buildings of Special Architectural or 
Historic Interest’, prepared by the 
Department for Digital, Culture, Media 
and Sport. In England the statutory 
body responsible for maintaining ‘the 
list’ is Historic England. The National 
Heritage List for England (NHLE) is the 
only official and up to date database of 
all listed and designated heritage sites.
8.32  Listed buildings are grouped into 
three grades, indicating their relative 
importance. In the district there are 
just under 500 listed buildings with 2% 
being Grade I, 5% being Grade II* (two-
star) and 93% being Grade II Listed. All 
three grades are subject to the same 
legislation.8.33  The listing of a building confers on 
it a significant degree of protection 
and special attention must be paid 
to maintain the character of listed 
buildings. Permission, in the form of 
Listed Building Consent, is also required 
for any works of demolition, extension, 
or alteration which affect the character 
of the building as one of special 
architectural or historic interest. This 
Consent is entirely separate from any 
need to obtain planning permission.
Policy SDC6: Development affecting Listed Buildings
1.  Proposals for alterations to or changes of use of a listed building will be supported 
where they preserve the significance of the heritage asset and its setting including 
impacts on the character, architectural merit or historic interest of the building.
2.  Proposals should use materials, layout, architectural features, scale and design that 
respond to and do not detract from the listed building.
3.  Proposals which allow for viable uses that are compatible with the conservation of 
the fabric of the building and its setting will generally be supported.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034135Scheduled Monuments and 
Archaeology
8.34 The District contains a wealth of 
archaeological remains which constitute 
an irreplaceable resource for, and 
record of, the District’s evolution. If 
properly protected and managed they 
will contribute greatly to understanding 
the past, and contribute to the 
district’s tourism and recreational 
potential. To protect the integrity of 
archaeological remains, preservation 
should take place in situ wherever 
possible.
8.35 The Derbyshire Historic Environment 
Record (HER) is maintained and 
updated by Derbyshire County Council 
and contains details of all known sites, 
structures, landscapes or other areas 
of archaeological interest in North East Derbyshire. The HER should be 
consulted on all planning applications 
within or near to areas of known 
archaeological interest.
8.36 The District also includes a number 
of Scheduled Monuments. These 
are remains, buildings or structures 
of national importance protected 
under the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act, 1979. Any 
work affecting a monument will require 
Scheduled Monument Consent from 
Historic England, in addition to any 
permissions or consents required from 
the Council under the Planning Acts.
8.37 Policy SDC7 provides policy at the local 
level and aims to ensure that these 
important sites are preserved and 
where possible enhanced.
Policy SDC7: Scheduled Monuments and Archaeology
1.  Proposals for development that affect heritage assets with archaeological interest 
will be permitted provided that it can be demonstrated that the development will 
not be harmful to the archaeological interest of the heritage assets or their settings, 
having regard to their significance.
2.  Where development proposals are likely to affect non-designated heritage assets of 
archaeological interest, the developer should submit sufficient information to allow 
the significance of the asset and the potential impact of the proposals thereon to be 
understood. In some cases this will require archaeological desk based assessment 
and/or field evaluation of the site which should be submitted as part of the 
development proposal and undertaken by a suitably qualified archaeologist.
3.  Preservation in situ of archaeological sites or remains is the preferred option. 
However, where assessment shows preservation in situ is not justified provision 
should be made for excavation and recording before demolition, disturbance or 
removal takes place.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034136Registered Parks and Gardens
8.38  In addition to buildings and 
archaeological sites, parks and gardens 
make a contribution to the historic 
environment. One such area included 
on Historic England’s Register of 
Historic Parks and Gardens of special 
historic interest is the park and gardens 
associated with Renishaw Hall.8.39  Policy SDC8 aims to ensure that this 
asset is preserved, whilst development 
proposals which conserve, and 
opportunities to enhance the character, 
appearance and significance of such 
assets are treated positively.
Policy SDC8: Registered Parks and Gardens
1.  Proposals for development that affect Renishaw Hall Registered Park and Garden 
including its setting will be granted provided that they would conserve or enhance 
the historic layout, character, designed features and principal components which 
contribute to its significance.
2.  Proposals which seek to restore or reinstate its historic landscape features to original 
designs, using appropriate evidence, or better reveal its setting will be encouraged
Non Designated Local Assets
8.40 In addition to the above designated 
historic assets the district contains a 
number of buildings, structures and 
facades that, whilst not nationally 
considered suitable for statutory listing 
or having the protection conferred 
by being situated with a conservation 
area, nonetheless have local historic 
or architectural importance to warrant 
retention and protection.8.41 The Government recognises such 
heritage assets as noted in its guidance 
(NPPF), and the Council will aim to 
identify and establish a list of locally 
important buildings and structures.
8.42 Policy SDC9 below aims to ensure 
that these assets are preserved, 
whilst development proposals which 
conserve and take the opportunity to 
enhance the character, appearance and 
significance of such assets are treated 
positively.
Policy SDC9: Non-designated Local Heritage Assets
1. Proposals for development that affect a non-designated local heritage asset will be 
permitted provided that they positively sustain or enhance the significance of the 
asset, its features, character and setting.
2.  Proposals involving the loss of or harm to, a local heritage asset will be subject to a 
balanced assessment taking account of the significance of the asset and the scale of 
the harm or loss.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034137Mitigating and Adapting to 
Climate Change
Decentralised, Renewable and 
Low Carbon Energy Generation
8.43 Climate change is now a widely 
accepted scientific fact. The 
Government has reviewed the 
delivery of national energy policies 
and has recognised that there are 
two major long term challenges to 
tackling climate change and delivering 
secure, clean energy at an affordable 
price. Renewable energy sources are 
key to a sustainable, economic and 
environmental future. The development 
of clean sources of electricity is 
essential to cutting down carbon 
dioxide emissions which is a major 
contributor to climate change and 
global warming.
8.44 The 2008 Climate Change Act was 
published with the aim of encouraging 
Britain’s transition to a low carbon 
economy, with this to be done through 
unilateral legally binding emissions 
reduction targets. 
8.45 National guidance sets out the 
Government’s commitment to 
facilitating the development of 
renewable energy sources, but 
recognises that this must be consistent 
with protecting the local as well as 
global environment. In particular, care 
should be taken in assessing proposals 
for renewable energy projects in 
sensitive, designated areas.
8.46 The North East Derbyshire Low Carbon 
& Renewable Energy Study (2011) 
assessed the potential for renewable 
energy technologies, and identified 
where there are significant constraints 
to particular types of renewable energy. 
In terms of wind energy the Study found 
that the practical deployable potential 
for wind energy is limited principally 
by the commercial value of a very small number of available sites in the 
district. Based upon the evidence in 
the Study the plan does not therefore 
identify suitable areas for wind energy 
development and such proposals will be 
considered against the Government’s 
latest policy guidance including any 
relevant policies dealing with onshore 
wind energy in any neighbourhood 
plans. 
8.47 The Study also identifies areas of 
potential for district heating, based on 
the towns and in close proximity to new 
major development sites. The Council 
recognises that there are variety of 
other ways to reduce carbon emissions 
and that different renewable and low 
carbon energy technologies will suit 
different parts of the District and 
different types of development. In 
some cases better CO2 savings are 
achieved at less cost by reducing the 
overall energy use of development 
through its design and layout rather 
than by generating energy use from 
renewable energy technologies; this 
could also lead to the savings being 
more cost effective. This issue is 
addressed in Policy SDC12 (High Quality 
Design and Place-Making).
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034138Policy SDC10: Decentralised, Renewable and Low Carbon 
Energy Generation
1.  Proposals for the generation of renewable energy including biomass power 
generation, combined heat and power, and other micro generation systems will be 
permitted where either individually or cumulatively with other renewable energy 
development, there would be no significant adverse effects on:
a. The visual amenity and character of the area including landscape and visual 
impacts; 
b. The amenity of local residents, in terms of noise, dust, odour, reflected light, 
traffic or visual intrusion;
c.  The ecology of the area, in particular in relation to protected species and to any 
sites of biodiversity value, ancient woodland, and veteran trees;
d. The historic environment, including the effect on the significance of heritage 
assets and their setting and important views associated with valued landscapes 
and townscapes; and
e. Airport radar and telecommunications systems.
2. In determining planning applications for renewable energy generation, significant 
weight will be given to the achievement of wider environmental and economic 
benefits.
3. Proposals should include details of associated developments including access roads 
and ancillary buildings; and transmission lines which should be located below ground 
wherever possible in order to reduce the impact on the open countryside. Planning 
applications will also need to include a satisfactory restoration scheme which will be 
implemented following decommissioning.
4. Major new developments will be expected to connect to or be designed to connect in 
the future to district or community heating networks where appropriate. Where no 
district heating scheme exists or is proposed in the proximity of major development 
the potential for developing a new scheme on site should be explored and pursued 
where feasible.
5. Developments along water courses will be expected to investigate the feasibility of 
using small scale hydro power taking into account flood risk.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034139Flood Risk
8.48 The water environment is vital for 
its contribution to the District’s 
biodiversity and is important to the 
economy and to the quality of life 
of people both within and outside 
the District. Development must take 
place within environmental limits 
and carefully consider how the water 
environment will be affected. How 
much waste water can be safely 
disposed of, the protection of 
vulnerable aquifers and the prevention 
of increased flooding are key 
considerations in developing sustainable 
communities.
8.49  National policy is clear that planning 
policy should minimise vulnerability 
and provide resilience to impacts 
arising from climate change, and 
avoid inappropriate development in 
areas at risk of flooding. As a principle 
therefore, inappropriate development 
in areas at risk of flooding should be 
avoided by directing development 
away from areas at highest risk. Where 
there is the possibility of any flood risk 
to a proposed development site, or 
the potential for flood risk impact on 
other sites, a site-specific Flood Risk 
Assessment will be required.
8.50 The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA) carried out in 2009 classified all 
land within the District into one of four 
Flood Zones 1, 2, 3a and 3b. This 
classification has been undertaken at 
the strategic level and is intended 
primarily for guidance purposes in the 
overall planning process. It provides an 
overview of the areas susceptible to 
flooding and the risk posed by flooding 
from rivers, groundwater and surface 
water runoff. It assesses the risk as it 
stands today, as well as the increased 
risk from a changing climate. The SFRA 
allows us to make more informed 
decisions about potential development 
sites in the Local Plan. Strategic decisions can therefore be made on 
where development is most appropriate 
in relation to flood risk. Significant 
flood risk exists to the north and west 
of Killamarsh and to the east of 
Eckington. A smaller area of flood risk 
exists in Dronfield and to the west and 
east of Clay Cross. Constraints also 
exist to the west of North Wingfield and 
Grassmoor and to the south of 
Wingerworth. Derbyshire County 
Council is responsible for coordinating 
the management of flood risk across 
Derbyshire and is a Lead Local Flood 
Authority (LLFA). The Environment 
Agency has flood risk management 
responsibilities over sections of main 
river such as the River Rother, River 
Drone, River Doe Lea, River Amber, 
Alfreton Brook, River Erewash and River 
Meden.
8.51 The Environment Agency is responsible 
for licensing abstractions, pollution 
control, and the quality of the water 
environment, whilst Yorkshire Water 
and Seven Trent are responsible for 
water services and sewage treatment 
across the District. Water Cycle Studies 
aim to identify tensions between 
growth proposals and environmental 
requirements in relation to water 
and identify potential solutions to 
addressing them, examining water 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034140supply, sewage disposal and water 
abstraction. A Water Cycle Study 
Scoping and Initial Study Report was 
carried out in 2010 for the District 
alongside Bolsover District and 
Chesterfield Borough, to ensure that 
the growth envisaged for the District 
can be supported and is not hindered 
by water infrastructure and resources. 
This has been reviewed in collaboration 
with water infrastructure providers as 
part of the work on the Infrastructure 
Study and Delivery Plan.
8.52 The Council’s approach to water 
management complements ‘The 
Humber River Basin Management 
Plan’. In particular the Local Plan 
has an important role in the key 
actions of promoting water efficiency, 
Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems 
(SuDS), re-use of water and the value 
of green infrastructure. The Council 
will require developers to demonstrate 
that their surface water drainage 
proposals, particularly for large sites, 
are appropriate and adequate for the 
development and will not increase 
the flood risk to land and property 
either upstream or downstream of the 
development site. SuDS are a desirable 
means of achieving this. Hard surfacing 
resulting from development (including 
roofs) reduces the ability of the land 
to absorb and/or store water, it is 
therefore important that SuDS and 
other methods are utilised for water 
management. This will include grey 
water recycling, rainwater harvesting, 
green roofs, permeable paving, 
infiltration areas and soakaways. Such 
measures should supplement green 
infrastructure networks, contribute 
to mitigating climate change and 
flooding, and improve biodiversity and 
amenity value, as an alternative or 
complimentary to hard engineering. 
New development must address the 
issue by managing runoff from new developments to hold back rainfall 
from reaching the drainage and river 
systems too quickly. Run off rates for 
development on greenfield sites should 
not be exceeded, and where possible 
should be reduced from existing. Run 
off rates for development on previously 
developed land should be reduced from 
the current rate of surface water runoff 
where feasible. As of April 2015, the 
surface water elements of the Flood 
Risk policy became the responsibility of 
Derbyshire County Council as the LLFA.
Foul Water Drainage
8.53  Policy SDC11 requires applicants to 
ensure that adequate foul water 
drainage systems are in place and that 
sufficient capacity exists within the 
sewer network to cater for proposed 
development.
8.54 Severn Trent Water and Yorkshire Water 
are the companies responsible for 
taking away wastewater from homes 
and businesses across the district. 
The council relies on feedback from 
them in order to ascertain whether 
sufficient capacity exists within 
the network to accommodate new 
development or where it may be 
necessary to coordinate development 
in line with any upgrading work. This 
will be dependent upon the scale and 
location of development proposed and 
developers are encouraged to engage 
with the relevant water company at 
the earliest opportunity. Should the 
relevant water company advise that 
connection to the public sewerage 
system is not possible, alternative 
on-site treatment methods and 
septic tanks associated with a new 
development will be permitted subject 
to the satisfaction of the Environment 
Agency.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034141Policy SDC11: Flood Risk and Drainage
1.  All development proposals will be required to consider the effect of the proposed 
development on flood risk, both on-site and off-site, commensurate with the scale 
and impact of the development. This should be demonstrated through a Flood Risk 
Assessment (FRA), where appropriate. Development will not be permitted unless:
a. If within the functional floodplain (Flood Zone 3b), it is water compatible or 
essential infrastructure;
b. In Flood Zones 2 and 3a, it passes the Sequential Test, and if necessary the 
Exceptions Test, as required by national policy; 
c. It can be demonstrated through an FRA46 that the development, including access, 
will be safe, without increasing flood risk elsewhere and where possible will 
reduce flood risk overall;
d. There is no net increase in surface water runoff for the lifetime of the 
development on all new development. Surface water runoff should be managed at 
source wherever possible, avoiding disposal to combined sewers; 
e. Part of the development site is set aside for surface water management, and uses 
measures to contribute to flood risk management in the wider area; and
f. The development incorporates a Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) to manage 
surface water drainage, in accordance with national SuDS standards, unless it 
is proven that SuDS are not appropriate in a specific location. Where SuDS are 
provided, arrangements must be put in place for their whole life management and 
maintenance.
2.  Development will only be permitted where adequate foul water treatment and 
drainage infrastructure currently exists, or can be made available to serve the 
development unless the developer can demonstrate acceptable alternative private 
solutions. 
3. The Council will seek opportunities to remove problems from the drainage network 
and increase the capacity of the floodplain, wherever this can be achieved safely , in 
connection with new development.
4. Where improvement works are required to ensure that the drainage infrastructure 
can cope with the capacity required to support proposed new development, 
developer contributions may be required in accordance with Policy ID1 
(Infrastructure Delivery and Developer Contributions).
46 In Flood Zone 1, and FRA will only be required for sites over 1ha.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034142Contributing to Successful 
Development
High Quality Design and  
Place-Making
8.55 Successful places tend to be those that 
have a distinct identity or sense of 
place. Good design and the creation 
of attractive places are not just about 
how buildings look. It is also about 
taking the opportunities available for improving the character and quality of 
the area as well as the way it functions 
as a place. Respect needs to be given 
to local character and context, and the 
quality of the buildings and the spaces around them, both public and private.
8.56 Good design can help to improve quality of life, health, equality of opportunity and economic growth. All development should therefore contribute positively to the creation of well-designed buildings and spaces as well as aiding resilience to the impacts of climate change.
8.57 Policy SDC12 sets out the design criteria to be taken into account to ensure quality, distinctive, and functional design and to ensure developments are satisfactorily assimilated within the existing local context reinforcing local character and a sense of local identity. It also aims to ensure that development through its design meets the challenges of climate change. This set of criteria is not intended to stifle originality, but rather forms a broad framework within which sustainable design concepts can be developed.
8.58 In relation to housing densities, the 
Council applies 30 dwellings per 
hectare, assuming 90%, 80% or 70% of 
site developable area47, as a starting point. However, it is acknowledged that 
housing densities may vary in different 
locations. The Council therefore 
supports a flexible approach to 
densities, whereby the characteristics 
of the site and surrounding area provide 
the basis for determining the most 
appropriate density, whilst at the same 
encouraging optimising densities in 
town centres and other locations with 
good public transport.
8.59 The policy should also be read in conjunction with the guidance contained within the Successful Places: A Guide to Sustainable Housing 
Layout and Design document which 
will be updated and adopted as a 
Supplementary Planning Document by the Council. This document primarily supports the creation of locally distinctive, well designed places to live. In particular it sets out the design process which is expected to be followed in order to demonstrate proposed development is based upon a clear appreciation of the site and its wider context.
8.60 On major schemes and/or those located within particularly sensitive locations the Council may seek input from specialist urban designers at an early stage in the design process. It may also seek to refer scheme designs for independent assessment through a Design Review Panel(s), and to use Building for Life 12 as a tool to improve design elements of development. Where relevant the Council will expect the recommendations made by the Council’s appointed urban designer and/or a Design Review Panel to have been taken into consideration in the final scheme design.
47 90% for sites between 0.65ha and 5.99ha; 80% for sites between 6ha and 10ha; and 70% for sites above 10ha.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034143Policy SDC12: High Quality Design and Place-Making
All new development should be of a high quality design and make a positive contribution 
to the quality of the local environment. Proposals for development will only be 
permitted provided that they:
a. Respond positively to local character and context to preserve and, where 
possible, enhance the quality and local identity of existing communities and their 
surroundings;
b. Provide an integrated network of public open space and green and blue 
infrastructure which connects with existing green/blue infrastructure wherever 
possible;
c. Create good design which is well-related to its site and surroundings in terms of its 
layout, form, height, massing, scale, plot size, elevational treatment, materials, 
streetscape, and rooflines which effectively integrate buildings into their local 
setting;
d. Include boundary treatments and landscaping which are well designed and create 
strong physical features which provide visual and functional separation from the 
site’s surroundings. Where appropriate, effective landscape buffers will be required 
which create appropriate transition between urban and rural environments;
e. Protect the amenity of existing occupiers and create a good quality of amenity for 
future occupants of land or buildings including in relation to privacy, overlooking, 
overshadowing and/or any overbearing impacts;
f. Create well-connected places that are easy to move around and which give priority 
first to pedestrian and cycle movements; and second, wherever possible, facilitate 
access to public transport;
g. Provide streets and spaces within a well-considered public realm which are legible 
and shaped by recognisable landmark features, and which are overlooked, active, 
and promote inclusive access;
h. Make efficient use of land by optimising housing densities, particularly in and around 
town centres and other locations where there is good access to frequent public 
transport services, whilst reflecting the particular characteristics of the site and its 
surrounding area;
i. Maintain or enhance important existing site features of landscape, ecological, 
heritage or amenity value as integral elements of the design;
j. Include measures to promote environmental sustainability, including those which 
address energy and water efficiency where practicable and viable to do so;
k. Make provision for private amenity space, storage and recycling facilities, and 
vehicle and cycle parking; 
l. Incorporate measures to minimise opportunities for crime and anti-social behaviour; 
and
m. Create good design which can be accessed by, and is inclusive for all users. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034144Environmental Quality
8.61 Planning has an important role to play 
in making sure that new development 
does not have, and is not at risk 
from, adverse environmental effects. 
Pollution can occur in terms of water, 
air, noise, light and land. Ensuring a 
safe environment is a prerequisite 
for safe and healthy communities and 
quality of life.
8.62 The history of North East Derbyshire as 
a location for mineral extraction and 
heavy engineering has sometimes left 
a legacy of land that has been affected 
by contamination from its former 
use. It is therefore important that 
the quality of both groundwater and 
surface water supplies are protected 
from contamination. It is also important 
to locate, design and manage new 
development so as not to give rise to 
unacceptable impacts on sensitive 
land uses or features. New sensitive 
land uses should not be located where 
they may be affected by the otherwise 
acceptable effects of established ones.
Air Quality 
8.63 Clean air is an essential element 
of a good quality life. The existing, 
and likely future, air quality in an 
area should be considered through 
Local Plans. It may also be material 
in considering individual planning 
applications where air pollution 
considerations arise.
8.64 The National Air Quality Strategy 
aims to ensure a level of air quality 
which poses no significant risk to 
health or quality of life. Where 
there is a likelihood of a national air 
quality objective being exceeded the 
Council has to declare an Air Quality 
Management Area (AQMA) and prepare 
an Air Quality Action Plan (AQAP) setting out the measures  that will be 
put in place in pursuit of air quality 
objectives. Whilst there are currently 
no AQMA’s in the district, parts of the 
East Sub-area have greater levels of 
nitrogen dioxide and PM10 than other 
areas of the District, due to exhaust 
emissions from traffic on the M1 
Motorway.
8.65 In addition to reducing impacts on 
human health, development should not 
result in the deterioration of protected 
habitats and species. These include 
Special Protection Areas (SPAs) and 
Special Areas of Conservation (SACs) 
located outside of the district which 
are jointly included in an EU wide 
network of sites called Natura 2000 
sites. Development proposals that are 
likely to increase air pollution in the 
vicinity of a Natura 2000 site will need 
to undergo an assessment under the 
Habitats Regulations 2010 in order to 
determine its likely impacts on the sites 
and habitats in question.
Noise and tranquillity
8.66 Noise pollution is noise created by 
man-made sources which is excessive, 
causes disturbance or annoyance, 
and can affect wildlife and sensitive 
areas, including areas known for their 
tranquillity. It often occurs as a result 
of industrial operations, transportation, 
or roads. National Policy48 and the NPPF 
acknowledge that good planning should 
aim to prevent the adverse effects 
of noise from being unacceptable, 
both in identifying locations for new 
noise sensitive and noise generating 
development.
Light Pollution
8.67 Light pollution is artificial light that is 
allowed to illuminate areas that are 
not intended to be lit. The intrusion of 
48 The Noise Policy Statement for England provides clarity on current policy and practice for the management of noise. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/69533/pb13750-noise-policy.pdfNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034145overly bright or poorly directed lights 
can cause glare, wasted energy, have 
impacts on nature conservation, and 
affect people’s right to enjoy their 
property. It can also severely affect 
views of the night sky. The NPPF is clear 
that planning policies should limit the 
impact from light pollution on local 
amenity, intrinsically dark landscapes, 
and nature conservation, primarily 
through promoting and requiring good 
quality design in order to cut down on 
light pollution and the impacts that it 
causes.
8.68 The Council will seek to where possible 
reduce light pollution by encouraging 
the installation of appropriate lighting 
and only permitting lighting proposals 
which would not adversely affect 
amenity or public safety. Lights should be 
appropriately shielded, directed to the 
ground and sited to minimise any impact 
on adjoining areas, and of a height 
and illumination level of the minimum 
required to serve their purpose.
Soil
8.69 It is government policy to protect 
and enhance the natural environment 
by preventing both new and existing 
development from being adversely 
affected by unacceptable levels of soil 
pollution. Soil is essential for achieving 
a range of important ecosystem 
services and functions including 
food production, carbon storage and 
climate regulation, water filtration 
and flood management and support for 
biodiversity and wildlife. Soil is a finite 
resource, and it needs to be conserved 
and managed in a sustainable way.
8.70  Some of the most significant impacts 
on soils occur as a result of activities 
associated with construction activity. A 
Code of Practice49 has been developed 
by Defra to assist anyone involved 
in the construction sector to better 
protect the soil resources with which they work and in doing so minimise the 
risk of environmental harm. The council 
strongly encourages developers to have 
regard to the practical guidance in the 
Code of Practice. 
Water Quality 
8.71  The Water Framework Directive (WFD) 
is the primary European legislation 
for matters relating to the water 
environment and sets out how water 
bodies will be managed within the 
context of River Basin Districts. A high 
proportion of the rivers in the North 
East Derbyshire District are headwaters 
or tributaries of larger rivers and 
are highly sensitive to water quality 
impacts. As they are headwaters that 
ultimately flow into other catchments, 
water quality in this area has the 
potential to affect water bodies over a 
much larger area.
8.72 A joint Water Cycle Study Scoping Study 
was carried out in 2010 for North East 
Derbyshire alongside Bolsover District 
and Chesterfield Borough. The study 
found that development in the district 
may generate a need to upgrade 
wastewater treatment works in order 
to increase capacity whilst at the same 
time ensuring that discharges meet 
water quality objectives. 
8.73 It is important to consider the 
protection of water resources 
from pollution, which can affect 
the District’s watercourse network 
consisting of rivers, streams, ditches, 
drains and canals. However it can also 
affect groundwater for many decades 
and may be impossible to remove 
completely, even after the source of 
the pollution has been cleared up. 
Policy SDC13 aims to ensure water 
quality issues are addressed and 
that development helps to assist 
improvements in the ecological status 
of the district’s watercourse network. 
49 Construction Code of Practice for the Sustainable Use of Soils on Construction Sites, Defra.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034146Policy SDC13: Environmental Quality
1.  All development proposals will be assessed in relation to their impact on air, light, 
noise, ground and water pollution. Planning permission will be refused for any 
proposal where pollution would pose an unacceptable risk to public health, quality of life or the environment.
2. Development proposals will be expected to contribute positively to the water environment and its ecology, and will only be permitted where they do not adversely affect surface or ground water quality in line with the requirements of the Water Framework Directive.
3.  Planning applications for development with the potential to pose a risk of pollution 
should be accompanied by an assessment of the likely impact of the development on 
environmental quality. Assessments of the risk of air, light, noise, ground or water 
pollution should relate to all stages of development. 
Land potentially affected 
by Contamination and Land Instability
8.74  Sustainable development includes the 
recycling of previously developed land (brownfield sites) for new uses. This includes sites potentially affected by contamination.
8.75  New development can provide the 
opportunity to address the risks to health, and the environment associated with potential contamination and unstable land by bringing about its improvement through risk management. National guidance also advises on the need to identify, at the earliest possible stage of the planning process, whether or not a site is affected by contamination. Land can become contaminated
50 from a variety of 
sources, but is typically associated with some particular types of industrial and manufacturing processes, such as gas, chemical and steel works.8.76  National guidance states that if there 
is a reason to believe contamination 
could be an issue, developers should 
provide proportionate but sufficient 
site investigation information (a risk assessment) to determine the existence or otherwise of contamination, its 
nature and extent, the risks it may pose 
and to whom/what (the ‘receptors’) so 
that these risks can be assessed  
and satisfactorily reduced to an acceptable level
51. 
8.77 The principle issues relating to ground instability across North East Derbyshire relate to past coal mining activity. Large parts of the District, particularly in the south and east, have been identified by the Coal Authority as being within ‘Development High Risk Areas’ due to the known occurrence of coal mining legacy issues and related hazards. In these areas, coal mining legacy issues have the potential to create unstable land and risks to surface development
52. It is therefore 
necessary to demonstrate how new development proposals will be safe  
and stable.
50 Contaminated land can be regarded as any land which is in such a condition by reason of substances in, on, or under the land, that can cause 
a risk to human health, property, or the wider environment. 
51 NPPG (2014), reference ID: 33-007-20140612. 
52 Further information about the Coal Authority’s Risk Based Approach can be found on the Coal Authority’s website:  
http://coal.decc.gov.uk/en/coal/cms/services/planning/strategy/strategy.aspxNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341478.78 Failure to deal adequately with 
contamination or instability can cause 
harm to human health, property and 
the wider environment. All planning 
applications for new development 
on sites which are potentially 
contaminated or are underlain by 
potentially unstable land should 
be accompanied by a preliminary 
assessment to identify and evaluate all 
potential sources of contamination or 
ground instability and the impact on 
land or controlled waters relevant to 
the site. In some cases further detailed 
assessment of risk may be required 
prior to the determination of planning applications. The aim is to ensure 
that new development is appropriate 
for its location and that the physical 
constraints on the land are taken into 
account at the planning application 
stage. Land affected by contamination 
often contains valuable areas of 
biodiversity, and historical interest. 
In some cases, a careful balance will 
need to be struck between the benefits 
of remediation and the harm to other 
interests, based on the collection and 
submission of sufficient information  
by developers at the planning 
application stage.
Policy SDC14: Land potentially affected by Contamination 
or Instability
1.  Development proposals will not be permitted unless it can be demonstrated that 
any land potentially affected by contamination or instability will be addressed by 
appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that the site is suitable for the proposed 
use, and does not result in unacceptable risks which would adversely impact upon 
human health, and the built and natural environment.
2.  Development proposals should also demonstrate that they will not cause the site, or 
the surrounding environment, to become contaminated and/or unstable.
3.  Where necessary, the developer will be required to carry out investigations 
and undertake any necessary risk management measures to ensure that any contamination or unstable land issues are addressed prior to the commencement of the development.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034148Hazardous Installations
8.79  The NPPF states that planning policies 
should be based on up to date 
information on the location of major 
hazards and on the mitigation of the 
consequences of major accidents. 
The Health and Safety Executive 
(HSE) provide planning advice to local 
authorities on developments which 
fall within the consultation zones of 
hazardous installations.
8.80 There are a number of hazardous 
consultation zones which affect the 
District, one of which relates to an 
operation just outside of the District. 
These installations are regulated by 
the Health and Safety Executive in 
accordance with Control of Major 
Accident Hazards (COMAH) regulations:
• Veolia Environmental Services, 
Norwood Industrial Estate, Killamarsh
•  Caldic UK Ltd, Holmewood Industrial 
Estate, Holmewood
•  Maxam UK Ltd, Holmewood Industrial 
Park, Holmewood
•  EPC UK Ltd, Rough Close Works, 
South Normanton8.81  Each installation has consultation zones 
around it which are determined by 
the HSE depending upon the materials 
stored and the technology operated 
at the site; these are periodically 
updated by the HSE. When considering 
applications for development in or near 
a hazardous installation or pipeline 
regard has to be given to the most up 
to date consultation zones.
8.82 Where proposals fall within the HSE 
consultation zones then the local 
planning authority will consult the HSE 
and apply its methodology and advice. 
This will normally result in either a “Do 
not Advise Against” or “Advise Against” 
determination based on the level of risk 
proposed to prospective occupants of 
the development.
8.83 Should the HSE revise its methodology 
on which it bases its advice with regard 
to developments within the proximity 
of Hazardous Installations then the 
Council will accept the advice emerging 
from this revised methodology.
Policy SDC15: Development near Hazardous Uses
Development proposals will be assessed in accordance with the Health and Safety 
Executive (HSE) guidance where they fall within a consultation zone for one or more 
hazardous installations. Where the HSE advises against the development proposed then 
permission will be refused.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034149Safeguarding Mineral 
Resources
8.84 Mineral resources are essential to 
support economic growth and are a 
natural finite resource. It is therefore 
important to make the best use of them 
to ensure their long term conservation. 
National Planning Policy requires 
Authorities to ensure that minerals of 
local and national importance are not 
needlessly sterilised by non-mineral 
development. It also requires the prior 
extraction of minerals to be considered 
in these areas where practicable and 
feasible, if it is necessary for non-
mineral development to take place.
8.85  Derbyshire County Council is 
responsible for waste and minerals 
plan preparation and for determining 
planning applications for minerals 
and waste development in North 
East Derbyshire. As such, within the 
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 
area, minerals and waste issues are 
covered by the Derby and Derbyshire 
Minerals Plan (amended November 
2002), and the Derby and Derbyshire 
Waste Plan (adopted March 2005). The 
‘saved policies’ in those two plans 
also form part of the development 
plan for North East Derbyshire. They 
include saved policies relating to 
Minerals Consultation Areas (MCA’s) 
and procedures to ensure that the 
County Council is consulted on non-
minerals development in those areas. 
These policies should be taken into 
account during the consideration of 
development proposals. In addition, 
there are policies in the adopted 
Minerals Local Plan covering minerals 
safeguarding and prior extraction which 
may also be applicable to non-minerals 
applications in North East Derbyshire.8.86 The new Derbyshire and Derby Minerals 
Local Plan will review the Mineral 
Safeguarding Areas (MSAs) and Mineral 
Consultation Areas (MCAs) shortly to 
prevent the unnecessary sterilisation 
of surface mineral resources. This is 
likely to include mineral resources 
within North East Derbyshire. These 
predominantly relate to surface coal 
reserves, but also to a small area of 
carboniferous limestone.
8.87 Within the MSAs and MCAs, defined 
by the Derbyshire and Derby Minerals 
Local Plan, the presence of the mineral 
resource will be considered by the 
Council as part of the determination 
of planning applications. The revised 
MSAs and MCAs once adopted by the 
Derbyshire and Derby Minerals Local 
Plan will be illustrated on the Policies 
Map accompanying the North East 
Derbyshire Local Plan.
8.88 In addition, consideration will be 
given to the policy and advice set 
out in the National Planning Policy 
Framework and the National Planning 
Practice Guide.  This includes the need 
to safeguard existing, planned and 
potential minerals storage, handling 
and transport sites to ensure that sites 
for these purposes are available should 
they be needed and prevent sensitive or 
inappropriate development that would 
conflict with the use of sites identified 
for these purposes. The District Council 
is working with Derbyshire County 
Council to develop a joint approach to 
identify and safeguard such sites.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341509. Infrastructure & Delivery 
Introduction
9.1 This section of the Plan addresses 
infrastructure that will be needed to 
support the development identified in 
the Plan and considers how it will be 
funded. In order to achieve sustainable 
development it is essential that new 
development is supported by the 
necessary infrastructure it needs to 
function, and that it does not place 
undue strain on the district’s existing 
infrastructure, services and facilities. 
9.2 The term infrastructure is broadly 
used for planning purposes to define 
all of the requirements that are 
needed to make places function 
efficiently and in a way that 
creates sustainable communities. 
Infrastructure can be physical (such 
as transport and water supply), social 
(such as education and community 
buildings) and green (such as public 
open space and wildlife habitats). 
The focus here is on physical, social, 
and green infrastructure. Minerals 
and waste infrastructure is dealt with 
by Derbyshire County Council in its 
Minerals and Waste Local Plans.
9.3 In general, infrastructure requirements 
relate to strategic and local need. 
Strategic infrastructure refers 
to facilities or services serving a 
wide area that may include several 
communities, the whole District, 
or further afield. For example 
improvements to the M1 Motorway, or 
investment in water, sewerage, and 
telecommunication networks. The 
infrastructure may be required where 
broader strategies are pursued to 
accommodate the cumulative impacts 
of growth, for example in a sub-region, 
rather than simply to accommodate the 
needs of the development proposals of 
a particular town or village.9.4 Local infrastructure includes facilities 
or services that are essential to meet 
the day-to-day needs of specific 
communities, for example schools, 
health facilities, community facilities 
and local green spaces. These are 
often essential for a development to 
occur and/or are needed to mitigate 
the impact of development at the site 
or neighbourhood level and to help 
integration into local surroundings.
9.5 The provision of infrastructure is 
managed by a wide range of public 
and commercial organisations, not 
just the District Council. The Council 
has worked closely with statutory 
undertakers, utility companies 
and other agencies to prepare an 
Infrastructure Study and Delivery 
Plan (IDP)53 which will support the 
proposed development identified in 
the Local Plan. This identifies planned 
infrastructure to serve existing and 
proposed development, as well as 
ensuring the objectives of the Local 
Plan can be met. This complements 
the strategic work undertaken by 
Derbyshire County Council in the 
Derbyshire Infrastructure Plan 
(DIP); which focuses on strategic 
infrastructure, including highways 
and transport, surface water 
flood management, waste, green 
infrastructure, broadband, education 
and social care. The DIP provides 
evidence on the condition of and 
investment in existing strategic 
infrastructure and services in the 
County. It also sets out strategic 
priority projects across the County, 
including identifying specific needs 
in North East Derbyshire, delivery 
schedules for future investment and 
potential sources of funding. The Local 
Plan, supported by infrastructure 
planning, will play a key role in 
53 North East Derbyshire District Council – Infrastructure Study and Delivery Plan, December 2017.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034151securing private sector involvement 
in infrastructure delivery, and in 
aligning the programmes of various 
infrastructure providers.
Plan Delivery and the Role of 
Developer Contributions
9.6 Where new development necessitates 
new or improved infrastructure 
or where mitigation is required to 
make a development acceptable in 
planning terms the Council will require 
developers to contribute towards any 
necessary site specific infrastructure 
and planning obligations in line with 
Policies ID2 to 9. Depending upon 
the application this may include 
contributions towards infrastructure 
needs generated by development such 
as highway improvements, new open 
space, schools, GP facilities, or other 
requirements such as contributing to 
local employment, skills and training 
initiatives. Requirements for affordable 
housing are separate to this and are 
covered in Policy LC2.
9.7 Developer contributions help to fund 
the infrastructure that is needed to 
make development acceptable in 
planning terms. Required infrastructure 
or community benefits must make 
development sites acceptable and 
mitigate the impact of additional 
demand caused by one or more new 
development sites. Benefits can be 
provided either on-site or off-site, 
depending on the local circumstances, 
but wherever possible, provision 
should be made on-site for facilities 
required through a planning obligation. 
All infrastructure improvements, 
where appropriate, will also need to 
be in accordance with Policy SS1 to 
ensure that any potentially adverse 
impacts are mitigated and the goal of 
sustainable development is achieved.
9.8 Where justified, development 
proposals will be required to provide or contribute towards delivering the 
infrastructure needed to support 
the growth in the Local Plan. Such 
infrastructure should be provided 
in advance of, or alongside, the 
development unless it can be proven 
that there will be sufficient existing 
capacity. The appropriate phasing for 
the provision of infrastructure will 
however be determined on a case by 
case basis.
Infrastructure Study and 
Delivery Plan (IDP)
9.9 National policy states that the Local 
Plan should be supported by evidence 
of what physical, social and green 
infrastructure is needed to support 
the overall quantum and distribution 
of growth proposed in the Plan. To 
this end, the Council has worked 
closely with Derbyshire County Council 
and other infrastructure providers 
to prepare an Infrastructure Study 
and Delivery Plan (IDP). The IDP 
provides a detailed assessment of the 
infrastructure needs of North East 
Derbyshire, and gives an indication 
of the specific requirements for 
the different types and scales of 
infrastructure needed across the 
district, within its neighbourhoods, 
and at a site-specific level. In doing so, 
the IDP draws heavily on other studies 
covering a range of infrastructure types. 
9.10 Whilst the infrastructure planning 
work shows there are no absolute 
infrastructure constraints to the 
delivery of the development proposed 
in the Local Plan, key infrastructure 
items will be required to facilitate 
the development proposed. A full 
list of these infrastructure projects 
are set out in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Schedule of the IDP . These 
infrastructure projects are categorised 
either as critical, essential or place-
making infrastructure based upon their North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034152role and timeliness in supporting the 
planned growth in the District. Key 
infrastructure items are set out in 
paragraph 9.22 onwards. 
9.11 At a strategic level, the Council 
will continue to work closely 
with neighbouring districts and 
Derbyshire County Council through 
its infrastructure planning process to 
effectively deliver any infrastructure 
projects of cross boundary significance 
for North East Derbyshire.
9.12 Delivering infrastructure does 
not stand still and infrastructure 
requirements may change over time 
as development is brought forward 
and new infrastructure requirements 
are identified. Therefore, the IDP will 
be regularly monitored, reviewed and 
updated as a ‘live’ document during 
the plan period.
Community Infrastructure 
Levy (CIL)
9.13 The preparation of the IDP was the 
first step in determining whether 
the introduction of a Community 
Infrastructure Levy (CIL) would be 
appropriate for the district. Work on 
the IDP demonstrates that while there 
are some strategic infrastructure 
requirements, for example the 
transport improvements along the A61 
corridor, much of the infrastructure 
required to facilitate the levels of 
growth proposed in the Local Plan is 
local infrastructure. As described in 
paragraph 9.4, although much of this 
local infrastructure is essential to 
make the development acceptable in 
planning terms it is relevant at the 
site specific or settlement level. As 
such it is considered that much of the 
infrastructure needed to support the 
growth in the Local Plan is capable of 
successful delivery through the current 
S106 regime.9.14 Alongside this infrastructure planning 
work, the Council has carried out a 
Whole Plan Viability Assessment (WPVA) 
to assess the viability of the Plan as 
a whole, and to determine whether 
there would be enough economic 
incentive to provide new development 
with these infrastructure requirements 
in place. Whilst the assessment shows 
that new housing development with 
some level of affordable housing would 
be viable across all parts of the district 
it found that only limited additional 
surplus monies would be available for 
capture as a CIL charge, and even that 
would be achievable only in the very 
highest value areas of the district.
9.15 Since the vast majority of the housing 
development proposed in the Plan 
lies outside of these high value areas 
it is not considered likely that the 
introduction of such a CIL charge in 
North East Derbyshire would contribute 
meaningfully towards the delivery 
of the necessary infrastructure to 
support the Plan. Given the viability 
assessment found relatively tight 
margins of development viability across 
significant parts of the district it is 
considered that the flexibility afforded 
through the section 106 regime is of 
particular benefit to the successful 
delivery of development in the district.
9.16 Based on the above findings the 
Council will continue with the use of 
Section 106 agreements to help fund 
the infrastructure required to support 
the Plan and that needed to make 
development acceptable in planning 
terms; rather than seek to introduce a 
CIL charge. 
9.17 Policy ID1 (Infrastructure Delivery and 
Developer Contributions) sets out the 
Council’s policy on the use of Section 
106 agreements (planning obligations) 
to secure contributions towards the 
infrastructure provision necessary to 
deliver the objectives of the Local Plan.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034153Viability and Developer 
Contributions
9.18 In circumstances where the viability 
of a development is in question, 
the developer will be required to 
demonstrate that this is the case 
through a site specific financial 
evaluation undertaken to the Council’s 
satisfaction at the earliest possible 
stage in the application process.
9.19 Where a scheme is agreed to be 
unviable or marginal, the Council will 
review the policy arrangements or the 
development and the timing or phasing 
of payments to assist the financial 
viability of the scheme. Where policy 
arrangements have been negotiated, 
review mechanisms and/or overage 
payment clauses will be built into Section 106 Agreements to ensure 
that the planning obligations can be 
periodically reviewed and updated to 
reflect any changes in circumstances or 
changes to market conditions.
9.20 In cases where essential/critical site 
specific infrastructure and mitigation 
cannot be secured because of viability 
concerns and the infrastructure is an 
essential prerequisite to enable the 
development to proceed, schemes will 
not be supported.
9.21 In all cases contributions must be 
necessary and ensure the viability 
of the development is maintained. 
Developers will be required to provide 
sufficient information to allow for 
independent assessment of site 
viability if necessary.
Policy ID1: Infrastructure Delivery and Developer 
Contributions
1.  Proposals for development will only be permitted provided they can be made 
acceptable through:
a.  The provision of necessary physical, social and green infrastructure; and
b.  Suitable measures to mitigate the impacts of development.
2.  Where new development will necessitate the provision of new or improved 
infrastructure, and / or when suitable mitigation is required development will be 
required to make direct provision of such infrastructure on-site, or make a financial 
contribution to its funding through the use of Planning Obligations (Section 106 of 
the Town and Country Planning Act 1990).
3.  Where justified, development will be required to provide or contribute towards 
delivering the infrastructure requirements to support the growth in the Local Plan as 
set out in the Infrastructure Study and Delivery Plan, or any future updates. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034154Physical infrastructure
Provision of New Transport 
Infrastructure
9.22 Transport infrastructure improvements 
are a key element in delivering the 
Plan strategy. They will support 
economic growth, sustainable 
transport, and the regeneration of 
previously developed land, helping 
to improve connectivity between 
North East Derbyshire, Chesterfield, 
Sheffield and the Sheffield City 
Region, and towns and communities 
across Derbyshire, the East Midlands 
and further afield. Secured funding 
and/or developers contributions will 
enable the delivery of some of the 
identified key transport infrastructure 
improvements, informed by the 
Infrastructure Study and Delivery 
Plan, such as the A61 corridor. 
Other infrastructure improvements 
may be required following more 
detailed transport assessment work 
at site level. It is expected that such 
interventions will be funded through 
developer contributions as necessary.
Highways
9.23 The safe efficient and free flowing 
movement of people and vehicles 
across the highway network is critical 
to achieving the Council’s ambitions 
for the local economy and for more 
sustainable communities. Proposals 
for improvements to highway 
infrastructure will be supported 
where it can be demonstrated to be 
necessary, and contribute to improving 
the economic prosperity of the area. 
These works will however need to 
take place alongside the promotion 
of sustainable travel. The Council is 
committed to working in partnership 
with Derbyshire County Council and 
other neighbouring authorities to 
ensure a co-ordinated approach to 
transport infrastructure improvements, recognising that transport issues do not 
stop at administrative boundaries.
9.24 In co-operation with Derbyshire County 
Council and neighbouring authorities 
the Council has undertaken extensive 
transport modelling work since 2010 
utilising the North Derbyshire ‘SATURN’ 
model to assess the cumulative traffic 
impacts of development across North 
Derbyshire. This work has shown 
that pressure on the A61 through the 
district will increase substantially 
as a result of planned development 
in the area. As such the A61 has 
been identified in a number of wider 
strategies, including the strategic 
economic plans of the D2N2, and 
Sheffield City Region LEP’s, as a critical 
transport corridor through Chesterfield 
and North East Derbyshire which 
plays an important role to deliver 
housing and employment growth in 
the south of the district; but where 
a co-ordinated balanced approach is 
required to mitigate against the effects 
of congestion.
9.25 The A61 Growth Corridor Strategy led 
by Derbyshire County Council but in 
partnership with the District Council 
and Chesterfield Borough Council 
(CBC), focuses on the A61 corridor 
between the Sheepbridge junction 
in the north and Clay Cross in the 
south. Whilst focussed upon the road 
it is, by design, multi-modal and 
has a core objective of supporting a 
strong economy through managing 
and accommodating the movement of 
people and goods, rather than simply 
managing highway traffic.
9.26 The A61 Growth Corridor Strategy sets 
out the intention of the authorities 
to work in partnership to deliver 
the best outcome for the social and 
economic wellbeing of the area. 
Development proposals planned 
adjacent to the A61 will increase 
the demand for movement along the 
corridor and the adjacent roads. No North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034155‘engineering’ solution would deal fully 
with the impacts, and nor would it 
be appropriate to approach the issue 
in this way. Instead, the Strategy 
recognises the need for a balanced 
approach, and identifies the A61 
corridor as a priority location for a 
combination of sustainable transport 
measures and highway improvements.
9.27 Along the A61, there will be a 
particular focus on addressing the 
current capacity issues and unlocking 
development potential along the 
corridor between Chesterfield and 
Clay Cross. The strategy together 
with an investment plan for the A61 
Growth Corridor has identified priority 
projects and interventions, and funding 
is in place to support growth along 
the corridor. The District Council 
will continue to work in partnership 
with Derbyshire County Council and 
Chesterfield Borough Council to support 
and develop this work.
9.28 In addition to the proposals to provide 
the second principal access to help 
bring forward the Avenue Strategic 
Site at Wingerworth it is expected 
that through this work a number of 
packages of interventions will be 
taken forward with secured funding 
to help mitigate the overall impact 
of development in the area. Such 
interventions will be likely to include 
bus detection and upgrades to traffic 
signal control at junctions along the 
A61 south of Chesterfield town centre; 
the completion of walking and cycling 
routes between the Avenue site and 
Peak Resort; and the provision of 
real-time bus information and other 
roadside displays giving traffic and 
parking guidance to road users along 
the A61 corridor.
9.29 Whilst the A61/A617 Avenue link 
road, with potential to support the 
regeneration of the Avenue site, is identified as a possible solution to 
address highway capacity issues along 
the A61, the County Council is pursuing 
an alternative mitigation strategy 
through the A61 Growth Corridor 
strategy and investment plan to help 
accommodate the increase demand for 
travel for which funding is already in 
place. As such Policy SS4 requires that 
development of the Avenue Strategic 
Site Allocation does not prejudice the 
construction of the A61/A617 Avenue 
link road should it be needed beyond 
the plan period.
9.30 Subsequent to previous transport 
modelling work, the Council has 
worked collaboratively with Derbyshire 
County Council to commission an 
update to the transport evidence 
base54 to test the impact of the 
planned housing and employment 
development identified in the Local 
Plan in particular at the main towns of 
Clay Cross, Dronfield, Eckington and 
Killamarsh. 
9.31 Whilst this work recognises that 
a mitigation strategy to cater for 
growth along the A61 corridor is being 
developed it has found that there 
may be a need to consider mitigation 
measures at two locations at Dronfield, 
namely the Chesterfield Road / Green 
Lane / Callywhite Lane junction, and 
the approaches to the A61 Bowshaw 
Roundabout, on the basis of cumulative 
traffic impacts. Where justified through 
a transport assessment or statement 
developer contributions will be 
sought to support the delivery of any 
necessary improvements in line with 
Policy ID2.
9.32 In addition, this work has highlighted 
that traffic, albeit not in large 
volumes, arising from the proposed 
housing development in the north 
of the district would route to and 
from Junction 30 of the M1 motorway 
54 North East Derbyshire Local Plan, Transport Evidence Base, Dec 2017.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034156located in neighbouring Bolsover 
District. However, the impacts from 
proposed development in North East 
Derbyshire are limited, and generated 
from the relatively small quantum 
of development at Eckington and 
Killamarsh, and would not alone 
necessitate the need for improvements 
to Junction 30 of the M1 Motorway.
9.33 On other key local roads in the district, 
although the result of planned growth 
will be some increases in traffic, the 
analysis concludes that such impacts would be likely to be limited; or could be satisfactorily addressed through 
the travel planning and transport 
assessment process as and when 
individual developments come forward.
High Speed Rail (HS2)
9.34 The Government is committed to delivering High Speed Rail Phase 2 (HS2) and announced on 17th July 2017 its decision on the revised route for part of Phase 2b. The route runs from the West Midlands to Leeds (Eastern leg) and Manchester (Western Leg), with connections onto the existing network and new stations in Manchester, Leeds and the  
East Midlands. 
9.35 The Eastern Leg passes through North East Derbyshire affecting the eastern parishes of the district running roughly parallel with the M1 to the east of Heath & Holmewood, Sutton-cum-Duckmanton and Killamarsh. A 
connection is also proposed into the 
existing rail network with a link to 
the Midland Mainline to the east of Stonebroom serving Chesterfield  
and Sheffield.
9.36 In order to protect the preferred route from conflicting development, the 
Secretary of State for Transport has 
safeguarded this section of HS2 using 
safeguarding directions
55. The route and safeguarded area are identified 
on the Policies Map for information, 
however they are not proposals of 
the LPA and the route will not be 
determined through the development 
plan process. The route will be 
considered in Parliament under hybrid 
Bill procedures, which will provide 
appropriate opportunities for petitions 
to be made to Parliament by those 
directly affected by the scheme.
9.37 Safeguarding provides a statutory mechanism by which Local Planning Authorities (LPAs) must consult High Speed Two (HS2) Ltd on new and 
undecided planning applications which 
fall within the safeguarded area, and 
provides HS2 Ltd with a statutory remit to comment on such applications. The Safeguarding Directions also put in place statutory blight provisions, whereby owners of land or property within the safeguarded area can serve a blight or purchase notice on the Secretary of State for Transport or  LPA respectively.
Midland Mainline Improvements and Electrification
9.38 The East Midlands is well connected to other areas of the country by rail, but journey times to London and other major centres do not compare well with other parts of the country. As part of Network Rail’s enhancement programme a programme of work has now been developed to address this by improving capacity and removing rail bottlenecks. This allows line speed improvements from London to Nottingham, Derby and Sheffield. Whilst a section between Clay Cross and Sheffield through Chesterfield is still expected to be electrified to allow HS2 trains to serve the city, the plans to complete electrification through Derby, Leicester and Nottingham have been cancelled by the Government. 
55 The safeguarding maps and a copy of the formal Safeguarding Directions can be found at:  
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/hs2-safeguardingNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034157The District Council will work with 
partners to ensure that the benefits 
and opportunities of this programme 
are maximised.
9.39 National policy supports the protection 
of sites and routes which could be 
critical in developing infrastructure. 
The legacy of coal mining has left a number of disused rail routes throughout the District, which have the 
potential to be returned to beneficial 
use to reduce the number of journeys 
made by road, increase the movement of freight by rail, or increase opportunities for recreation. These 
routes are safeguarded for recreation 
purposes as Greenways through  
Policy ID8.9.40 The Local Transport Plan 3 identifies potential major transport projects. 
Whilst the Clay Cross Railway station 
is included as a project for further 
appraisal as a County Council scheme, 
it is not being actively pursued and 
is not included in the Derbyshire 
Infrastructure Plan. However, there 
may be opportunity to review the 
business case and realise the long term 
aspirations for a station at Clay Cross 
as the town grows in the future. As 
such the Plan through Policy SS4 seeks 
to ensure that the development of the 
Strategic Site Allocation at the former 
Biwaters site does not preclude the 
provision of rail access should the  
case for the station be established in the future.
Policy ID2: Provision and Safeguarding of Transport 
Infrastructure
1.  New transport infrastructure will be permitted provided that it is necessary to:
a. Improve the existing highway or rail network, or improve connectivity; or
b. Support economic growth or unlock future development sites; and
c. Minimise and mitigate any harmful impact on the environment and the amenity of local communities; and
d. Make safe and proper provision for the movement of pedestrians, cyclists, and public transport.
2.  Where justified through appropriate transport statements or assessments, 
development will be required to provide or contribute towards delivering the following transport infrastructure to support development including:
a.  Improvements to the A61 corridor, south of Chesterfield to Clay Cross, including 
the Southern Access to the Avenue Strategic Site Allocation from the A61;
b. Improvements to key road junctions to support growth at Dronfield including the B6057 Chesterfield Road / B6158 Green Lane / Callywhite Lane, and the A61 
Bowshaw Roundabout;
c. Measures to mitigate any adverse impacts of development on the M1 motorway 
junctions; 
d. Other transport projects at Clay Cross, Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh as 
identified in the Regeneration Frameworks for these towns and in accordance with Policies SP1, SP2, SP3 and SP4.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034158Sustainable Travel
9.41 The rural nature of North East 
Derbyshire56, and its dispersed 
settlement pattern means that the 
majority of residents do not live, work 
or shop all in one place. The location 
of housing, employment, education, 
health, retail and leisure facilities 
can have a significant impact on 
patterns of travel, and accessibility, 
particularly for those without access 
to a car. The relationship between 
planning, transport and infrastructure 
is acknowledged as crucial in creating 
successful and sustainable places that 
work for everyone. Whilst the planning 
system cannot directly change people’s 
travel behaviour, it can provide the 
framework for more sustainable 
transport choices. It is crucial that 
the Council, developers, and other 
stakeholders work together to deliver 
such choices. 
9.42 Derbyshire County Council is 
responsible for transportation, which 
includes producing the Local Transport 
Plan. The Derbyshire Local Transport 
Plan 357 (LTP3) sets out the transport 
vision, goals and challenges, covering 
the period 2011 to 2026. Whilst the 
District Council has only limited control 
over highways or transport matters, 
its role as the Local Planning Authority 
is an important one in influencing 
transportation in the District through 
policies in the Local Plan and decisions 
on planning applications. 
9.43 Sustainable modes of travel such as 
walking, cycling, public transport, car 
sharing, and alternative fuel vehicles 
can help to cut down on congestion 
and have positive benefits for the 
environment in terms of improving 
air quality. It can be provided through 
good planning and design, but also through travel planning such as 
promoting car sharing and providing car 
share spaces within new development. 
New infrastructure such as charging 
points for electric vehicles further 
supports sustainable travel journeys. 
9.44 Access to sustainable forms of 
transport must be integrated into the 
design of new development. All future 
development should be planned to 
maximise opportunities for walking, 
cycling, public transport, car sharing, 
and electric vehicles. The Plan does 
however; recognise that in some 
smaller settlements, particularly in 
rural areas, there is a greater reliance 
on private cars. This will be taken into 
consideration in determining planning 
applications.
Walking and cycling
9.45 New development should incorporate 
a ‘pedestrian and cycle first’ principle. 
All transport journeys include an 
element of walking, whether it is 
walking to a bus stop or to a car park. 
All new developments must include 
pedestrian and cycle routes which are 
direct, convenient, and take priority 
over motor traffic. New developments 
must provide direct links to new or 
existing footpath or cycling networks, 
where appropriate, as well as to 
nearby local attractors, such as schools 
and shops, thereby negating the need 
for short trips by car.
9.46 Cycling provides great potential to 
reduce reliance on the private car. The 
Local Transport Plan 3 identifies 
walking and cycling as a priority, 
including for new infrastructure 
provision, focusing on strategic and 
local cycle networks. The cycle 
networks are shown on the Policies Map 
and form part of Derbyshire’s Key Cycle 
56 North East Derbyshire is categorised as a Rural 50 district by Defra, which means that between 50 - 79.9% of its population live in rural 
census output areas.
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/239063/2001-la-class-intro.pdf
57 https://www.derbyshire.gov.uk/transport-roads/transport-plans/ltp3/local-transport-plan-three.aspxNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034159Network and Local Cycle Network 
within North East Derbyshire. The 
Derbyshire Cycling Plan 2016-2030 has 
great ambitions to promote and 
support cycling in Derbyshire and this 
is carried forward in this Plan through 
Policy ID3. This should be mainly 
achieved through improvements to the 
connectivity of cycle infrastructure 
including the provision of identified 
new routes, as well as measures to 
increase participation in cycling such 
as through marketing, communication 
and lobbying for change. Where 
appropriate, opportunities should be 
taken to link with strategic cross 
boundary cycle routes including for 
Chesterfield58.
Bus Travel
9.47 Bus travel is by far the most used form of public transport across North East 
Derbyshire and is considered to be fit 
for purpose. Discussions with 
Derbyshire County Council highlight a 
good frequency of available bus service 
throughout the day along the A61 
corridor and within the four main 
towns, but more patchy and infrequent 
in the more rural parts of the district. 
The Infrastructure Study and Delivery 
Plan identifies some limited gaps in 
provision of commercial and supported 
services for example in Marsh Lane, 
Coal Aston and the area to the west  
of Clay Cross. 9.48 When allocating proposed development 
sites, accessibility to bus services has been a key consideration. When submitting planning applications, developers must consider the impact of the development on local bus routes. Where possible, bus routes should penetrate new development sites through permeable routes and bus priority measures will be considered. Where appropriate, developers will be asked for a financial contribution so the Council and bus operators can work together to improve bus provision for a particular site. The County Council’s capital programme and LTP3 Investment Protocol commit funding for the maintenance and improvement of physical infrastructure to support  
bus services.
Car Parking
9.49 As part of the objective of promoting sustainable forms of transport, the Local Plan seeks to reduce the adverse impact of transport on the environment (Objective D12). The growth in car ownership has led to an increasing need to mitigate the worst effects of increased traffic movement. The availability of car parking has a major influence on the choice of means  
of transport. 
58 https://www.derbyshire.gov.uk/transport-roads/transport-plans/transport-studies/chesterfield-cycle-network/chesterfield-proposed-cycle-
network.aspx
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341609.50 Parking provision for new development 
and other on or off street parking 
proposals sought by the Council 
will reflect the need to balance the 
legitimate operational requirements 
of any development with wider 
environmental considerations. The 
future focus will therefore be on 
limiting parking supply at destination. 
All new developments must provide 
parking as part of new development. 
The design implications relating to 
this policy are set out in the Delivering 
Streets and Places Design Guide 
prepared by the 6C’s Local Highway 
Authorities including Derbyshire  
County Council59.
 
 Alternative Fuel Vehicles and Car 
Sharing
9.51 Passenger cars are often the only 
practical choice for residents living in 
some parts of the District, particularly 
rural areas. Therefore it is important 
that the Plan supports the growth of 
alternative fuel vehicles and actively 
discourages the number and frequency 
of single occupancy car journeys 
through the provision of car sharing 
bays in new development. Promotion 
of car sharing and alternative fuel 
vehicles will be delivered through the 
Travel Plan process.
9.52 Policy ID3 sets out the Council’s policy 
on sustainable travel by providing a positive approach to the management of travel demand and the delivery of sustainable transport networks.
59 https://www.nottinghaminsight.org.uk/Document-Library/Document-Library/197452Policy ID3: Sustainable Travel
1. The Council will seek to maximise walking, cycling, and the use of public transport through the location and design of new development, with the aim of reducing congestion, and improving air quality and health.
2.  Proposals for major development60 will be required to promote sustainable travel 
through necessary interventions as identified through appropriate tr ansport 
statements or assessments including the following:
a. Site specific and area wide travel demand measures; 
b. Improvements to existing pedestrian, cycle and public transport services and facilities, and provision of new walking and cycling routes. New routes should provide direct links to new or existing footpaths, cycling networks, and local facilities; and
c.  Optimisation of the existing highway network to prioritise walking, cycling, public 
transport and other forms of sustainable travel.
3. Highway capacity enhancements should deal with residual car demand where the initiatives required in criteria (a) to (c) above are insufficient to avoid significant additional car journeys.
4. In all cases, planning permission will only be refused on transport grounds if there would be an unacceptable impact on highway safety, or where the residual cumulative impacts on the road network would be severe. 
60 Major Development is defined in the Plan’s GlossaryNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034161Water Supply and Waste Water 
Treatment 
9.53 Water supply and waste water 
treatment are crucial to supporting 
new development and to attracting 
inward investment. While Severn 
Trent covers the south of North 
East Derbyshire, Yorkshire Water 
is responsible for waste water 
treatment infrastructure in the 
north of the district. The Derbyshire 
Infrastructure Plan 2013 includes 
details of the current available 
capacity at each of Yorkshire Water’s 
main water treatment works in North 
East Derbyshire, and any planned or 
potential investment. 
9.54 During the preparation of the 
Infrastructure Study and Delivery Plan 
dialogue has taken place with relevant 
water companies, including Yorkshire 
Water, to further investigate capacity 
of existing waste water treatment 
works. Whilst previous assessments 
highlighted limited capacity at the 
Staveley Waste Water Treatment 
Works (which may serve some of the 
settlements in North East Derbyshire) 
the IDP highlights that it is anticipated 
that any necessary re-enforcement 
works would be delivered and funded 
by Yorkshire Water in accordance with 
its regulatory funding arrangements 
with Ofwat.
Broadband
9.55 Currently access to the internet is 
mainly through the national telephone 
network infrastructure. In rural areas, 
access to broadband is very limited and 
is a major barrier to the ability of rural 
business to grow and for such areas to 
attract new business. The Housing and 
Economic Development Strategy 
includes ‘Improved Access to Superfast 
Broadband’ as a strategic priority for 
supporting the rural economy. 
Nationally, the Government is 
committed to investing in the UK’s broadband network with the objective 
of delivering 90% coverage of superfast 
broadband.
9.56 Digital Derbyshire is a £27.67 million 
programme to delivery broadband 
infrastructure and services across the 
County. The project has identified 
areas of poor broadband access (many 
of them in North East Derbyshire) 
and has been allocated funding from 
the Government to improve the 
situation. The Derbyshire Infrastructure 
Plan and the North East Derbyshire 
Infrastructure Study and Delivery 
Plan provide details of how this will 
be rolled out. The Council will work 
with Derbyshire County Council to 
ensure that superfast broadband in 
North East Derbyshire is improved as a 
priority. In designing new development, 
developers can help to anticipate 
the future needs of residents and 
businesses and prevent having to 
retrofit properties in the future by 
providing for the delivery of broadband 
infrastructure and services as part of 
the on-site design of their development 
scheme in accordance with Policy ID1.
Social infrastructure
9.57 Sustainable development has a social 
role in supporting strong, vibrant 
and healthy communities. Providing 
sufficient community and cultural 
facilities and services to meet local 
needs is a core planning principle of 
the NPPF .
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341629.58 Physical facilities for different 
groups, individuals and communities, 
including leisure61, health, education 
and community facilities62 (local 
shops, meeting places, cultural 
buildings, public houses and places 
of worship), can be collectively 
termed ‘social infrastructure’. They 
include public, private and voluntary 
facilities. Such facilities are often at 
the heart of local communities and 
essential to the quality of life of the 
District’s residents, making a positive 
contribution to safe, healthy and active 
communities. They can provide a sense 
of local identity and encourage active 
participation in community life. It is 
important that facilities are available 
locally and are accessible. The Council 
in working with other partners will 
seek to ensure adequate provision of 
such services and facilities. 
9.59 The 2017 Settlement Hierarchy Study 
Update identifies the extent of existing 
provision of facilities and services in 
each settlement across the District. 
New facilities, and the enhancement of 
existing provision, will be encouraged 
in accessible locations, preferably 
within town and local centres. The loss 
of existing facilities can have a major 
impact on communities and existing 
social infrastructure assets therefore need be protected and enhanced, 
especially in areas that are not 
currently well served as indicated by 
the Settlement Hierarchy Study.
9.60 In order to protect existing community 
facilities, local communities can 
nominate important local buildings 
and facilities for inclusion on a central 
list held by the Council. This gives the 
community the opportunity to develop 
a proposal and raise the required 
capital to bid for a specific ‘Asset of 
Community Value’. 
9.61 The improvement of skills, training and 
education, particularly amongst young 
people and the long term unemployed, 
is also a key priority relating to social 
infrastructure and inclusivity, but also 
clearly related to the success of the 
District’s economy and inclusion of 
all sections of the community in the 
economic growth. To ensure convenient 
access to educational facilities for 
all residents across the District, any 
expansion of education or training 
facilities should be easily accessible by 
public transport in order to ensure that 
new development supports access to 
education and improvements in skills 
for local people to enable them to 
compete effectively in the job market.
61 Please note that urban green space, recreation sites and allotments as well as indoor and outdoor sport facilities are dealt with within the 
‘Open space, Sports and Recreation Facilities’ chapter 
62 In paragraph 70 of the National Planning Policy Framework ‘Community Facilities’  are described as ‘local shops, meeting places, sports 
venues, cultural buildings, public houses and places of worship’Policy ID4: New Social Infrastructure
Development proposals involving the provision, expansion, or improvement of social 
infrastructure facilities will be permitted where they:
a. Are accessible by public transport, walking and cycling, unless they are meeting a 
specific local need; and
b. Are provided, wherever practicable, in multi-use, flexible and adaptable buildings, 
or co-located with other social infrastructure uses which encourage dual use and 
increase public access.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034163Policy ID5: Loss of Existing Social Infrastructure
Development proposals which would result in the loss of social infrastructure facilities 
will not be permitted unless: 
a. It can be shown that the facility is no longer needed, or that the service could be 
adequately provided in an alternative way, or elsewhere in an alternative location 
that is equally accessible by public transport, walking and cycling; or 
b. It can be demonstrated through a viability assessment that the current use is not 
economically viable and all reasonable efforts have been made to let or sell the 
facility for the current use over a 12 month period.
Education
9.62 Derbyshire County Council is 
responsible for ensuring the adequate 
provision of primary and secondary 
school places. Each year, Derbyshire 
County Council produces pupil 
projection information based on 
the current pupil census data and 
information provided by the Local 
Health Authority. When analysing an 
individual school’s pupil projections, 
no account is taken in the modelling 
of proposed housing development in 
the school’s normal area (formerly 
catchment area of that school). Such 
information has to be considered 
separately for individual schools on a 
case by case basis.
9.63 Large scale population growth 
can trigger a need for additional 
investment in education. The 
County Council normally seeks 
developer contributions towards the 
provision of necessary primary and 
secondary school places through S106 
Agreements, on a case by case basis. 
As a guide, development proposals of 
around 1,000 dwellings will normally 
require provision of a new single 
form entry primary school and around 
6,000 dwellings will normally require 
provision of a new secondary school. 
Developments of a smaller scale may 
also trigger a need for new schools if 
the existing normal area schools are expected to have no surplus capacity 
and are unable to expand.
9.64 The Derbyshire Infrastructure Plan 
identifies that strategic growth at 
the former Avenue (a strategic site 
allocation in Policy SS3) would require 
a new single form entry primary school 
and an extension to the existing Tupton 
Hall Secondary School. However, it 
concludes that residential development 
elsewhere in North East Derbyshire 
could potentially be accommodated 
through capacity and expansion 
(subject to funding) of existing schools. 
Whilst the County Council has re-
iterated that this continues to be its 
approach in the absence of an agreed 
education provision strategy, it has 
indicated through work on the North 
East Derbyshire Infrastructure Plan that 
feasibility studies are underway to look 
at capacity issues at primary schools 
within Brampton, and Morton parishes.
Safeguarded Land for Education 
Facilities
9.65 Derbyshire County Council has formally 
notified the District Council of a 
number of sites within the District 
which they wish to safeguard for either 
future expansion of an existing school, 
or for the provision of a new school or 
playing field.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034164Policy ID6: Safeguarded Land for Education Facilities
Land identified as safeguarded for education facilities on the Policies Map is 
safeguarded from development that would prejudice the necessary provision of a new 
school, expansion of the existing school, or provision or expansion of a playing field in 
consultation with Derbyshire County Council in the following locations:
a. Land at Renishaw Primary School, Hague Lane, Renishaw 
b. Land at Lansbury Avenue, Pilsley 
c. Land at Mickley Infant School, Milton Avenue, Stretton 
d. Land at Unstone Junior School, Main Road, Unstone
Green Infrastructure
9.66 Green infrastructure is defined in the 
National Planning Policy Framework 
as “a network of multi-functional 
green space, urban and rural, which 
is capable of delivering a wide range 
of environmental and quality of life 
benefits for local communities”. 
As well as public open space, it 
includes wildlife sites, river and canal 
corridors, moorland, and woodland. 
Collectively these areas contribute to 
the ecological network of the District. 
With regards to Natural England’s 
definition, Green Infrastructure 
should be strategically planned and 
actively managed. It should also 
respect and enhance the character and 
distinctiveness of an area and should 
be delivered at all spatial scales. 
9.67 Green Infrastructure fulfils a number of 
important functions, including:
• Access and recreation –  public open 
spaces, and the public rights of way 
network provide a free recreational 
resource as well as formal playing 
pitches for more active sports.
•  Biodiversity and geodiversity –  
providing habitat within towns and 
countryside .•  Economic development –  green 
infrastructure improves the setting 
and image of towns and villages, 
making them more attractive places 
to live, work and invest.
•  Energy –  the natural environment 
provides a resource for renewable 
energy.
•  Health and well being - well-
planned green infrastructure 
promotes healthy lifestyles, with 
a positive impact on mental and 
physical health.
•  Landscape –  green infrastructure 
is a crucial element in defining 
and linking to the character of the 
surrounding landscape.
Wilday Green CountrysideNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034165•  Townscape –  open spaces , street 
trees and other green infrastructure 
as a crucial element in defining the 
character of the urban areas.
•  Sustainable Drainage - green 
infrastructure helps to manage water 
flow and quality by holding it in 
times of high rainfall and releasing 
it slowly, reducing the likelihood of 
flood and drought; and can prevent 
pollution by filtration of surface 
water runoff, thereby contributing 
to improvements in quality of 
watercourses; and •  Climate change mitigation –  plants 
and trees absorb carbon dioxide. 
Trees act as windbreaks and provide 
shade and flood management 
mechanisms to reduce the impact 
of climate change on the local 
environment.
9.68 In 2012, the Council published a Green 
Infrastructure Study which identifies 
the existing Green Infrastructure 
assets across the District and the 
external linkages of the wider Green 
Infrastructure network, and considers 
how they could be extended and 
improved.
Policy ID7: Green Infrastructure
1.  Development proposals should conserve and where appropriate improve and 
extend the Green Infrastructure Network running through and beyond North East 
Derbyshire.
2.  Development proposals that would result in the loss or isolation of existing green 
infrastructure will not be permitted unless:
a.  The affected site or feature does not have a significant recreational, ecological, 
landscape or townscape value; or
b. The affected site can be demonstrated to be surplus to local requirements, or 
c. A compensatory amount of green infrastructure of an equivalent or better quality 
can be provided in the local area
3. To ensure the quality of new or improved Green Infrastructure, development 
proposals shall, where appropriate:
a. Incorporate Green Infrastructure as an integral part of designs at an early stage in 
the planning process in line with Policy SDC12;
b. Enhance connectivity between green spaces and improve public access to green 
infrastructure in line with Policy SDC12;
c. Contribute to the character and creation of high quality and locally distinctive 
places and having regard to the landscape, townscape, ecological character of the 
locality and the setting of heritage assets;
d. Protect trees, woodland and hedgerows in line with Policy SDC2;
e. Incorporate native species and habitats in line with Policy SDC4; and
f. Capitalise on any opportunities provided by rivers, streams, ditches, drains and 
canals in order to improve their ecological status. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034166Greenways and Public Rights  
of Way
9.69 Greenways as part of Green 
Infrastructure link spaces and places 
throughout the district. The existing 
Greenways network consists of traffic-
free pathways that connect towns 
and villages with the countryside 
and is suitable for walking, cycling 
and horse riding. Greenways support 
a sustainable and healthy way of 
travelling to schools, work places, 
shops and local amenities. 
9.70 Since the publication of the Derbyshire Greenways Strategy (1998), Derbyshire County Council has with various partners brought back into beneficial use as greenways a number of disused railway lines including the Five Pits Trail and Trans-Pennine Trail. These routes have been carried forward from the 2005 Adopted Local Plan and are shown as Greenways on the Policies Map.
9.71 However, a fully linked network is yet to be established. A number of future strategic routes were prioritised in the 1998 Derbyshire Greenways Strategy including a route linking Dronfield, Eckington and Killamarsh in the north of the District. Such a route would meet the need for a link between the three towns, but could also feed a route to Chesterfield. It would also act as a link from the Trans-Pennine Trail to Hardwick Hall, Chesterfield and the southern part of the Peak District. 9.72 As part of the preparation of the 
Infrastructure Study and Delivery Plan 
the Council has collaborated with 
Derbyshire County Council to identify 
proposed routes that are considered 
to be deliverable over the plan period. 
These proposed Greenways differ from 
existing ones both in relation to their 
condition and legal status. 
9.73 Beyond the Greenways network, 
Public Rights of Way (PROWs) provide 
considerable opportunities for people 
to enjoy the countryside. Where they exist within settlements they can provide good links between areas 
of housing, places of employment, 
shops and community facilities. It is 
important to ensure that development does not have an adverse impact upon the integrity of these routes. 
9.74 The Council will support the use and improvement of all public rights of way and encourage additional provision and links as opportunities arise and safeguard them against development likely to prejudice their integrity. If an alternative route for a footpath is sought an application for footpath diversion must be made. If a planning application affects the route of a footpath, equivalent alternative provision within the new development shall be made, or a diversion order could be implemented.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034167Policy ID8: Greenways and Public Rights of Way
1. The Council will seek to protect all existing and proposed Greenways throughout the 
district as identified on the Policies Map.
2. The Council will liaise with Derbyshire County Council to further develop the 
existing network through promoting proposed Greenways. 
3. Development proposals will be expected to maintain or improve the permeability of 
the built environment and access to the countryside for walkers, cyclists and horse 
riders. Proposals that would result in the loss of, or deterioration in the quality 
of existing Public Rights of Way (PROWs) will not be permitted unless equivalent 
alternative provision is made. Where diversions are required, new routes should 
be direct, convenient and attractive, and should not have an unacceptable adverse 
impact on environmental or heritage assets. 
Chesterfield Canal
9.75 Generally, canals and canal routes 
are an important element of green 
infrastructure, linking homes and 
communities, workplaces and services, 
and providing access to the wider 
countryside. They often provide a role 
on linking fragmented habitats over 
degraded land.
9.76 The Chesterfield Canal is a route of 
cross boundary strategic significance 
passing through Nottinghamshire, 
Derbyshire and South Yorkshire. In 
North East Derbyshire the Chesterfield 
Canal crosses the north east of the 
District and runs through Killamarsh 
and Renishaw. The Chesterfield Canal 
Partnership, formed in 1995, is a 
working group whose membership 
includes the Canal & River Trust, the 
Chesterfield Canal Trust and the Local 
Authorities through which the canal 
passes. The Partnership ensures a 
co-ordinated approach to the 
restoration, protection and 
management of the canal route. Work 
on restoration is well underway and a 
significant part of the route is now 
navigable and once fully restored could 
be reconnected to the national 
network.9.77 The Council alongside other Partners 
(through the Chesterfield Canal 
Partnership) is committed to securing 
the restoration of the canal through 
the district and improving the canal 
towpath as an important part of the GI 
network. The 2005 Adopted Local Plan 
has already included both the original 
route of the Chesterfield Canal and the 
identified preferred alternative route 
which would run through the east of 
Killamarsh town centre. This ensured 
that both routes were protected from 
development that could prejudice the 
restoration of the Chesterfield Canal.
North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341689.78 The Chesterfield Canal Partnership 
has subsequently assessed the eastern 
alternative route which showed that 
problematic and extensive engineering 
requirements would be necessary. 
Consequently, a western alternative 
route has been assessed in more detail. 
This route would take advantage of 
the re-development of the Tarran 
bungalows to the west of the town 
centre and showed that it may be 
a more economic and attractive 
solution. Based on these findings 
and coordinated with Killamarsh 
Parish Council the Chesterfield Canal Partnership carried out a further 
consultation with local residents 
on the western alternative route in 
June 2017. Members of the public 
expressed clearly their preference for 
this route and thus the Chesterfield 
Canal Partnership supports the views 
to reflect the western alternative 
route restoration. As a consequence, 
as well as the original route through 
Killamarsh, the western alternative 
route and the land safeguarded for the 
canal corridor is protected through 
Policy ID9.
Policy ID9: Chesterfield Canal
1. The original route of the Chesterfield Canal and land safeguarded for the canal 
corridor as identified on the Policies Map will be protected from development likely 
to prejudice its future restoration and its existing function of providing a quality 
green space and leisure route.
2.  The western alternative route and land safeguarded for the canal corridor through 
Killamarsh as identified on the Policies Map will be protected from development that 
is likely to prejudice its implementation.
3. Development proposals associated with the recreational, leisure, nature conservation 
and historical potential of the Chesterfield Canal will be encouraged, especially where 
they make a positive contribution to restore and/or enhance the Canal.
Open Space, Sports and 
Recreation Facilities
Existing Facilities
9.79 Open space, sports and recreation 
facilities all contribute to the health 
and well-being of communities in and 
around North East Derbyshire. The 
Council has an important role to play 
in ensuring that there are sufficient 
facilities, that they are in the right 
location and that they are of high 
quality. 
9.80 The Council is committed to the 
protection and enhancement of open 
space, sports and recreation facilities 
which contribute to creating high quality environments and sustainable 
communities. The implementation 
of Policy ID10 seeks to protect and 
enhance existing sites and secure 
additional provision to meet identified 
needs.
9.81 Open space, recreation sites and 
allotments were assessed by the 
Recreation Survey 2017. The Survey 
shows that local residents highly value 
the existing open spaces and recreation 
facilities and that there is no surplus 
of provision in the district compared 
to nationwide recreation standards 
(Fields in Trust Guidelines and National 
Allotment Society). In the following, 
the different typologies of open space 
and recreation are explained which 
form part of Policy ID10. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341699.82 Urban Green Spaces  are larger 
informal open spaces that contribute 
to the form and character of the 
settlement, often providing a pleasant 
setting or view. These include parks, 
green corridors, churchyards and 
cemeteries and amenity green space 
and commons as shown on the Policies 
Map. In addition to these areas, 
smaller informal open spaces exist but 
these are not shown on the Policies 
Map. However, the Council seeks to 
protect all forms of informal open 
space provision from inappropriate 
development.
9.83 Recreation sites  comprise informal 
recreational fields which are accessible 
to the public and are used for informal 
sporting activities. It also includes 
children’s play spaces and outdoor 
youth facilities.
9.84 Allotments  are designated areas which 
provide opportunities for those people 
who wish to grow their own produce 
as part of the long term promotion 
of sustainability, health and social 
inclusion. A flexible supply of allotment 
space should be retained in order to 
accommodate fluctuating demand. The 
Recreation Survey shows that demand 
for and the supply of allotments varies 
significantly between settlements 
within the district and is linked to the 
type and tenure of housing. 
9.85 Formal sport sites  were assessed by 
the Playing Pitch Strategy (PPS) 2017 
and built sports facilities by the Indoor 
Sports Facilities Strategy (IFS) 2017. 
Both strategies are based on detailed 
assessment work and incorporate 
Action Plans which give guidance 
on how these facilities should be 
developed in the future.
9.86 Formal sport sites include a wide 
range of formal outdoor facilities 
such as pitch sports (e.g. football, 
cricket, rugby, etc.), hard court sports 
(e.g. tennis, basketball), bowls and athletics. The PPS concludes that there 
is no surplus of grass pitch provision or 
non-pitch sports in the district. Current 
and future demand for all pitch sports 
is either being met or there is a small 
shortfall. Any shortfall can be met by a 
range of measures such as: improving 
pitch quality, pitch reconfiguration, 
increasing access to school sites etc. 
or new provision through development. 
For non-pitch sports both current and 
future demand is being met. 
9.87 Indoor sports facilities  include mainly 
sports halls and swimming pools which 
are located in the district’s towns like 
Dronfield Sports Centre, Eckington 
Swimming Pool, Killamarsh Sports 
Centre and Sharley Park Leisure Centre 
at Clay Cross. The sports halls are 
situated in appropriate locations and 
all are available for community use. 
Compared to a current available supply 
both sports halls and swimming pools 
are ‘in balance’ to demand. Indoor 
sport facilities are also designated in 
the Policies Map as Formal Sport Sites.
9.88 Although the Council will seek to 
protect all existing green spaces, 
recreation sites, allotments and formal 
sports sites there might be the case 
that a site or facility is threatened to 
be lost. In this case, a development 
proposal would not be permitted unless 
it could clearly demonstrate that there 
are circumstances which would make 
the proposal acceptable. These are laid 
out specifically within Policy ID10.
9.89 Appendix E shows the relation of open 
space, sports and recreation categories 
to their designation on the Policies 
Map.
New and Upgraded Facilities
9.90 The Council is committed to not only 
protect existing open space, sports and 
recreation facilities but to invest in 
existing facilities and new provision for 
local residents and to provide facilities North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034170that are accessible by sustainable 
modes of transport. To achieve this, 
financial contributions will be sought 
from relevant proposals which means 
that residential developments of 9 
units or less are excluded. 
9.91 New provision or developer 
contributions will be sought for at least 
one of each of the following category, 
if a need arises:
•  Urban Green space,
•  Informal recreational fields,
•  Equipped children’s play spaces,
•  Outdoor youth facilities,
•  Formal sport sites
•  Indoor sports facilities
•  Allotments
9.92 The Council’s Developer Contributions 
Protocol lays out a mechanism in 
more detail to calculate financial 
contributions for open space, sport and 
recreation. The protocol advises which 
type of provision is needed most in 
the area including urban green space, 
recreation sites and allotments and 
formal sport sites. Whilst urban green 
space, recreation sites and allotments 
were assessed by the Recreation Survey 
and local standards apply, formal sport 
sites were assessed through the Playing 
Pitch Strategy and Indoor Sports 
Facilities Strategy.
Urban Green Space, Recreation 
Sites and Allotments
9.93 Any residential development of 10 or 
more dwellings will need to provide or 
contribute to urban green space, 
recreation sites and allotments. 
Residential developments of 10 to 49 
dwellings would usually be expected to 
contribute to such facilities off-site; 
and residential proposals of 50 or more 
dwellings would usually be expected to provide such facilities on-site, unless 
exceptions can be justified in line with 
the Developer Contributions Protocol.
9.94 Employment proposals for additional 
floorspace of 1000m2 or more should 
provide green spaces as part of the 
development.
9.95 Where these thresholds for residential 
developments apply, the protocol 
advises that the number of new 
residents needs to be established 
and the additional requirements for 
urban green space, recreation sites 
and allotments should be calculated. 
For this purpose, the Local Quantity 
Standard derived from the Recreation 
Survey should be used to determine 
demand for new residents (Table 9.1).
Table 9.1: Local Quantity 
Standard
TypologyLocal Standard  
(ha/1000 
population)
Urban Green Space 1.60
Informal Recreational 
Fields0.35
Equipped Children’s Play 
Spaces0.09
Outdoor Youth Facilities 0.025
Allotments25 plots per 
1,000 householdsNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341719.96 For both off-site contributions and 
on-site provision, the Ward position 
should be considered and compared to 
the Quantity, Quality and Accessibility 
standards to determine which existing 
site should be upgraded or extended; 
or what type of new provision is 
required. It is also advised to consult 
with local partners (local clubs/groups, 
parish/town council, local allotment 
societies, etc.).
9.97 The Recreation Survey shows that 
the quality of urban green space, 
recreation sites and allotments can 
vary considerably throughout the 
district. It is envisaged that the quality 
of a facility should score ‘Good’ or 
‘Very good’. Therefore, where a 
facility scores only ‘average’, ‘poor’ 
or ‘very poor’ according to the quality 
assessment, financial contributions 
should be sought to improve the site. 
9.98 The location of a proposal to existing 
facilities will also vary from case to 
case. In determining which facility 
should be improved or extended 
the Accessibility Standard should be 
applied. Where the proposed site lies 
within a defined catchment area, 
improvements to or extension of 
existing facilities should be considered. 
The Accessibility standard is as follows:  Table 9.2: Local Accessibility 
Standard
9.99 Based on identified need, financial 
contributions should be calculated for 
both maintenance and provision by 
using tables 1 to 3 in Appendix D.
Formal Sport Sites
9.100 Any residential development of 10 or 
more dwellings will need to contribute 
to the provision of formal sport sites.
9.101 Once the anticipated number of new 
residents is established the Developer 
Contributions Protocol advises the 
use of Sport England’s Playing Pitch 
Demand Calculator to calculate playing 
pitch requirements. The calculator 
identifies associated costs for providing 
the required pitches. For non-pitch 
requirements (bowling and tennis) the 
Playing Pitch Strategy identifies current 
and future demand.
TypologyStraight Line 
distance
Urban Green Space: 
amenity green spaces 
& commons and 
housing green spaces;  
parks, green 
corridors and 
cemeteries & 
churchyards280 metres (based on 
5 min adult walking 
speed); 
or
560 metres (based on 
10 min adult walking 
speed)
Informal 
Recreational Fields840 metres (based on 
15 min adult walking 
speed)
Equipped Children‘s 
Play Spaces240 metres (based on 
5 min child walking 
speed)
Outdoor Youth 
Facilities560 metres (based on 
10 min adult walking 
speed)
Allotments 560 metres (based on 
10 min adult walking 
speed)North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 20341729.102 In most cases residential developments 
do not create sufficient demand 
for a whole pitch. In this instance, 
the protocol recommends making 
a financial contribution to increase 
the capacity of an existing site or to 
contribute financially to new provision 
off-site.
9.103 For off-site provision the nearest site(s) 
to the new development should be 
considered for contributions towards 
increasing capacity to meet likely 
need generated from the proposed 
development. This can be checked 
by using the Playing Pitch Strategy 
Assessment Report.9.104 If financial contributions are found 
to be preferable, the Playing Pitch 
Strategy Action Plan should be used to 
identify existing sites for investment. 
The Action Plan makes suggestions how 
best to develop a specific facility.
9.105 In addition to providing on-site 
facilities or contributing to new off-site 
facilities, a development proposal will 
also be required to cover maintenance 
costs for both formal sport sites as well 
as urban green space, recreation sites 
and allotments.
Policy ID10: Open Space, Sports and Recreation Facilities
1. The Council will seek to protect and enhance all existing open space, sports and 
recreation facilities and any new provision added during the plan period. These 
facilities are shown on the Policies Map as:
a.  Urban Green Space,
b.  Recreation Sites,
c.  Formal Sport Sites, and
d.  Allotments.
Protection of existing facilities
2. Development proposals that would result in the loss or isolation of the typologies 1a. 
to 1d. will not be permitted unless:
a.  An assessment has been undertaken that has clearly shown the typologies 1a. to 
1d. to be surplus to requirements; or
b. The loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by 
equivalent or better provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable 
location; the replacement facility should be made available prior to the loss; or
c. The development is for alternative provision of typologies 1a. to 1d. the needs of 
which clearly outweigh the loss; or
d.  The proposed development is ancillary to the recreational or sports use of the site 
and does not adversely affect the quality of the site in terms of its recreational or 
sports use; or
e. The proposed development only affects land that is incapable of performing a 
recreational or sports function.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034173Local Green Spaces
9.106 ‘Local Green Spaces’ are green spaces 
of particular importance to the local 
community. National policy makes 
provision for these to be identified 
through local and neighbourhood 
plans. Local communities will be able 
to rule out new development other 
than in very special circumstances by 
designating land as Local Green Spaces. 
However, National Policy makes clear 
that this specific designation would not 
be appropriate for most green spaces 
and specifies when it should be used. In 
North East Derbyshire, the Local Plan 
does not designate Local Green Spaces, 
but any forthcoming Neighbourhood 
Plans may do so.9.107 Where new Local Green Spaces are 
proposed, it is envisaged that clear 
funding and delivery mechanisms are 
in place for its long term management 
and maintenance.Provision of new facilities
3.  For urban green space, recreation sites and allotments, financial contributions for 
new off-site provision or for enhancing existing off-site facilities will be sought 
from residential developments of 10 to 49 dwellings. Unless exceptions can be 
demonstrated in line with the Developer Contributions Protocol, on-site provision 
will be required from residential developments of 50 or more dwellings. Employment 
proposals of additional floorspace of 1000m2 or more should provide green spaces as 
part of the development.
4.  The Developer Contributions Protocol should be used to establish financial 
contributions. For urban green space, recreation sites and allotments, local 
standards apply and financial contributions will be sought towards the maintenance 
of all on-site and new off-site facilities and contributions towards new off-site 
provision and the enhancement of existing off-site facilities (Appendix D).
5. For formal sport sites financial contributions will be sought from residential 
developments of 10 or more dwellings. To calculate playing pitch requirements and 
costs for new on-site or new off-site facilities, Sport England’s Playing Pitch Demand 
Calculator should be used. Existing sites for investment and maintenance are 
identified by using the Playing Pitch Strategy Action Plan.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 203417410. Monitoring, Review and 
Implementation
10.1 The Local Plan covers a 20 year period, during which time it is likely that changes will occur which could affect the delivery of the Plan’s Strategy. As such, the Local Plan must have clear arrangements for monitoring and review to ensure it continues to remain effective in its implementation. 
10.2 The Plan will be monitored using the framework of policies, targets and indicators set out in Table 10.1. The approach does not involve monitoring 
all policies on an individual basis; 
rather it takes the Local Plan’s 
objectives from Chapter 3 as the starting point and groups them under the three key themes of sustainable development: ‘The Economy’, ‘The Community’ and ‘The Environment’. It then focuses upon those policies that are fundamental to the achievement of key targets and indicators that support the Plan’s objectives and reflect the effectiveness of the Plan’s strategy and strategic policies.
10.3 Table 10.1 identifies a set of targets and key indicators to describe the intention of the policy and set out in specific and measurable terms the desired outcomes of the plan’s strategy together with details of how policies will be monitored. 
10.4 The delivery of the Local Plan will be monitored on a continuing basis, and formally published through the Authority’s Monitoring Report (AMR), on at least an annual basis.  The Council through its AMR will consider whether the Plan is compromised in its effectiveness, the reasons for this, and whether any refinements or reviews to the Plan, either in whole or in part are required. Failure to achieve a target will not automatically trigger a plan or policy review. 
10.5 Failure to deliver new homes and/or identify a 5 year supply of housing land are the matters most likely to trigger 
the need for a review. Where the 
Housing Delivery Test indicates that the 
delivery of housing was substantially below (less than 75% of) the housing requirement over the previous three years, or in situations where it is anticipated that the Council cannot demonstrate a rolling five year housing land supply, a review of the Local Plan, in whole or in part, will be triggered. Alternatively, a significant change in National Planning Policy or baseline evidence may trigger a review, if this would render the Local Plan ineffective or incompatible with the Framework on a key matter.
10.6 There is a legal requirement to review local plan policies at least every 5 years from the date of adoption to assess whether they are in need of updating as prescribed by Regulation 10A of the Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 
(as amended) and paragraph 33 of the 
NPPF (2019).North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034175Table 10.1: Monitoring Framework
The Economy Policy Targets Monitoring Details: Indicators
D1: Sustainable Economic 
Growth, D2: Jobs & Training,  
D3: Tourism, N1: Dronfield, 
Eckington and Killamarsh 
Town Centres,  
N3: Employment Land, 
W1: Strong and Vibrant 
Communities,  
W3: Diversifying the Rural 
Economy,  
S1: Clay Cross Town Centre,  
S2: Regeneration,  
E1: Regeneration
The following policy references 
work towards meeting these 
objectives: SS1, SS2, SS3, SS4, 
SS5, SS6, SS7, SS8, LC1, LC4, 
LC6, WC1, WC2, WC3, WC4, 
WC5, WC6, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, 
SDC1, ID1SS2 - Spatial 
Strategy and the 
Distribution of 
Development 
Plan Objectives: D1, 
D2, D4, D5, D6, D7, 
D8, D9, D11, D12, D13, 
D14, N1, N3, W1, W2, 
W3, S1, S2, E1, E2.Employment
• Delivery of at least 43ha of employment 
land by 2034.• Annual monitoring of employment 
land take-up.
• Progress on delivery to be reported 
annually in the AMR. 
SS3, SS4, SS5 and 
SS6 – Strategic Sites 
and Regeneration 
Priority Area.
Plan Objectives: D1, 
D2, D5, D10, D11, D13, 
S2, E1, E2.Employment
• Delivery of a minimum of 4ha of 
additional employment land on The 
Avenue Strategic Site, Wingerworth.
• Delivery of 5ha of employment land 
including provision for starter units 
and managed workspace on the Former 
Biwaters Strategic Site, Clay Cross.
• Delivery of 4ha of employment land on 
the Markham Vale Strategic Site, Long 
Duckmanton.
• Potential delivery of up to 28ha of 
employment land on the Former Coalite 
Chemical Works Priority Regeneration 
Area, Long Duckmanton.• Annual monitoring of employment 
land take-up.
• Progress on delivery to be reported 
annually in the AMR.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034176Table 10.1: Monitoring Framework continued  
The Economy Policy Targets Monitoring Details: Indicators
D1: Sustainable Economic 
Growth, D2: Jobs & Training,  
D3: Tourism, N1: Dronfield, 
Eckington and Killamarsh 
Town Centres,  
N3: Employment Land, 
W1: Strong and Vibrant 
Communities,  
W3: Diversifying the Rural 
Economy,  
S1: Clay Cross Town Centre,  
S2: Regeneration,  
E1: Regeneration
The following policy references 
work towards meeting these 
objectives: SS1, SS2, SS3, SS4, 
SS5, SS6, SS7, SS8, LC1, LC4, 
LC6, WC1, WC2, WC3, WC4, 
WC5, WC6, SP1, SP2, SP3, SP4, 
SDC1, ID1WC2 – Principal 
Employment Areas
WC3 – General 
Employment Areas
Plan Objectives: D1, 
D2, D4, D9, D12, D13, 
N1, N3, S1, S2, E1, E2.•  No loss of B2, B8 or E(g) land uses on 
employment areas beyond the expected 
rate of 20ha over the Plan period. • Annual monitoring of loss of 
employment land.
• Position to be reported annually in 
the AMR.
WC4 – Retail 
Hierarchy and Town 
Centre Uses
Plan Objectives: D1, 
D2, D3, D4, D9, D12, 
D13, N1, W1, W3, S1. •  Regeneration and enhancement of the 
District’s town and local centres
•  No net loss in retail floorspace and 
social infrastructure within Town Centre 
boundaries.• Annual monitoring of new or loss of 
existing retail floorspace and social 
infrastructure through planning 
permissions.
• Position to be reported annually in 
the AMR.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034177Table 10.1: Monitoring Framework continued
The Community Policy Targets Monitoring Details: Indicators
D4: Sustainable 
Communities, 
D5: Housing for All 
The following policy 
references work 
towards meeting these 
objectives: SS1, SS2, 
SS3, SS4, SS7, SS8, SS11, 
LC1, LC2, LC3, LC4, LC5 
LC8, LC9, WC1, WC2, 
WC3, WC4, WC5, WC6, 
SDC1, ID4, ID5, ID10SS2 - Spatial Strategy 
and the Distribution of 
Development 
Plan Objectives: D1, D2, 
D4, D5, D6, D7, D8, D9, 
D11, D12, D13, D14, N1, 
N3, W1, W2, W3, S1, S2, 
E1, E2.Housing
• Delivery of at least 6,600 dwellings  
by 2034.
• Delivery of 330 dwellings per year.• Annual monitoring of housing completions 
and commitments.
• Progress on delivery to be reported in the 
AMR. 
• Delivery over the previous three years to 
be above 75% of the housing requirement, 
in line with the Housing Delivery Test.
SS3, SS4 and SS6 – 
Strategic Sites and 
Regeneration Priority 
Area 
Plan Objectives: D1, D2, 
D5, D10, D11, D13, S2, 
E1, E2.Housing
•  Delivery of 731 dwellings on The 
Avenue Strategic Site, Wingerworth 
within the Plan Period
•  Delivery of 825 dwellings on the 
Former Biwaters Strategic Site, Clay 
Cross within the Plan Period.
•  Potential delivery of up to 660 
dwellings on the Former Coalite 
Regeneration Area, Long Duckmanton.• Annual monitoring of housing completions, 
housing commitments and anticipated 
future delivery timescales. 
• Progress on delivery of allocations and five-
year housing land supply to be reported 
annually in the AMR and Five Year Housing 
Land Supply Statement.
LC1 - Housing 
Allocations
Plan Objectives:  
D1, D5.•  330 dwellings to be completed per 
year.
•  A five year supply of housing to be 
maintained throughout the lifetime of 
the Plan in order to sufficiently meet 
residual housing need.• Annual monitoring of housing completions, 
housing commitments and anticipated 
future delivery timescales. 
• Progress on delivery of allocations and five-
year housing land supply to be reported 
annually in the AMR and Five Year Housing 
Land Supply Statement.
• Delivery over the previous three years to 
be above 75% of the housing requirement, 
in line with the Housing Delivery Test.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034178Table 10.1: Monitoring Framework continued  
The Community Policy Targets Monitoring Details: Indicators
D4: Sustainable 
Communities, 
D5: Housing for All 
The following policy 
references work 
towards meeting these 
objectives: SS1, SS2, 
SS3, SS4, SS7, SS8, SS11, 
LC1, LC2, LC3, LC4, LC5 
LC8, LC9, WC1, WC2, 
WC3, WC4, WC5, WC6, 
SDC1, ID4, ID5, ID10LC2 - Affordable 
Housing
Plan Objectives: D5.•  Affordable housing developments to be 
achieved in line with policy.
•  20% or 30% affordable housing provision 
on sites of 10 or more dwellings or 
with a site area of 0.5ha or more.• Annual monitoring of Affordable Housing 
completions and commitments. 
• Progress on delivery and achievement of 
policy target to be reported annually in the 
AMR.
LC4 - Type and Mix of 
Housing
Plan Objectives: D1, D5.•  Developments coming forward during 
the Plan Period should provide a mix of 
types, tenures and sizes of dwellings.
•  Accommodation available for older 
people and people with disabilities to 
increase. 
•  20% of dwellings in developments of 
10 or more dwellings to comply with 
Part M Category 2 of the Building 
Regulations – accessible and adaptable 
dwellings.
•  Sufficient Self and Custom Build plots 
are available to meet the demand on 
the Self and Custom Build Register.•  Annual monitoring of developments in 
relation to Table 5.1, breaking down both 
market and affordable housing completions 
into size. 
•  The number of commitments and 
completions of specialist housing. 
•  The number of developments providing 
20% of dwellings which comply with Part 
M Category 2 of the Building Regulations – 
accessible and adaptable dwellings. 
• The number of Self and Custom Build Plots 
permitted and the number of entries on the 
Self Build Register.
LC8 - Allocation of 
Traveller Sites & LC9 
-Provision for Traveller 
Sites
Plan Objectives: D5.• To meet the need identified in the 
Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Assessment (GTAA).• Annual monitoring of delivery of traveller 
pitches. 
• Progress on delivery to be reported 
annually in the AMR.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034179Table 10.1: Monitoring Framework continued  
The Community Policy Targets Monitoring Details: Indicators
D4: Sustainable 
Communities, 
D5: Housing for All 
The following policy 
references work 
towards meeting these 
objectives: SS1, SS2, 
SS3, SS4, SS7, SS8, SS11, 
LC1, LC2, LC3, LC4, LC5 
LC8, LC9, WC1, WC2, 
WC3, WC4, WC5, WC6, 
SDC1, ID4, ID5, ID10ID1 – Infrastructure 
Delivery and 
Developer 
Contributions
Plan Objectives: D1, D4.• To provide the necessary infrastructure 
to support new development.•  Annual monitoring of critical and essential 
infrastructure projects listed in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan. Progress on 
delivery to be reported annually in the 
Infrastructure Funding Statement and AMR.
•  Monitoring of developer contributions 
secured through S106 agreements.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034180Table 10.1: Monitoring Framework continued
The Environment Policy Targets Monitoring Details: Indicators
D6: Green Belt,  
D7: Settlement Identity,  
D8: Addressing Climate Change,  
D9: Design and Place Making,  
D10: Heritage Assets,  
D11: Natural Assets,  
D12: Sustainable Transport, 
D13: Local Amenity,  
D14: Strategic Co-operation, 
N2: Countryside Recreation, 
W2: Countryside Character,  
E2: Land Remediation,  
E3: Environmental Quality
The following policy references 
work towards meeting these 
objectives: SS1, SS2, SS5, SS6, SS7, 
SS8, SS9, SS10, SS11, LC3, LC5, 
WC1, WC2, WC3, WC4, WC5, WC6, 
SDC2, SDC3, SDC4, SDC5, SDC6, 
SDC7, SDC8, SDC9, SDC10, SDC11, 
SDC12, SDC13, SDC14, SDC15, ID2, 
ID3, ID7, ID8, ID9, ID10SS9 – Development in 
the Countryside
Plan Objectives: D8, D9, 
D10 & D11 .• No planning permissions for 
housing, employment and retail 
development in the countryside 
contrary to the policy.• Annual monitoring of planning 
permissions granted / appeals upheld 
contrary to the policy which are not 
justified by material considerations.
SS10 - North East 
Derbyshire Green Belt
Plan Objectives: D6.• No planning permissions for 
housing, employment and retail 
development in the Green Belt 
contrary to the policy.• Annual monitoring of planning 
permissions granted / appeals 
upheld contrary to the policy which 
are not justified by very special 
circumstances.
SS11 - Local 
Settlement Gaps
Plan Objectives: D4, D7, 
S1.• Maintain the extent of separation 
between relevant settlements.• Annual monitoring of planning 
permissions granted / appeals upheld 
contrary to the policy, which are not 
justified by material considerations. 
• Monitoring of the potential impact of 
such developments, and whether they 
require an amendment to the existing 
LSGs, or a full review.
SDC4 – Biodiversity 
and Geodiversity
Plan Objectives: D11.• No significant effect on European 
Sites caused by the NEDDC 
Local Plan either alone or in-
combination• In cooperation with neighbouring 
authorities, monitoring the predicted 
traffic movements every 3 to 5 years, 
and comparing these to the baseline 
set out in the Habitats Regulation 
Assessment – Appropriate Assessment 
Report, 2018. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034181
Appendix A: 
List of Saved Policies from the 2005 Adopted Plan Deleted by 
this Plan. 
ChapterPolicy 
referencePolicy title
Chapter 1 – 
General StrategyGS1 Sustainable Development
GS2 Development in the Green Belt
GS3 Major Developed Sites in the Green Belt
GS5 Settlement Development Limits
GS6 New Development in the Countryside
GS7 Change of Use and Conversions
GS8 Temporary Land Uses and Buildings
GS9 Planning Obligations
GS11 Hazardous Installations
GS12 Access for All
Chapter 2  
– Natural 
EnvironmentNE1 Landscape Character
NE2 Special Landscape Areas
NE3 Protecting and Managing Features of Important to Wild Flora 
and Fauna
NE4 Sites of National Importance for Nature Conservation
NE5 Other sites of Importance for Nature Conservation
NE6 Development Affecting Nationally Rare Species
NE9 Development and Flood Risk
Chapter 3 – Built 
EnvironmentBE1 General Design Principles
BE2 External Lighting and Floodlighting
BE3 Security Shutters
BE5 Percent For Art
BE6 Scheduled Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
BE7 Alterations and Works to Listed Buildings
BE8 Change of Use of a Listed Building
BE9 Development in the Vicinity of a Listed Building
BE11 Development Within and Adjoining Conservation Areas
BE12 Demolition of Unlisted Buildings and Structures Within a 
Conservation Area
BE13 Historic Parks and GardensNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034182Appendix A: continued
ChapterPolicy 
referencePolicy title
Chapter 4 – 
Employment 
Development & 
TourismE1 New Employment Land Provision
E2 Callywhite Lane Extension
E3 Norwood Extension – Killamarsh
E4 Mixed Use site Former Avenue Coking Works, Wingerworth
E5 Mixed Use Development Former Biwaters site, Clay Cross
E6 Existing Employment Areas
E7 Development in New and Existing Areas
E8 Employment Development in Other Areas
E9 Employment Development in the Countryside
E10 Tourism Development
E11 Tourist Accommodation
E12 Camping and Caravan sites
Chapter 5 – 
HousingH1 Sites for residential development
H2 Housing Development on Other Sites Within the SDLs
H3 New Housing Outside Settlement Development Limits
H5 Domestic Extensions
H6 Affordable Housing Provision in the Main Settlements
H7 Affordable Housing in Settlements with a Population of 3000 
or fewer
H8 Affordable Housing: Alternative Provision
H9 Affordable Housing: Exception Sites in Rural Areas
H11 Sites for Gypsies and Travellers
H12 Design and Layout of New Housing
Chapter 6 – 
Town Centres & 
RetailingSH1 Clay Cross Town Centre Development
SH2 Retail Development in Town Centres
SH3 Ground Floor Development Within Centres
SH4 Upper Floor Development Within Centres
SH5 Retail Development in Edge of Centre Locations
SH6 Retail Developments in Out of Centre Locations
SH8 Loss of Local Facilities
SH9 Hot Food Take-Aways, Restaurants and Public Houses
SH10 Weekly Markets and Car Boot Sales
SH11 Farm Shops
SH12 Garden CentresNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034183Appendix A: continued  
ChapterPolicy 
referencePolicy title
Chapter 7 – 
TransportT1 Clay Cross Diversion
T2 Highway Access and the Impact of New Development
T3 Traffic Management
T4 Travel Plans
T5 Walking and Cycling
T6 Public Transport
T8 Disused Transport Routes
T9 Car Parking Provision
T10 Car Park, Dronfield Station
Chapter 8 – 
Recreation & 
LeisureR1 Outdoor Recreation Space Standards
R2 Formal Recreation Facilities
R3 Urban Green Space
R4 Allotments
R5 Providing for Children’s Play Space through New Development
R8 Specialist and Noise Generating Recreational Activities
R9 Equestrian Development
R10 Golf Courses and Driving Ranges
R11 Development Affecting Public Rights of Way
R12 The Chesterfield Canal
R13 Country Parks
Chapter 9 – 
Community 
Facilities, 
Services & 
UtilitiesCSU1 Sites for Educational Use
CSU2 Purpose Built Community Facilities
CSU3 Protection of Existing Community Facilities
CSU4 Surface and Foul Water Drainage
CSU5 Development in the Vicinity of Sewage Treatment Works
CSU6 Contaminated Land
CSU7 Renewable Energy
CSU8 TelecommunicationsNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034184Appendix B:
Housing Provision
Settlements Completions 
2014-20Minor 
Permissions at 
31/03/2020 
not allocated 
(minus 7% 
expiry rate)Deliverable 
Major 
permissions 
at 31/03/20 
not 
allocatedAllocations 
with 
planning 
permission 
(31/03/20)Allocations 
without 
planning 
permission 
(31/03/20)TOTAL
Clay Cross 149 47 98 0 170 464
Dronfield 70 23 10 0 200 303
Eckington 135 19 0 59 0 213
Killamarsh 76 16 0 24 444 560
Calow 40 3 19 47 0 109
Grassmoor 231 9 0 36 0 276
Holmewood 193 0 0 291 0 484
Morton 52 4 0 100 0 156
North 
Wingfield79 20 0 0 0 99
Pilsley 25 28 0 87 0 140
Renishaw -5 2 0 0 0 -3
Shirland 82 6 0 105 0 193
Stonebroom 60 10 39 35 0 144
Tupton 104 7 0 251 0 362
Wingerworth 270 20 206 256 0 752
Strategic 
Sites138 0 0 1418 0 1556
Level 3 
and 4 
settlements, 
countryside 
locations297 203 403 0 0 903
TOTAL 1996 417 775 2709 814 6711North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034185Appendix C: Housing Trajectory (April 2020)
Site Allocation Planning 
permissionYield 
(remaining)Year 1 
2020/ 
2021Year 2 
2021/ 
2022Year 3 
2022/ 
2023Year 4 
2023/ 
2024Year 5 
2024/ 
2025Year 6 
2025/ 
2026Year 7 
2026/ 
2027Year 8 
2027/ 
2028Year 9 
2028/ 
2029Year 10 
2029/ 
2030Year 11 
2030/ 
2031Year 12 
2031/ 
2032Year 13 
2032/ 
2033Year 14 
2033/ 
2034
Former Biwater Strategic 
SitesYes 730 15 45 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 60 10
CC1: Land off Stretton 
RoadNo 120           15 35 35 35
CC2: Land North of Clay Lane, Clay CrossNo 25      15 10        
CC3: Land off Holmgate Road, Clay CrossNo 15             5 10
CC4: Land at Broadleys, 
Clay CrossNo 10              10
DR1: Land off Shakespeare 
Crescent & Chesterfield 
Road, DronfieldNo 160     25 35 35 35 30      
DR2: Land at Stubley Drive,Stubley Hollow, DronfieldNo 40     5 10 10 10 5      
EC1.Bradley Lomas 
Electrolok Ltd, Church 
Street, EckingtonYes 20   10 10           
EC2. Land at Staveley Lane, EckingtonYes 39 20 19             
KL1. Land at Westthorpe, KillamarshNo 330    15 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35  
KL2. Land off Rotherham Road, KillamarshNo 70       20 25 25      
KL3. Land off Primrose Lane, KillamarshNo 30   
          15 15North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034186Appendix C: continued
Site Allocation Planning 
permissionYield 
(remaining)Year 1 
2020/ 
2021Year 2 
2021/ 
2022Year 3 
2022/ 
2023Year 4 
2023/ 
2024Year 5 
2024/ 
2025Year 6 
2025/ 
2026Year 7 
2026/ 
2027Year 8 
2027/ 
2028Year 9 
2028/ 
2029Year 10 
2029/ 
2030Year 11 
2030/ 
2031Year 12 
2031/ 
2032Year 13 
2032/ 
2033Year 14 
2033/ 
2034
KL4. Land at 30 Ashley 
Lane, KillamarshNo 14             7 7
KL5. Old Station, 
KillamarshYes 13   6 7           
KL6. Land off Boiley Lane, KillamarshYes 11 5 6             
CA1. Land at Churchmeadows, CalowYes 47       20 27      
GR1. Land at Windwhistle Farm, Grassmoor
Yes 36 18 18             
HO1. Land to the west 
of Chesterfield Road, 
HolmewoodYes 225   35 47 48 35 35 25       
HO2. Allotments at Hunloke Road, HolmewoodYes 12 12              
HO3. Land to the South of, 205 Chesterfield Road, HolmewoodYes 40   10 15 15          
HO4. Land between 205 and 235 Chesterfield Road, HolmewoodYes 14 4 6 4            
MO1. Land North of Stretton Road, MortonYes 100   30 35 35          
PI1. Land at Hallgate Lane, PilsleyYes 87      17 35 35       
SH1. Land at Hallfieldgate Lane, ShirlandYes 65 25 25 15
           North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034187Appendix C: continued
Site Allocation Planning 
permissionYield 
(remaining)Year 1 
2020/ 
2021Year 2 
2021/ 
2022Year 3 
2022/ 
2023Year 4 
2023/ 
2024Year 5 
2024/ 
2025Year 6 
2025/ 
2026Year 7 
2026/ 
2027Year 8 
2027/ 
2028Year 9 
2028/ 
2029Year 10 
2029/ 
2030Year 11 
2030/ 
2031Year 12 
2031/ 
2032Year 13 
2032/ 
2033Year 14 
2033/ 
2034
SH2. Land North of Park 
Lane, ShirlandYes 40       10 30       
ST1. Land to rear of 14A to 
54 High Street, StonebroomYes 35            20 15  
TU1. Land at Ankerbold Road, TuptonYes 203  25 40 35 35 35 33        
TU2. Land to the Rear of 10 to 52, Ashover Road, Old TuptonYes 6 6              
TU3. Land South of Sunningdale Park, TuptonYes 42 6 2 12 20 2          
The Avenue Strategic SiteYes 688 30 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 50 54 54
WW1. Hanging Banks, WingerworthYes 176 15 30 30 30 30 30 11        
WW2. Land South of Mill Lane, Wingerworth Yes 80 10 35 20 15           
Total Allocations  
(with and without permission)
3523 166 261 322 339 340 322 364 332 205 145 160 200 226 141North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034188Appendix C: continued
Sites with permission  
at 31/03/2020 (not allocated)Yield 
(remaining)Year 1 
2020/ 
2021Year 2 
2021/ 
2022Year 3 
2022/ 
2023Year 4 
2023/ 
2024Year 5 
2024/ 
2025Year 6 
2025/ 
2026Year 7 
2026/ 
2027Year 8 
2027/ 
2028Year 9 
2028/ 
2029Year 10 
2029/ 
2030Year 11 
2030/ 
2031Year 12 
2031/ 
2032Year 13 
2032/ 
2033Year 14 
2033/ 
2034
19/00868/RM - Land South West Of 
Grange Farm, Milken Lane, Ashover10 2 5 3            
17/00841/RM - Land At The Junction 
Of Narrowleys Lane And, Moor Road, Ashover26  6 13 7           
18/00777/OL - 56 Top Road Calow19      14 5        
18/00273/FL - Watercress Farm, Watercress Lane, Clay Cross14 7 7             
16/01260/OL - Land North Of Pilsley Road And West Of Coney Green Road, Clay Cross84  
   35 35 14        
17/00751/FL - NEDDC Area Housing Office, High Street, Dronfield10      10         
17/00806/FL - Land Between Bypass And The Rear of, 109 To 247, Mansfield Road, Hasland160 10 40 40 40 30          
17/00509/FL - S And A Parsons 
Building , Highmoor, Killamarsh22 5 11 6            
16/00034/OL - Land East Of Rupert 
Street And South Of, Green Lane, Pilsley54       24 30       
18/00107/RM - Fox Hall, Green Lane, Lower Pilsley32 10 12 10            
316/00276/OL - Land Between Poplar Grove And Park House Farm, Pilsley Road, Pilsley15   5 5 5          North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034189Appendix C: continued
Sites with permission  
at 31/03/2020 (not allocated)Yield 
(remaining)Year 1 
2020/ 
2021Year 2 
2021/ 
2022Year 3 
2022/ 
2023Year 4 
2023/ 
2024Year 5 
2024/ 
2025Year 6 
2025/ 
2026Year 7 
2026/ 
2027Year 8 
2027/ 
2028Year 9 
2028/ 
2029Year 10 
2029/ 
2030Year 11 
2030/ 
2031Year 12 
2031/ 
2032Year 13 
2032/ 
2033Year 14 
2033/ 
2034
16/00665/FL - Land Between Locko 
Road, Lower Pilsley13 5 5 3            
17/00585/OL - Land to north, West 
street, Stonebroom29      14 15        
18/00053/OL - Land to the north west of 101 Birkinstyle Lane, Stonebroom10      10         
14/00249/OL - Land To The East Of Prospect House Highstairs Lane Stretton28  5 23            
18/00461/FL - Land North And West Of Creg Ny Baa Brackenfield Lane Wessington43
10 20 13            
18/00188/OL - Land To The Rear Of Hockley House, Hockley Lane, Wingerworth26 6 14 6            
17/00268/OL - Land North Of Spindle Drive And East Of, Deerlands Road, Wingerworth180     35 35 35 35 40      
Total Major Deliverable Sites with permission at 31/03/2020 (not allocated)775 55 125 122 52 105 118 93 65 40      
Minor Sites with permission at 31/03/2020 minus 7% expiry rate417 42 84 84 84 82 41         
TOTAL 4715 263 470 528 475 527 481 457 397 245 145 160 200 226 141North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034190Appendix D: 
Calculation of Financial Contributions for Open Space and 
Recreation Facilities
The following tables give the figures that should be used for the calculation of financial 
contributions for the future maintenance of on site and new off site facilities (per annum), for 
the provision of new off site facilities, and for the enhancement of existing off site facilities.
Table 1: Commuted Sums Calculations for the Maintenance of on site 
and new off site facilities per annum*
Facilities Rate / m² Rate / facility
Green space £0.46 N/A
Shrub beds £4.58 N/A
Bowls green £7.49 N/A
Informal Recreational Field £0.33 N/A
Equipped Children’s Play Space N/A £1,536.09
Youth Shelter N/A £321.26
MUGA £3.16 N/A
Wheeled sports area (area shall be determined by the 
total hard surface or track area)£12.76 N/A
* The above maintenance table is based on April 2020 rate values. These will be updated 
annually in line with the retail price index, as a percentage increase from the year before. The 
following formula is to determine the amount of commuted sum required by the Council for 
maintaining on site and new off-site provisions which are conveyed to the Council, based on a 10 
year period:
n = Number of years = 10 years
f = Inflation / i = interest rate = The percentage values will be the rates applicable will be those 
published by the Bank of England at the onset of the commuted sum being transferred to the 
Council.
(1-((1+f/100)/(1+i/100))^(n+1)) / (1-(1+f/100)/(1+i/100))-1
The formula will calculate a multiplier for the rate value specified. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034191Table 2: Contribution towards new off-site provision per dwelling*
Based on number of bedrooms per dwelling
* The above contribution table is based on April 2020 rate values. These will be updated annually 
in line with the retail price index, as a percentage increase from the year before.
Table 3: Contribution towards the enhancement of existing  
Off-site provision per dwelling*
Based on number of bedrooms per dwelling  
* The above contribution table is based on April 2020 rate values. These will be updated annually 
in line with the retail price index, as a percentage increase from the year before.TypeElderly 
Person 
Dwelling1 Bed 
Dwelling2 Bed 
Dwelling3 Bed 
Dwelling4 Bed 
Dwelling5 + Bed 
Dwelling
Green Space 
or Informal 
Recreational 
Field£256.38 £256.38 £336.98 £439.53 £498.16 £556.80
Equipped 
Children’s 
Play SpaceNil Nil £1,003.68 £1,106.11 £1,216.15 £1,340.65
Outdoor 
Youth 
FacilitiesNil Nil £615.30 £688.68 £761.89 £842.49
TypeElderly 
Person 
Dwelling1 Bed 
Dwelling2 Bed 
Dwelling3 Bed 
Dwelling4 Bed 
Dwelling5 + Bed 
Dwelling
Green Space 
or Informal 
Recreational 
Field£227.06 £227.06 £300.30 £380.89 £417.57 £461.61
Equipped 
Children’s 
Play SpaceNil Nil £769.27 £850.12 £937.68 £1,033.00
Outdoor 
Youth 
FacilitiesNil Nil £476.06 £527.48 £586.13 £644.76North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034192Appendix E: 
Open Space, Sports and Recreation Categories and 
Designation
Overview of open space, sports and recreation categories and their designation on the  
Policies Map.
Recreation surveyLocal Plan - 
Policies Map
Allotments Allotments
Amenity Green Space and Commons Urban Green space
Green Corridors
Parks
Cemeteries and Churchyards
Children Play Spaces Recreation sites
Outdoor Youth Facilities
Informal Recreational Fields
Informal Recreational Fields (School Fields in Dual Use)
Informal Recreational Fields (Education Provision Only)
Playing Pitches and non-pitch Facilities (Outdoor Sports Provision) Formal Sport sites
Playing Pitches and non-pitch Facilities (School Fields in Dual Use)
Playing Pitches and non-pitch Facilities (Education Provision Only)
Indoor Sports ProvisionNorth East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034193Glossary
A61 Corridor – A D2N2 Growth Deal project 
which sets out infrastructure funding 
priorities to support economic growth, 
provide infrastructure improvements, reduce 
commuter journey times, provide sustainable 
transport routes and provide opportunities for 
major housing and employment growth. 
Accessibility –  The ability of people to 
move around an area and reach places and 
facilities, e.g. elderly and disabled people.
Adoption –  The final confirmation of a 
development plan or Local Development 
Document status by a local planning authority 
(LPA).
Affordable Housing –  The Local Plan has been 
examined in light of the 2012 NPPF , which 
defines affordable housing as including social 
rented, affordable rented and intermediate 
housing (both for rent and sale), provided 
to eligible households whose needs are not 
met by the market. The 2019 NPPF includes 
a different definition of affordable housing. 
This will be addressed through a review of the 
Plan. 
Ageing Population – A change in the age 
structure within an area, where the average 
age rises and a growing number of people live 
beyond the standard working age. 
Air Quality Management Area (AQMA) –  
Areas designated by local authorities which 
are not likely to achieve national air quality 
objectives, with a need to devise an action 
plan (AQAP) to improve the quality of air. 
Amenity -  A positive element or elements 
that contribute to the overall character of an 
area, for example open land, trees, historic 
buildings and how they relate to each other.
Ancient Woodland –  Woodlands where there 
has been continuous woodland cover since at 
least 1600AD. Ancient woodland is likely to 
be home to more threatened species than any 
other habitat in the UK. Ancillary Use / Operations -  A subsidiary or 
secondary use or operation closely associated 
with the main use of a building or piece of 
land. 
Areas of Multiple Environmental Sensitivity 
(AMES) –  Areas where two or more significant 
factors (such as historic, ecological or visual 
importance) affect the land/sites within it (as 
defined by Derbyshire County Council). 
Authority Monitoring Report (AMR) –  Provides 
an assessment of the progress made against 
targets and the performance of policies.
Best and Most Versatile Agricultural Land –  
Land in grades 1, 2 and 3a of the Agricultural 
Land Classification. 
Biodiversity –  The whole variety of life 
encompassing all genetics. Species and 
ecosystem variations, including plants and 
animals. 
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) - A Strategy 
prepared for a local area aimed at conserving 
biological diversity.
Blue Infrastructure –  Infrastructure which 
relates to water both natural and man-made. 
Includes rivers, streams, ponds and lakes. 
Change of Use –  A change in the way that 
land or buildings are used (see Use Classes). 
Planning permission is usually necessary 
in order to change from one ‘use class’ to 
another. 
Climate Change –  Long-term changes in 
temperature, precipitation, wind and all 
other aspects of the Earth’s climate. Often 
as a result of human activity and fossil fuel 
consumption. 
Coal Authority Risk Assessment – Required 
if submitting a planning application in a Coal 
Authority Development High Risk Area. The 
assessment identifies site specific coal mining 
risks and sets out the proposed mitigation 
strategy. 
Coalescence –  the merging or coming 
together of separate towns or villages to form 
a whole entity. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034194Community Facility -  Facilities which 
provide for the health and wellbeing, social, 
educational, spiritual, recreational, leisure, 
or cultural needs of the community.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) -  A levy 
allowing local authorities to raise funds from 
landowners of developers undertaking new 
development in order to fund improvements 
to services, systems or facilities needed by 
the development.
Community Right to Bid -  The right (under 
the Localism Act) for local communities to 
request that certain assets are listed as being 
of value to the local community. If an asset 
is listed and then comes up for sale, the 
community will then have 6 months to put 
together a bid to buy it.
Community Right to Build Order -  An order 
drawn up by the local community and made 
by the local planning authority (under the 
Localism Act) that grants planning permission 
for a site-specific development proposal or 
classes of development.
Comparison Goods –  Retail items not bought 
on a frequent basis, for example durable 
goods such as clothing, household goods, 
furniture, DIY and electrical goods. 
Conservation -  The process of managing 
change to a historic asset in a way that 
sustains and enhances its significance.
Conservation Area -  An area of special 
architectural or historic interest, the 
character, appearance or setting of which it is 
desirable to preserve or enhance.
Contaminated Land –  Land that has been 
polluted or harmed in some way making it 
unfit for safe development unless cleaned, or 
the harmful effects reduced to an acceptable 
level. 
Conurbation –  A large densely populated 
urban sprawl formed by the growth and 
coalescence of individual towns or villages. 
Convenience Goods –  Everyday goods, such 
as milk, newspaper, food. Shops which hold 
these goods are usually close to people’s homes so people can make many visits during 
the week. 
Countryside -  The Countryside (or 
‘countryside locations’) consists of all 
locations in the Plan area outside Settlement 
Development Limits as shown on the Policies 
Map (see paragraph 4.58). This specifically 
concerns references in Policies SS9, LC6, WC4, 
WC5, WC6, SDC1, SDC10 & ID8.
Where the Green Belt coincides with the 
Countryside, Green Belt policies also apply. 
Custom Build Homes –  A form of self-build 
homes which are facilitated in some way 
by a developer. It gives a more ‘hands off’ 
approach than traditional self-build. 
D2N2 –  The Local Enterprise Partnership 
for Derby, Derbyshire, Nottingham and 
Nottinghamshire.
Decentralised energy - Locally generated 
renewable and low carbon energy usually, 
but not always, on a relatively small scale 
encompassing a diverse range of technologies.
Density -  A measure (for residential 
development) of either the number of 
habitable rooms per hectare or the number of 
dwellings per hectare.
Deprived/deprivation –  The damaging lack 
of material benefits considered to be basic 
necessities in society. 
Designated Heritage Asset -  A World 
Heritage Site, Scheduled Ancient Monument, 
Listed Building, Registered Park & Garden, 
Registered Battlefield, or Conservation Area 
designated under relevant legislation.
Development Plan -  In North East Derbyshire 
this includes saved policies from the adopted 
Local Plan and will include this Local Plan and 
adopted Neighbourhood Plans.
Digital Derbyshire –  A partnership with 
BT to lay hundreds of miles of fibre optic 
cable bringing faster broadband to parts of 
Derbyshire.
Duty to Cooperate –  A legal test which 
requires cooperation between local planning North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034195authorities and other public bodies in relation 
to Local Plans. It is separate from but related 
to the Local Plan test of soundness. 
Ecological Network –  These link sites of 
biodiversity importance or existing and future 
habitats.
Economic Development –  Development, 
including those within the B Use Classes, 
public and community uses and main town 
centre uses (excludes housing development) 
(NPPF 2012 Glossary). 
Employment Land Review (ELR) -  A study to 
review the current employment land supply 
and look to identify appropriate type, quantity 
and location of employment land which will be 
capable of accommodating projected economic 
growth across the plan period.
Employment Uses - Development including 
uses within the B Use Classes, and all 
other use classes except C3 Housing. This 
corresponds to Economic Development as 
defined in the 2012 NPPF Glossary (see 
above).
Energy Hierarchy -  A hierarchy which 
prioritises the conservation and efficient use 
of energy, and then the generation of energy 
from renewable and low carbon sources.
Enterprise Zone –  A designated area that 
provides tax breaks and Government support 
to help increase economic development in an 
area. 
Equality Impact Assessment –  Measures 
whether the Local Plan and policies 
discriminate against any disadvantaged or 
vulnerable people. 
European Site -  Includes candidate Special 
Areas of Conservation, Special Areas of 
Conservation and Special Protection Areas, 
defined in the Conservation of Habitats and 
Species Regulations 2010 (Regulation 8).
Examination -  The process by which an 
independent planning inspector examines a 
local plan, with any public recommendations, 
before publishing a report on its soundness.Exception Sites –  Small sites used for 
affordable housing which would not usually be 
allowed residential development. 
Exception Test -  Provides a method of 
managing flood risk while still allowing 
necessary development to occur. The 
Exception Test is only appropriate for use 
when there are large areas in Flood Zones 2 
and 3, where the Sequential Test alone cannot 
deliver acceptable sites.
Exceptional Circumstances –  These are 
needed to justify making a change to the 
Green Belt in a Local Plan, as required by the 
National Planning Policy Framework.
Five year housing land supply –  As set out by 
the NPPF , Local Planning Authorities should 
identify and annually update a supply of 
specific deliverable sites sufficient to provide 
five years’ worth of housing land when set 
against their housing requirements. 
Flood Risk Assessment –  Assessment of the 
likelihood of flooding in a particular area 
so that development needs and mitigation 
measures can be carefully considered. 
Flood Zones –  National planning guidance 
sets out three levels of flood risk which can 
be mapped in zones. Zone 1 covers areas of 
little or no risk of flooding. Zone 2 covers 
areas with low to medium risk. Zone 3 covers 
areas of high risk. The Environment Agency 
produces and maps of these zones and 
updates them every 3 months. 
Formal Greenspace –  ‘Good’ quality 
greenspace which is well maintained and 
includes paths which are associated with 
recreation activities.
Fragmentation (spatial) -  Separated urban 
spaces which are broken up by rural land or 
vice versa. 
Geodiversity -  The range rocks, minerals 
fossils, soils and landforms.
Green Belt -  A designation for land around 
certain cities, towns and built up areas which 
aims to keep this land permanently open or 
largely undeveloped. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034196Green Infrastructure –  A strategic network of 
multi-functional green space, both rural and 
urban, which supports natural and ecological 
process, has the potential to provide 
sustainable transport routes and is integral to 
the health and quality of life in sustainable 
communities. 
Green Space –  An area of grass, trees or 
other vegetation set apart for recreational 
or aesthetic purposes in an otherwise urban 
environment. 
Greenfield Land/site -  Land which has never 
been built on before or where the remains of 
any structure or activity have blended into 
the landscape over time.
Greenways/ Green Networks –  Are generally 
car-free off-road routes for shared use 
by people of all abilities on foot, bike or 
horseback. 
Habitats Regulation Assessment –  Formal 
assessment of the impacts of a plan or project 
on specific nature conservation areas, namely 
Special Protection Area (SPA), Special Area 
of Conservation (SAC) or proposed Spas and 
Ramsar sites. The assessment is undertaken 
under the Habitats Directive and Regulations. 
Health and Safety Executive (HSE) –  A 
statutory consultee for planning applications 
around major hazard sites and major hazard 
pipelines. HSE sets a consultation distance 
around the major hazard site within which the 
planning authority must consult over relevant 
developments which are likely to lead to an 
increased population around the hazard. 
Heritage Assessment –  Provides information 
to understand the impact of proposals on the 
significance of any heritage assets affected 
i.e. a building, monument, site, place, area 
or landscape positively identified as having a 
degree of significance meriting consideration 
in planning decisions. 
Historic England –  A public body which looks 
after England’s historic environment. 
Historic Environment –  All aspects of the 
environment which result from the interaction 
between people and places through time. Including all surviving physical remains of 
past human activity, whether visible, buried 
or submerged, and landscaped and planted 
or managed flora. Elements of the historic 
environment which hold significance are call 
heritage assets. 
Housing Delivery Test -  Measures net 
additional dwellings provided against the 
homes required. The Government publishes 
the results for each local authority in England 
annually.
Housing Market Area (HMA) -  The 
geographical area which reflects the 
functional relationships of a housing market. 
The North Derbyshire HMA covers North East 
Derbyshire, Chesterfield Borough, Bolsover 
District and Bassetlaw District.
Housing Trajectory –  A means of showing past 
and future housing performance by identifying 
the predicated provision of housing over a 
period of time. 
HS2 –  High-speed railway which is aimed to be 
the new backbone of the national rail network, 
linking London, Birmingham, the East Midlands, 
Sheffield, Leeds and Manchester. 
Impact Assessment (Character and Visual) 
– Aims to ensure that all possible effects of 
change and development both on the landscape 
itself and on views and visual amenity, are 
taken into account in decision-making. 
Impact Assessment (Retail and Leisure) –  
Undertaken for an application for retail and 
leisure use on the impact of the proposal on 
the vitality and viability of existing centres 
within the catchment area of the proposed 
development. The assessment includes 
the likely cumulative effect of recent 
permissions, developments under construction 
and completed developments.
Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD) -  A 
ward level index made up six indicators 
(income; employment; health deprivation 
and disability; education skills and training; 
housing; and geographical access to services). 
The IMD can help to identify areas for 
regeneration.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034197Infrastructure –  Basic services necessary for 
development to take place, for example, 
roads, electricity, sewerage, water, education 
and health facilities. 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan IDP -  The IDP 
identifies what physical, social and green 
infrastructure is needed, who will deliver the 
infrastructure, and when.
Land Availability Assessment (LAA) –  An 
assessment which aims to identify land 
that may be appropriate for development 
(residential, employment or Gypsy and 
Traveller sites). It assesses the availability, 
suitability and achievability of potential 
sites. All sites identified are subject to 
assessment made in stages following the LAA 
methodology. 
Land Instability –  Land at risk of landslides, 
subsidence or ground heave due to the type 
of rock/soil of the land or from previous site 
uses such as coal mining. Failing to deal with 
land instability issues can result in harm to 
human health, local property, infrastructure 
and the wider environment. 
Landscape Character -  The distinct and 
recognisable pattern of elements that occur 
consistently in a particular type of landscape 
and give it recognisable identity. 
Limited Infill Development –  Building on 
a relatively small site between existing 
buildings in a built up area.
Listed Building -  A building of special 
architectural or historic interest, graded I 
(highest quality), to II* or II.
Local Centre -  Includes a range of small shops 
and perhaps limited services of a local nature, 
serving a small catchment.
Local Distinctiveness –  The positive features of 
a place and its communities which contribute to 
its special character and sense of place. 
Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) - North 
East Derbyshire falls within two LEP areas, 
the Sheffield City Region (SCR) and Derby & 
Derbyshire and Nottingham & Nottinghamshire 
(D2N2).Local Green Spaces -  Green areas of 
particular local importance identified for 
special protection according to criteria set 
out in the NPPF .
Local Nature Reserve –  Habitats of local 
significance where protection and public 
understanding of nature conservation is 
encouraged. 
Local Plan -  Part of the development plan for 
a local area.
Local Settlement Gap (LSG) -  North East 
Derbyshire District Council’s local designation 
of areas designed to maintain settlement 
identity.
Local Wildlife Sites - Local wildlife sites 
are non-statutory areas of local importance 
for nature conservation that complement 
nationally and internationally designated 
geological and wildlife sites.
M1 Strategic Growth Corridor –  Provides 
excellent north-south road links between 
Junctions 28-30. The M1 corridor has supported 
significant economic activity around Junction 
29a which was built to serve the Markham Vale 
Business and Industrial Park.
Major Development –  For housing, it is defined 
as development where 10 or more homes 
will be provided, or the site has an area of 
0.5 hectares or more. For non-residential 
development it means additional floorspace 
of 1000m2 or more, or a site of 1 hectare 
or more, or as otherwise provided in the 
Town and Country Planning (Development 
Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015.
Master Plan –  A type of planning brief 
outlining the preferred usage of land and 
the overall approach to the layout of a 
development on a site or group of sites. To 
provide detailed guidance for subsequent 
planning applications. 
Mineral Consultation Area –  An area identified 
to ensure consultation between the relevant 
materials planning authority, the minerals 
industry and others before certain non-
mineral planning applications made within the 
area are determined. North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034198Mineral Safeguarding Area -  An area 
designated by a Mineral Planning Authority 
which covers known deposits of minerals 
which are desired to be kept safeguarded 
from unnecessary sterilisation by non-mineral 
development.
Minerals Application –  Applications for 
mineral related developments, such as 
mineral extraction and ancillary works, 
quarries, peat workings and processing plants. 
National Park -  Designated by the Countryside 
Agency, subject to confirmation by the 
Secretary of State under the National Parks 
and Access to the Countryside Act 1949. The 
purposes of national parks are to conserve 
and enhance their natural beauty, wildlife 
and cultural heritage and to promote 
opportunities for public understanding and 
enjoyment of their special qualities. 
National Planning Policy Framework – Sets 
out the Government’s planning policies for 
England and how these are expected to 
be applied. It sets out the Government’s 
requirements for the planning system only to 
the extent that it is relevant, proportionate 
and necessary to do so. 
Neighbourhood Plan - A plan prepared by a 
Parish or town Council or Neighbourhood Forum 
for a particular neighbourhood area. Once 
adopted, the Neighbourhood Plan becomes part 
of the development plan for the area.
Objectively Assessed Housing Need (OAN) –  
Need of market and affordable housing in a 
District or Housing Market Area. 
One Public Estate Programme –  A national 
programme which aims to support and fund 
councils to help deliver property-focused 
programmes and utilising the Council’s 
collective assets. 
Outline Planning Application –  A general 
application for planning permission to 
establish that a development is acceptable in 
principle, subject to subsequent, approval of 
detailed matters. Does not apply to changes 
of use. Phasing or Phased Development -  The 
phasing of development into manageable 
parts, for example and annual rate of 
housing release for a large development that 
may need to be controlled so as to avoid 
destabilising housing markets and causing low 
demand.
Planning & Compulsory Purchase Act 2004 - 
The Act introduces:
•  a statutory system for regional planning
•  a new system for local planning 
•  reforms to the development control and 
compulsory purchase and compensation 
systems
•  removal of crown immunity from planning 
controls.
Planning Condition – A condition imposed on 
a grant of planning permission or a condition 
included in a Local Development Order or 
Neighbourhood Development Order. 
Planning Permission – Formal approval sought 
from a local planning authority to allow a 
proposed development to proceed, often 
granted with conditions. 
Pollution -  Anything which affects the quality 
of land, air, water, or soils which might lead 
to an adverse impact on human health, the 
natural environment, or general amenity. 
Previously Developed Land (PDL) or 
‘Brownfield’ Land -  Land which is or was 
occupied by a permanent structure. This 
excludes land that is or has been occupied by 
agricultural or forestry buildings, land that 
has been developed for minerals extraction or 
waste disposal where provision has been made 
for restoration.
Protected Species -  Plants and animal species 
afforded protection under certain Acts of 
Parliament and Regulations.
Public Open Space -  Urban space, designated 
by a council, which fulfils or can fulfil a 
recreational or non-recreational role (for 
example, amenity, ecological, educational, 
social or cultural usages).North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034199Public Realm -  The publicly accessible 
external space including pavements, streets, 
squares, parks.
Reclaimed/Reclamation –  Operations 
designed to return an area to an acceptable 
environmental state, whether for the 
resumption of the former land use or for a 
new use. Including restoration, aftercare, soil 
handling, filling and contouring operations. 
Regeneration –  The economic, social and 
environmental renewal and improvement of 
rural and urban areas. 
Regionally Important Geological Sites 
(RIGS) –  A non-statutory regionally important 
geological or geo-morphological site (basically 
relating to rocks, the Earth’s structure and 
landform). 
Registered Parks and Gardens -  Designated 
heritage assets of national importance which 
are registered for their special historic 
interest.
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy -  Energy 
that reduces emissions of CO2 and other 
‘greenhouse’ gases. For example, biomass and 
energy crops; combined heat and power; heat 
pumps, such as ground-source and air-source 
heat pumps; energy from waste including 
from solid recovered fuel; hydro; solar 
thermal and photovoltaic generation and wind 
generation.
Reserved Matters Permission –  Within three 
years of approval of an Outline Planning 
Permission an application for the outstanding 
reserved matters can be made. This will 
typically include information about the 
layout, access, scale and appearance of the 
development. 
Restrictive Condition (occupancy) –  A 
planning condition “for regulating the 
development or use of any land under the 
control of the applicant”.
Retail Capacity Study –  Provides evidence 
on shopping patterns and future retail needs 
commissioned jointly between Bolsover 
District, Chesterfield Borough and North East 
Derbyshire District.Retail Floorspace – Total floor area of a 
property that is associated with all retail 
uses. Usually measured in square metres. May 
be expressed as a net figure (the sales area) 
or in gross (including storage, preparation and 
staff areas). 
Retail Offer –  The range and mixture of 
different quality, sizes and types of shop within 
or outside town, district and local centres. 
Safeguarding/Safeguarded Zone –  An area 
defined in Circular 01/03: Safeguarding 
aerodromes, technical sites and military 
explosives storage areas, to safeguard such 
sites. 
Scheduled Ancient Monument –  Nationally 
important monuments that enjoy greater 
protection against inappropriate development 
through the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Areas Act 1979. 
Section 106 Agreements -  Legal agreements 
under Section 106 of the 1990 Town & Country 
Planning Act, which are between a planning 
authority and a developer, or undertakings 
offered unilaterally by a developer, that 
ensure certain necessary extra works related 
to a development are undertaken.
Self-Build Housing –  Self-building is the act of 
commissioning a bespoke home that’s tailored 
to the individuals design requirements. 
Sequential Approach/ Sequential Test -  A 
planning principle that seeks to identify, 
allocate or develop certain types or locations 
of land before others. For example, 
brownfield housing sites before Greenfield 
sites, or town centre retail sites before out-
of-centre sites. 
Setting (of a Heritage Asset) -  Is defined as 
the surroundings in which a heritage asset 
is experienced. Its extent is not fixed and 
may change as the asset and its surroundings 
evolve.
Settlement Development Limit (SDL) -  A 
boundary drawn around a settlement which 
broadly reflects its built form and is used 
as a policy tool to define the area within or 
outside which a Local Plan policy will apply.North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034200Settlement Hierarchy Study –  Provides 
information about settlements in the district 
and the services and facilities they provide. 
The primary aim is to promote sustainable 
communities, and provide an initial 
spatial strategy for the location of major 
development across the district. 
Sheffield City Region -  LEP that brings 
together the eight local authorities of 
Barnsley, Bassetlaw, Bolsover, Chesterfield, 
Doncaster, North East Derbyshire, Rotherham 
and Sheffield to work with businesses and 
other partners towards encouraging growth 
and economic activity to create a prosperous 
and sustainable City Region.
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) 
– A conservation designation denoting sites 
which are protected by law to conserve their 
wildlife or geology. 
Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs) –  Non-
subsidiary, independent firms which employ 
less than a given number of employees, 
usually 250. 
Social Infrastructure -  Facilities enabling 
social interaction and wellbeing including 
community, leisure, cultural, education and 
children’s services, adult care and health 
buildings and other facilities such as local 
shops, places of worship, pubs and post offices.
Special Areas of Conservation (SAC) - Areas 
given special protection under the European 
Habitats Directive, which is transposed into 
UK law by the Habitats and Conservation of 
Species Regulations 2010.
Special Protection Area (SPA) -  Areas which 
have been identified as being of international 
importance for the breeding, feeding, 
wintering, or the migration of rate and 
vulnerable species of birds found within EU 
countries. SPA’s are European designated site, 
classified under the Birds Directive.
Specialist Housing -  Housing to meet the 
needs of groups of people who may be 
disadvantaged, such as the elderly, the 
disabled, students, young single people, rough 
sleepers, the homeless etc.Starter Homes -  New dwellings only available 
for purchase by qualifying first-time buyers 
which are to be sold at a discount of at least 
20 per cent of market value, and less than the 
price cap of £250,000 outside Greater London.
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) 
- A procedure which requires the formal 
environmental assessment of certain plans 
and programmes which are likely to have 
significant effects on the environment (set 
out in the Environmental Assessment of Plans 
& Programmes Regulations 2004).
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) –  
Maps all forms of flood risk and forms the 
evidence base to locate new development 
primarily in low flood risk areas (Zone 1). 
Areas of ‘low (zone 1) ‘medium’ (level 2), 
and ‘high’ (level 3) risk are mapped using 
data collected from many sources including 
the Environment Agency and water utility 
companies.
Strategic Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) 
- An assessment of the level of future housing 
provision and the mix of housing required, 
prepared across the Housing Market Area.
Strategic Site -  A site allocated in a Local Plan 
which is central to the achievement of the 
Plan strategy.
Sui-Generis –  A term given to the uses of land 
or buildings, not falling into any of the use 
classes identified by the Town and Country 
Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987, (as 
amended), for example amusement arcades, 
launderettes, car showrooms and petrol filling 
stations. 
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) -  A 
document which adds further detail to the 
policies in the Local Plan. SPDs can be used 
to provide further guidance for development 
on specific sites, or on particular issues. SPDs 
are capable of being a material consideration 
in planning decisions, but are not part of the 
development plan.
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) –  An appraisal 
of the economic, environmental and social 
effects of a plan from the outset of the North East Derbyshire Local Plan 2014 - 2034201preparation process to allow decisions 
to be made that accord with sustainable 
development. 
Sustainable Development –  The principle 
for meeting human development goals 
whilst sustaining the ability of natural 
systems to provide the natural resources 
and ecosystem services which the economy 
and society depend. The 17 Global Goals for 
Sustainable Development have shaped the 
world’s approach to growth and sustainable 
development until 2030. 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) 
– Drainage techniques used to help 
return excess surface run-off for natural 
watercourses (rivers, streams, lakes and so 
on) without negatively affecting people and 
the environment. These might include ponds 
or reed beds to hold water before it runs into 
a watercourse. 
Sustainable Transport/ Travel –  Often 
meaning walking, cycling and use of public 
transport (and in some circumstances “car- 
sharing”), which is considered to be less 
damaging to the environment and reduce 
traffic congestion and pollution. 
Town Centre Uses –  These are uses that are 
commonly found in town centres including 
retail, social, leisure, office and cultural 
developments. 
Transport Assessment / Statement -  A 
Transport Assessment is a process that 
provides a thorough assessment of the 
transport implications of a proposed 
development. Whereas a Transport Statement 
is a ‘lighter touch’ evaluation to be used 
where this would be more proportionate to 
the potential impact of the development (i.e. 
in the case of development with anticipated 
limited impacts).
Travel Plan -  A long-term management 
strategy for an organisation or site to deliver 
sustainable transport objectives through 
action and is articulated in a document that is 
regularly reviewed. Tree Preservation Order (TPO) -  A 
mechanism for securing the preservation 
of single trees or groups of trees of 
acknowledged public amenity value. A TPO 
prevents trees being topped, lopped or felled 
without the consent of the local planning 
authority.
Urban Sprawl –  The uncontrolled or 
unplanned extension of urban areas into the 
countryside. 
Use Classes –  The Town and Country Planning 
(Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) 
puts uses of land and buildings into various 
categories. Traditional Employment uses 
are covered by Use Classes B2 (general 
Industrial), B8 (storage and distribution) with 
offices, research and development, or any 
industrial process that can be carried out in 
any residential area without detriment to 
amenity included within use class E(g).
Viability -  In financial terms, a viable 
development could proceed if there were no 
financial reason for it not to, in relation to 
development costs and returns. In terms of 
retailing, viability is a measure of a centre’s 
capacity to attract ongoing investment for 
maintenance, importance and adaptation to 
changing needs.
Vitality -  In terms of retailing, the capacity of 
a centre to grow or develop its likeliness and 
level of activity.
Wildlife corridor -  A strip of land (for 
example, along a hedgerow) connecting 
wildlife populations. 
Windfall Site –  Sites which have not been 
specifically identified in the development 
plan. We speak your languag e
If you require this publication in
large print  or another 
format please call us on 
01246 231111
Text No : 07800 00 24 25Polish
Mówimy T woim językiem
Romanian
Vorbim limba dumneavoastr ă
Urdu
Chinese
ე࿽
Polish
Mówimy T woim
językiem
Romanian
Vorbim limba
dumneavoastră
Urdu
Chinese
ე࿽We speak
your language
If you require
this publication in
large print  
or another format 
please call us on
01246 231111
Text No : 
07800 00 24 25
Designed by North East Derbyshire District Council 11448_WEB_A