1 
 NORTH WEST LEICESTERSHIRE LOCAL PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adopted: November 2017  2 
 Addendum : Please note – the reference in policy IF3 (2) to Policy 
S5 should instead refer to Policy D1.  
 
 
 3 
 CONTENTS  
 
CHAPTER  POLICY  PAGE  
1  Background   7 
2  North West Leicester shire 
Context   10 
3 North West Leicestershire 
Profile   12 
4 What are the issues?   17 
 Vision  18 
 Objectives  19 
5 Strategy   21 
 S1 – future housing and economic development 
needs  23 
 S2 – Settlement Hierarchy  23 
 S3 - Countryside  27 
6 Design   30 
 D1 – Design of new development  32 
 D2 - Amenity  35 
 D3 - Telecommunications  36 
7 Housing   38 
 H1 – Housing provision: planning permissions  39 
 H2 - Housing provision: resolutions  40 
 H3 - Housing provision: new allocations  43 
 H4 – Affordable Hou sing 47 
 H5 – Rural exceptions sites for affordable housing  51 
 H6 – House types and mix  52 
 H7 – Provision for gypsies and travellers and 
travelling showpeople  54 4 
 8 Economic   57 
 Ec1 – Employment provision: permissions  60 
 Ec2 – New Employment Site s 61 
 Ec3 – Existing employment areas  64 
 Ec4 – East Midlands Airport  67 
 Ec5 – East Midlands Airport: Safeguarding  68 
 Ec6 - East Midlands Airport: Public safety Zones  69 
 Ec7 – Donington Park  72 
 Ec8 – Town and Local centres: Hierarchy and 
manage ment of Development  75 
 Ec9 – Town and Local centres: Thresholds for 
Impact Assessments  78 
 Ec10 – Town and Local centres: Primary Shopping 
Area – Non-Shopping uses  78 
 Ec11 – Town and Local centres: Primary Shopping 
Areas – Hot Food Takeaway Balance  79 
 Ec12 – Local Centres  80 
 Ec13 – Tourism development  82 
9 Infrastructure and Facilities   83 
 IF1 – Development and Infrastructure  83 
 IF2 – Community and Cultural Facilities  85 
 IF3 – Open Space, S port and Recreation facilities  87 
 IF4 – Transpo rt Infrastructure and new 
development  89 
 IF5 – Leicester to Burton rail line  91 
 IF6 – Ashby Canal  93 
 IF7 – Parking provision and new development  95 
 5 
 10 Environment   97 
 En1 – Nature Conservation  98 
 En2 – River Mease Special Area of Conservatio n 100 
 En3 – The National Forest  103 
 En4 – Charnwood Forest  Regional Park  105 
 En5 – Areas of Separation  106 
 En6 – Land and Air Quality  107 
11 Historic Environment   109 
 He1 – Conservation and enhancement of North 
West Leicestershire’s historic e nvironment  111 
 He2 – Shopfront Design  113 
12 Climate Change   114 
 Cc1 – Renewable Energy  115 
 Cc2 – Flood Risk  118 
 Cc3 –Sustainable Drainage Systems  119 
13 Implementation and 
Monitoring   120 
 IM1 – Implementation and monitoring of the Local 
Plan 120 
Appendix 1  Glossary  123 
Appendix 2  Housing Trajectory  as at 1 October 2016  134 
Appendix 3  Map of area to be subject to Masterplan at 
Money Hill  135 
Appendix 4 Map of Coalville Growth Corridor and East 
Midlands Enterprise Gateway  136 
Appendix 5 Off-street Parking standards  (excluding 
residential)  137 
Appendix 6  Monitoring Framework  139 6 
 Appendix 7 Schedule of saved local plan policies  replaced by 
policies in this local plan  154 
 7 
 1 BACKGROUND  
What is planning?  
1.1 The purpose of planning is t o help achieve sustainable development. This means 
ensuring that providing for the needs of the current generation does not make life 
worse for future generations. It requires making decisions on proposals for 
development from house extensions to large sca le housing and employment 
developments which provide the homes and jobs that people require.  
What is the Local Plan?  
1.2 Most new development requires planning permission before it can be built. Planning 
policies are used to help decide whether planning p ermission should be granted or 
not. The role of the Local Plan is to set out such policies and to help secure  sustainable 
development by identifying how much new development is required and where it 
should go.   
1.3 The preparation of the Local Plan has in cluded a number of consultations and the plan 
was the subject of an Examination in early 2017. Following receipt o f the Inspector’s 
Report in October 2017 , the plan was adopted in November  2017.  
1.4 The adopted Local Plan together with the Minerals and Was te Local Plan prepared by 
Leicestershire County Council comprise the Development Plan for North West 
Leicestershire.  The Development Plan provides the basis for determining planning 
applications.  
1.5 This Local Plan r eplaces the 2002 adopted Local P lan. 
What other matters have we had regard  to in preparing the Local Plan?  
1.6 The Local Plan is not prepared in isolation  and must be consistent with national 
policies.  These are set out in the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) which 
was published by the Government in 2012. The NPPF is also supplemented by a range 
of Planning Practice  Guidance (PPG)  on a variety of subjects. This provides guidance on 
the interpretation and implementation of requirements in the NPPF . 
 
1.7 Throughout this document there are various references to the NPPF and the P PG. 
 
1.8 In addition to national policies we have complied with various European level 
regulations. In particular the plan has been subject to a Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) to assess the plan ’s envir onmental impacts. We have also 
undertake n a Habitats Regulations Assessment (HRA) to consider the impact of the 
policies and proposals of the Local Plan on sites of European significance designated 
for species and habitats (Special Areas of Conservation (S AC)) or birds (Special 
Protected Areas (SPA)). Th e part of the river Mease and its tributaries which lie within  
North West Leicestershire are designated as a Special Area of Conservation .    8 
  
1.9 The plan has also been subject to a Sustainability Appraisal  (SA) to assess not only the 
environmental effect s of the plan, but also the economic and social effects.  
 
Duty to Cooperate  
 
1.10 The Localism Ac t 2011  introduced a requirement on local planning  authorities to co -
operate with neighbouring local authoriti es and other bodies  with a regulatory or 
strategic in terest in Local Plan issues. This is referred to as the  “Duty to Cooperate”  
and includes the need to consider the impact of the strategy  as a whole and its 
proposals for major development on other places  close  to North West Leicestershire.  
 
1.11 North West Leicestershire lies within the county of Leicestershire which, together with 
Leicester City, has been identified as a Housing Marke t Area (HMA) and the Leicester 
and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnershi p area (LLEP). We have a close working 
relationship with the authorities across the HMA/LLEP through a variety of different 
groups.  
 
1.12 The LLEP is serviced by three different boards (Place, People and Business). The Place 
Board is itself then serviced by a Strategic Planning Group which  consists of high level 
officers from the various authorities.  It is through this group that cooperation at a 
strategic level is co -ordinated and also provides a direct link in to the work of the LLEP 
with whom we are re quired to cooperate.  A Member Advisory Group which consists 
of the appropriate portfolio holders from each authority has also been established to 
provide a political buy -in to the work of the Strategic Planning Group.  
 
1.13 In terms of this Local Plan we have co -operated with our partners across the 
HMA/LLEP on a variety of matters including:  
 
 Establishing housing and employment requirements  through a Housing and 
Economic Developments Needs Assessment (HEDNA) .  
 Planning for Climate Change – a report commis sioned by all the HMA authorities 
(except Charnwood Borough) which considered the potential of different sources of 
renewable energy across Leicestershire.  
 Charnwood Forest - the District Council has worked with Leicestershire County 
Council, Charnwood Bor ough Council and Hinckley and Bosworth Borough Council 
to set up a Charnwood Forest Regional Park Steering Group to oversee the creation 
of a Regional Park and to agree its long term Vision. This Vision has informed the  
Charnwood Forest policies of this Lo cal Plan.  
 
1.14 We have worked with the highway authorities (Highways England and Leicestershire 
County Council) to establish the impact of proposed development on the highway 
network and to identify new infrastructure requirements resulting from this 
deve lopment.  9 
 1.15 The river Mease Special Area of Conservation also covers part of the districts of 
Lichfield and South Derbyshire. We have worked with the two authorities and Natural 
England, the Environment Agency and Severn Trent to develop  a joint strateg y to 
ensure that there is no detrimental impact  on the wate r quality of the river Mease as a 
result of development.  
1.16 We have worked with the Environment Agency and Leicestershire County Council to 
prepare an updated Strategic Flood Risk Assessment and with the former in the 
preparation of a Water Cycle Study.  
1.17 Outside of the HMA/LLEP we also adjoin a number of other local authorities (North 
Warwickshire, Lichfield, South Derbyshire, Erewash and Rushcliffe).  In addition to the 
work on the river Meas e outlined above we have agreed a Statement of Common 
Ground with South Derbyshire. We also have a regular dialogue with each of these 
authorities, none of whom have asked North West Leicestershire for help in meeting 
their development needs.   
Evidence ba se 
1.18 A wide r anging evidence base was used to inform this Local Plan. This can be viewed 
on the Council’s website (www.nwleics.gov.uk).  
Structure of Document  
1.19 The Local Plan is divided into a number of themed chapters which then contain a 
number of policies and supporting text. The policies are shown in grey boxes.   
 
1.20 The Local Plan is also accompanied by a Policies Map which shows  the location of 
proposed allocations of land and other land use related policy information, on an 
ordnance survey ba se map .  There is one single map which covers the whole district.  
At a settlement level there are then a series of inset maps which show more details at 
a suitable scale.  
 
1.21 Alongside the Policies Map are Wind Energy Map s.  Th ese identif y the areas wit hin the 
district potentially suitable for both medium -large scale and small scale wind energy 
development.  
 
1.22 We are aware that planning is full of a lot of technical words and jargon. To help you 
understand this better we have included a glossary of ke y terms at Appendix 1 of this 
document.  
 
IT IS IMPORTANT TO NOTE THAT WHEN USING THE LOCAL  PLAN TO FORM A VIEW 
ON A PROPOS ED DEVELOPMENT ALL OF THE POLICIES CONTAINED IN THE PLAN 
MUST BE CONSIDERED TOGETHER WHEN FORMING A VIEW.  
 10 
 2 NORTH WEST LEICESTERSHI RE CONTEXT  
2.1 North West Leicestershire  district,  as the name suggests, comprises the north -west 
part of the county of Leicestershire and is a mainly rural district, covering 27,900 
hectares  (108 square miles). The district shares borders with the counti es of 
Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, Staffordshire and Warwickshire.  
2.2 The district is close to, and has excellent road access with four major cities - 
Birmingham, Derby, Leicester and Nottingham - using the motorway network (M1 
north/south and M42 south -west /north -east). However, there are no passenger rail 
services in the district.  In the north of the district is the East Midlands Airport (EMA )  
2.3 Most of the southern part of the district lies within the National Forest which spans 
three counties in the centre  of England - Derbyshire, Le icestershire and Staffordshire, 
whilst the upland area of the Charnwood Forest lies in the south -east corner.  
2.4 The population of the district was about 93,500 as at the 2011 Census. The principal 
town is Coalville and the other main settlements are Ashby de la Zouch, Castle 
Donington, Ibstock, Kegworth and Measham.  
2.5 The map on the next page shows the location of the district and its wider context.  11 
 
 12 
 3 NORTH WEST LEICESTERSHIRE PROFILE  
3.1 The Sustaina bility Appraisal scoping rep ort sets out a detailed assessment of the 
district and its characteristics which provides a context for the Local Plan.  The 
following provides a summary of the key characteristics and follows the order of the 
Scoping Report:  
Population  
 There were 93,468 people as at the 2011 Census, a growth of a bout 9,000 
from the 2001 Census.  
 The population is ageing with a rapid increase in the number of residents aged 
40-49 and 60 -69 in the last 10 years, whilst the  number o f 25-39 year olds has 
decreased.  
 According t o the 2011 Census the largest population was in Coalville (36,801 
people) followed by Ashby -de-la-Zouch (12,385), Castle Donington  (6,350), 
Ibstock (5,961), Measham (5,200) and Kegworth (3,541).  
 There are high concentrations of working age people in Coalvi lle and Castle 
Donington, whilst older people are concentrated in the Measham/Appleby 
Magna area and younger people in Ashby de la Zouch and Ellistown.  
 The district is the 200th most deprived local authority in England (out of 354)  
but it is the most depri ved in Leicestershire (excluding Leicester City) with  
pockets of  deprivation  concentrated  in Coalvil le, Greenhill, Ibstock, Measham , 
Moira, Ashby and Castle Donington.  
 
Housing  
 The proportion of 3 bed dwellings is higher than the average in Leicestershire 
and England, as is the proportion of detached dwe llings and terraced 
properties.  
 There has been an increase of 17%  in overcrowding between the 2001 Census 
and the 2011 Census but this is less than that for the East Midla nds (36%) and 
England & Wales (32%).  
 
Employment and the economy  
 In terms of competitiveness and growth opportunities, North West 
Leicestershire enjoys a highly accessible position in the middle of the country, 
with good road links and a growing international airport . Partly because of its 
accessibility, the area has proved attractive to inward investors, and has 
recently seen h igh levels of employment growth.  
 There are significantly more people employed in the transport and logistics 
sector (19.8%), wholesale/retail (17.3%), construction (5. 9%), professional and 
other private s ervices (17.3%) than nationally.  13 
  Economic forecasts based on the Experian 2013 data for the district indicate 
that from 2012 to 2031 the sectors predicted most likely to grow by over 1% 
are transport & storage; professi onal & other private services; 
accommodation, food services & rec reation; and wholesale & retail .  Only 
three sectors are predicted to decline (one very marginally), the two with the 
greatest predicted decline are agriculture, forestry & fishing and by a l arge 
proportion the greatest declin e is predicted in manufacturing.  
 The overall job density in NWL (i.e. the number of jobs per head of population 
aged 16 to 64 so 1 equals one job for one person) was 1.05 in 2012 which 
indicates in commuting in to the dis trict and is an increase from 2011 when it 
was 0.92 . 
 There was a concentration of higher order occupations ‘Managers, Directors 
and Senior Officials’ according to the Census 2011 around Appleby (18.1%) and 
the rural wards of central NWL (Breedon and Valley ).  In contrast there were 
concentrations of those with ‘Elementary Occupations’ in the wards of 
Coalville (17.4%) and Greenhill, both associated with the settlement o f 
Coalville and also in Measham.  
 The proportion of the workforce with NVQ4+ level skills,  including university 
degree, at 25.4%, is lower than the proportion for Great Britain and East 
Midlands  (35.2% and 30.1% respectively).  
 
Transport and Access  
 North West Leicestershire benefits from excellent road transport links. It is at 
the intersection s of the M1 and A42 whilst the A50 provides a link from the 
north of the distr ict to Stoke on Trent and the North West of England and in 
the south -east to Leicester whilst the A453 provi des a direct link to 
Nottingham.  
 No passenger rail services in the dis trict, whilst bu s service provision is 
variable.  
 Travel to work is dominated by the use of the car. 
 There is a net in -flow of commuters based on the 20 11 Census (7,453 
persons) . 
 East Midlands Airport  (EMA) is in the north of the district and is one of the 
UK’s major freight airports. It has seen significant growth in both passenger 
numbers and cargo freight since the mid -1990s, but the economic downturn 
has resulted in re duced levels of both. A s would be expected of a large airport 
there are environmental i ssues relating  to its operation.  These include noise 
impacts on local residents associated with take -off and landing, and also issues 
relating to significant carbon emissions from aircraft . 
 
 
 
 14 
 Air quality and noise  
 
 There are f ive Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) i n the district; M1 Mole 
Hill Kegworth; High Street Kegworth; Stephenson Way/Bardon Road Coalville; 
High Street/Bondgate Castle Donin gton and Copt Oak Road Copt Oak.  
 There  are noise issues associated with transport, particularly at East Midlan ds 
Airport,  as well as events at Donington Park.  
 
Climate Change  
 
 A technical review of renewable energy potential for the district for 2020 to 
2030 indicates that there is potential for over 255MW of electricity and 
217MW of heat in 2020 to be generated from all sources, including small scale 
generation. The greatest potential is from wind energy (up to 80% of the 
total), with solar P hotovoltaic  the other main source . However,  the overall 
potential is less than some other districts in Leicestershire and Ru tland, due to 
limited wind resource.   
 Information from the Department of Energy and Climate Change shows at 
present there is very little opportunity for district heat in the district.   
 The tonnes of CO 2 per capita in the district has steadily declined fr om 2005 to 
2011 (commercial and domestic), although this has been less marked for 
transport.  However, per capita emissions are well above that for England; in 
2011 this was approximately 8.8 tonnes CO 2 per capita compared to England 
at 5.6 tonnes CO 2 per capita. This is largely attributable to industrial and 
commercial sources and transport (1.6 tonnes and 1.5 tonnes more than 
England respectively) whilst domestic is only marginally higher than England 
(0.1 tonne difference).   
 The district lies wholly wit hin the catchment of the River Trent.  
 Fluvial flooding represents the primary source of flood risk with the northern 
part of the district (K egworth across to Castle Donington) at the highest risk of 
fluvial flooding from the rivers Trent and Soar. Other a reas at risk of flood ing 
are central Ashby -de-la-Zouch , parts  of the wider Coalville Urban Area 
including Thringston e and Whitwick and the southern edge of Measham.   
 Other potential sources of flooding include flooding from sewers and potential 
canal infr astructure failure, surface water flooding and groundwater rising 
from former coal mining areas , although the areas at risk are difficult to 
define.  
 
Biodiversity and geodiversity  
 
 The river Mease (including its tributary the Gilwiskaw Brook) is designated  as a 
Special Area of Conservation (SAC), a European level designation, as well as a 
Site of Special Scientific Interest. Water quality in the river has deteriorated 
mainly due to high phosphorus levels. A Restoration Plan and Water Quality 15 
 Management Plan  have been put in place. These are supported by a Developer 
Contributions Strategy which seeks to ensure that new development that 
affects water quality makes a financial contribution towards measures to 
improve water quality.  
 There are 17 Sites of Special  Scientific Interest in the district, the majority of 
which are assessed as being in favourable or un favourable recovering 
condition.  
 There is one National Nature Reserve and 5 Local Nature Reserves.  
 There are two Local Biodiversity Action Plans relevant t o North West 
Leicestershire: Leicester, Leicestershire & Rutland Biodiversity Action Plan 
(Leicestershire and Rutland Wildlife Trust, 2010) and The National Forest 
Biodiversity Action Plan (National Forest, 2004). The former consists of 19 
Habitat Action P lans and 16 Species Action Plans whilst the latter consists of 18 
Habitat Action Plans and 9 Species Action Plans.  
 
Landscape and Land  
 
 There are no nationally designated landscapes within the district. However, 
the district is covered by 5 National Chara cter Areas, as identified by Natural 
England. These are: Trent Valley Washlands, Melbourne Parklands, 
Leicestershire and South Derbyshire Coalfield, Mease/Sence Lowlands, and 
Charnwood.  
 The Charnwood Forest represents the highest land in Leicestershire and  has a 
distinctive landscape character with geology of international importance and a 
rich biodiversity. The area has been identified as a Regional Park to reflect its 
importance in landscape terms and as an area for recreation. The Regional 
Park is a non-statutory designation, led by a steering group of local partners, 
with specific objectives for environmental, social and economic benefits.  
 The National Forest was designated in the early 1990’s to transform the 
landscape and link the ancient forests of C harnwood (to the east) and 
Needwood (to the west).  The National Forest covers about 56% of the district 
including the larger settlements of Coalville, Ashby de la Zouch, Ibstock and 
Measham.  
 
Cultural Heritage  
 
 There are 22 Conservation Areas, 23 Schedule d Monuments, 640 Listed 
Buildings and 3 Registered Parks and Gardens.  
 
Water  
 
 The various rivers that run through the district have Water Abstraction 
Licensing Strategies in place which generally identify  that water is available, 16 
 although in some places th ere may be occasions where water is more limited 
when flows are at low levels.  
 Severn Trent’s Water Resource Management Plan identifies that water will be 
available for use sufficient to meet future demand of customers and it also 
targets spare headroom ca pacity.  
 The North West Leicestershire Water Cycle Study 2012 highlights known 
capacity issues at the Snarrows Wastewater Treatment Works that serves the 
Coalville Urban Area.  
Waste and minerals  
 There ex ists supplies of minerals which need to be protected f rom 
development which would sterilise them.  17 
 4 WHAT ARE THE ISSUES?  
 
4.1 Based on the findings outlined above, the Scoping Report identifie d a broad range of 
issues across the district.  
4.2 The following list summarises the key issues , in no particular or der, from  the Scoping  
Report and concentrates upon those which are most likely to require addressing 
through the planning system.  
 Table 1 – summary of key issues  
Housing  Ensure provision of housing to meet the needs of all 
communities , including provision  of housing for older people 
and families as well as affordable housing.  
Services and 
facilities  Need to ensure  that the services and facilities in the district are  
appropriate to  meet the needs of a growing  and changing 
population.   
Accessibility  Need to ensure that communities have access to services and 
facilities, including by public transport, walking and cycling. 
However, current bus service provision is variable  which impacts 
upon some sections of the community more than others, for 
example the el derly and infirm.  
Housing and 
economic growth  Ensure that growth in housing and the economy complement 
each other in terms of scale . 
Economy  Support for economic growth will require the provision of 
additional land and premises across the district, incl uding rural 
areas, and support for tourism and leisure.  
Retailing  Health  checks of town centres show that performance is 
variable, with particular issues in Coalville which is the principal 
town centre in the district. Need to protect and enhance 
centres.  
Pollution  To improve air quality in the 5 Air Quality Management Areas 
which are largely linked to transport related issues. In addition, 
need to ensure that new development is not itself detrimentally 
affected by noise and pollution  and deals with any o nsite land 
contamination issues . 
Flooding  Some areas at risk of flooding, largely in the northern part of the 
district along the rivers Trent and Soar.  18 
 Nature 
conservation  River Mease Special Area of Conservation is affected by water 
quality issues, whi lst the condition of some Sites of Special 
Scientific Interest is a concern.  
Landscape  There is a varied landscape in terms of character and 
appearance. New development needs to reflect this in its design 
and layout, whilst the N ational F orest and Charnwo od Forest are 
major assets where enhancement will benefit the district.  
Agricultural Land  There are limited areas of best and most versatile agricultural 
land so it is important to ensure that these areas are protected.  
Heritage  The provision of new de velopment needs to be achieved whilst 
also paying due regard to the protection and enhancement of 
heritage assets . 
 
4.3 It should be appreciated that not all of the issues identified in the Scoping report are 
ones which can necessarily be addressed by the  planning system, which is largely 
concerned with new development. For example, issues related to training and skills 
will largely be addressed through education and other training establishments and 
possibly involve various training programmes which m ay b e supported by government 
or the Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership.  The role of planning is 
limited to ensuring that new development does not detrimentally affect the ability of 
education establishments to provide education because of a lack of physical space. 
Where development would have an adverse impact on capacity then it will be 
necessary to ensure that new development makes a suitable financial or other 
contribution towards the enhancement of facilities.  Therefore, the issues outlin ed 
above and the following objectives are those which can most directly be addressed 
using the planning system . 
4.4 Implementation of the policies as well as the provision of infrastructure will require 
co-operation and input from a wide range of organisat ions, including neighbouring 
authorities, as well as public, voluntary and private sector organisations.  
OUR VISION  
4.5 The Spatial Vision set out below describes the kind of place that we want North West 
Leicestershire to be by the end of the Plan period . It picks up on the key issues that are 
set out in the previous section.  
 19 
 By 2031 North West Leicestershire will have continued its transformation, started in 
the 1980s, from a former coalfield area characterised by environmental degradation, 
a struggling  economy and poor connections into a place fit for the 21st century. This 
will be reflected in the maturing of the National Forest as both an environmental and 
economic asset and in the attractiveness of the towns and villages in North West 
Leicestershire as places in which to live, work and relax.  
Businesses will choose to locate and grow in this area, taking advantage of its 
excellent location in the centre of the country, close to major road and rail networks 
and a major international airport. The East Midlands Enterprise Gateway, focussed on 
East Midlands Airport, Donington Park and the East Midlands Gateway Rail Fright 
Interchange, will be recognised as a key destination in its own right. This strongly 
performing economy will be reflected in low unempl oyment and reduced instances of 
deprivation.  
The district will continue to be a place of choice for people wishing to live here, with 
lots to see and do, such as the National Forest,  Charnwood Forest, Ashby Canal and a 
plethora of heritage assets,  as well as being strong communities built around vibrant, 
accessible places and awar d winning housing developments.  
As the district ’s main town, Coalville will have grown significantly and the town will 
have benefited from major new investment in infrastructure an d as a result, the town 
centre regeneration as a heritage town will be well underway. Elsewhere, the other 
key centres, including the historic market towns of Ashby d e la Zouch and Castle 
Donington , will be vibrant c entres which meet people’ s day -to-day sh opping needs as 
well as supporting a thriving night time economy . 
 
OBJECTIVES   
4.6 Having regard to the issues outlined above, those in the  Sustainability Appraisal  
Scoping Report and to national policies as set out in the National Planning Policy 
Framewo rk a range of objectives have been prepared to identify what we are seeking 
to achieve through the Local Plan  and new development.  
Objective 1 - Promote the health and wellbeing of the district ’s population.  
Objective 2 - Support the delivery of new homes  balanced with economic growth to 
provide a stock of housing that meets the needs of the community, including the need 
for affordable housing.  
Objective 3 - Ensure  new development is of a high quality of design and layout whilst 
having due regard to the nee d to accommodate national standards in a way that 
reflects local context and circumstances . 20 
 Objective 4 – Ensure regard is had to reducing the need to travel and to maintain ing 
access to services and facilities including jobs, shops, education, sport and r ecreation, 
green space,  cultural facilities,  communication networks, health and social care.  
Objective 5 - Support economic growth throughout the district and the provision of a 
diverse range of employment opportunities  including the development of tourism  and 
leisure .  
Objective 6 - Enhance the vitality and viability of the districts town and local centres, 
with a particular focus on the regeneration of Coalville, in ways that help meet the 
consumer needs.  
Objective 7 - Enhance  community safety  so far as practically possible and in a way 
which is proportionate to the scale of development proposed whenever allocating 
sites for development or granting planning permission . 
Objective 8 - Prepare for, lim it and adapt to climate change.  
Objective 9 - New develop ments need to be designed to use water efficiently, to 
reduce  flood risk and  the demand for water within the district, whilst at the same time 
taking full account of flood risk  and ensuring the effective use of sustainable urban 
drainage systems (SUDs ).  
Objective 10 - Conserve and enhance the identity, character and diversity and local 
distinctiveness of the district ’s built,  natural, cultural,  industrial and rural heritage and 
heritage  assets . 
Objective 11 - Protect and enhance the natural environment inc luding the district ’s 
biodiversity , geodiversity and water environment areas identified for their 
importance.  
Objective 12 - Conserve and enhance the quality of the district ’s landscape character 
including the National Forest and Charnwood Forest  and othe r valued landscapes . 
Objective 13 - Take account of the need to reduce the amount of waste produced.  
Objective 14 - Seek  to deliver the infrastructure needs of the area,  including Green 
sustainable development.  
Objective 15 - Take full account of the need to safeguard mineral resources including 
sand and gravel, igneous rock and brickclay.  21 
 5 STRATEGY  
INTRODUCTION  
5.1 This chapter sets out the main components of our strategy  
 
HOW MUCH NEW DEVELOP MENT IS REQUIRED?  
 
5.2 People are living longer, birth rates  are increasing and more people are moving into 
the district. As a result we have a growing and changing community who need homes, 
jobs, shops and services.  
 
5.3 A key aspect of the Local Plan is to identify the amount of new jobs  and homes  needed 
in the d istrict and then translating these in to the provision of sufficient land.  
 
Business Needs  
 
5.4 A Housing and Economic Needs Development Assessment (HEDNA) has been 
undertaken for the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area (HMA) which 
identifies  the future housing and employment needs for the district. Whilst the HEDNA 
was completed towards the end of the process of preparing this Plan it was considered 
and subjected to public consultation as part of the evidence base and provides the 
basis for t he housing and employment provision made in this plan.    
 
5.5 The HEDNA has identified a need for 66 hectares of employment land (comprising 
those uses which fall within Class B1, B2 and B8 of less than 9,000sq metres (as 
defined by the Use Classes Order 2 015)). A study1 in respect of the need for additional 
provision for distribution use s (Class B8) of more than 9,000 sq metres has identified a 
need for both additional road and rail connected sites across the HMA but it does not 
identify any specific requir ements for individual districts/boroughs. Within North West 
Leicestershire such provision has already been made through a Strategic Rail Fr eight 
Interchange (SRFI) near to East Midlands Airport/ M1 J unction 24 (referred to as 
Roxhill), which was approved by  the Secretary of State in January 2016.  
 
Housing Needs  
 
5.6 For North West Leicestershire the HEDNA identified an Obj ectively Assessed Need 
(OAN) of  481 dwellings each year for the period 2011 -2031. This equates to a total of 
9,620 dwellings.   
 
5.7 Havin g regard to this evidence this Local Plan makes provision sufficient to ensure that 
a minimum of 9,620 dwellings will be delivered over the plan period 2011 -31. 
 
                                                           
1 Leicester and Leicestersh ire Strategic Distribution Study  22 
 5.8 Policy S1 recognises that there is a need to undertake an early review of the Local 
Plan . This is because whilst the current total provision of employment land is about 
291 hectares, there is a mismatch between the type of land identified as being 
required in the HEDNA and the actual provision. There is a shortfall of about 29 
hectares when com pared to the HEDNA requirement for Class B1, B2 and B8 of less 
than 9,000sq metres. This reflects the fact that the HEDNA was completed towards the 
end of the process of preparing this plan. In addition, it is apparent that not all of the 
other HMA authori ties will be able to accommodate their housing needs within their 
boundaries. The Council is committed to working with the other HMA authorities to 
agree how and where this unmet need will be accommodated. It may, therefore, be 
necessary for additional pro vision to be made for housing (and/or employment) when 
this work is completed.   
 
Shopping Needs  
 
5.9 As the population grows it is necessary to ensure that as much of the shopping needs 
of local people as possible can be met within the district.  
 
5.10 A Retail Capacity Study was undertaken in late 2014  which assessed the  need  for 
additional shopping provision (both  convenience (food) and comparison (non -food) 
goods). This study took into account projections of population growth, spending 
projections and non-traditional forms of shopping as well as sites with permission for a 
retail use or where new shops have been developed.   
 
5.11  A number of scenarios were used to identify future floorspace requirements, using 
either a static or increased expenditure re tention rate. Overall the study 
recommended that there is a need for 7,300 sqm of additional comparison retail 
floorspace in the District for the period to 2031, with the need not arising until after 
2016.  No additional need for convenience retail floorsp ace was identified.   
 
5.12 Following on from this a further retail study was undertaken in 2016, this time 
focusing on an assessment  of the operator demand for retail property in the town 
centres of  Coalville and Ashby de la Zouch.  This has suggested tha t there is limited 
demand at this time.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 23 
  
Policy S 1 – Future housing and economic development needs  
 
Over the plan period to 2031 provision will be made to meet the housing and 
employment land needs of the district as identified in the Leicester  and 
Leicestershire Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (January 
2017).  
This means that:  
 provision will be made for the development of a minimum of 9,620 
dwellings (481 dwellings per annum) which is the Objectively Assessed Need 
(OAN) and Hou sing Requirement for the district;  
 provision will be made for 66 hectares of land for employment purposes 
(B1, B2 and B8 of less than 9,000sq metres)  
Provision will also be made for 7,300sq metres for shopping purposes.  
The Council will continue to work co llaboratively with the Leicester & Leicestershire 
Housing Market Area (HMA) authorities to establish the scale and distribution of 
any additional provision that may be necessary in North West Leicestershire and 
elsewhere in the HMA as a result of the inabi lity of one or more authority to 
accommodate its own needs as identified in the Leicester and Leicestershire 
Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment.  
The District Council will commence a review of this Local Plan (defined as being 
publication of an invitation to make representations in accordance with Regulation 
18 of The Town and Country Planning (Local Planning) (England) Regulations 2012) 
by the end of January 2018 or within 3 months of the adoption of this Local Plan 
(whichever is the later). The Plan Review will be submitted for examination within 
two years from the commencement of the review. In the event that the reviewed 
plan is not submitted within two years then this Local Plan will be deemed to be out 
of date.  
 
WHERE SHOULD DEVELOP MENT GO?  
5.13 A core principle of the NPPF is to “focus significant development in locations which are 
or can be made sustainable”.  To help do this we define a settlement hierarchy to 
distinguish between the roles and functions of different settlements and to guide the 
location of future development, although it should be appreciated that the scale and 
location of most new development that is needed is already committed.   
 
Policy S 2 – Settlement Hierarchy  
The following Settlement Hierarchy will be used when a ssessing the suitability of a 
settlement for new development, with the general principle being that those 24 
 settlements higher up the hierarchy will take more growth than those lower down 
and that the type of development proposed is appropriate to the scale and 
character of the settlement and its place in the hierarchy.  
Settlement Classification  Settlement(s)  
Principal Town  
The primary settlement in the district which 
provides an extensive range of services and 
facilities including employment, leisure and 
shopping and which is accessible by sustainable  
transport from surrounding areas and to other 
large settlements outside the district. The largest 
amount of new development will be directed here, 
including retail development, to support the 
regeneration of C oalville Town Centre.   
Coalville Urban Area 
which comprises of 
Coalville, Donington -le-
Heath, Greenhill, 
Hugglescote, Snibston, 
Thringstone and 
Whitwick as well as the 
Bardon employment 
area.  
Key Service Centre  
Smaller than the Principal Town in terms of 
population and also the range of services and 
facilities they provide, they play an important role 
providing services and facilities to the surrounding 
area and are accessible by some sustainable 
transport .  A significant amount of development 
will take pl ace in these settlements but less than 
that in the Principal Town.   
Ashby de la Zouch  
Castle Donington  
Local Service Centre  
Settlements which provide some services and 
facilities primarily of a local nature meeting day -
to-day needs and where a reasonabl e amount of 
new development will take place.   
Ibstock  
Kegworth  
Measham  
Sustainable Villages  
Settlements which have a limited range of services 
and facilities where a limited amount of growth  
will take place  within the  defin ed Limits  to 
Development . Albert  Village, Appleby 
Magna, Belton, 
Blackfordby, Breedon 
on the Hill, Coleorton 
(the Lower Moor Road 
area only), Diseworth, 
Donisthorpe, Ellistown, 
Heather, Long 
Whatton, Moira 
(including Norris Hill), 25 
 Oakthorpe, Packington, 
Ravenstone, 
Swannington, 
Worthingt on. 
Small Village  
Settlements with very limited services and where 
development will be restricted to conversions of 
existing buildings or the redevelopment of 
previously developed land (as defined in the 
National Planning Policy Framework) or affordable 
housing in accordance with Policy H5 (Rural 
Exceptions Sites for Affordable Housing).  
 
 Battram, Coleorton 
(the part not 
considered to be a 
Sustainable Village), 
Griffydam, Hemington, 
Lockington, Lount, 
Newbold, Newton 
Burgoland, 
Osgathorpe, Peggs 
Green, S inope, 
Snarestone, 
Swepstone, Spring 
Cottage, Tonge, 
Wilson.  
Hamlets  
Small groups of dwellings with no services and 
facilities and where development will be 
considered in the context of t he countryside policy 
(Policy S3).  
 
 
The re -use of previously deve loped land (as defined in the National Planning Policy 
Framework) will be supported where it is compatible with the settlement hierarchy 
set out above. The redevelopment of previously developed land for housing should 
be within or well -related to the Princ ipal Town, a Key Service Centre, Local Service 
Centre, Sustainable Village or Small Village.  
 
Any development provided for within this policy which discharges wastewater into 
the Mease catchment will be subject to the provisions of policy En2. Any such 
development which does not meet these provisions will not be permitted . 
 
5.14 In considering the sustainability of different settlements this means looking at the 
range of services and facilities available including accessibility by public transport and 
non-car modes. Consideration also needs to be given to the role of specific 
settlements. For example, some settlements will have services and facilities which only 
serve the immediate population, whilst in other settlements there is a greater range of 
services  and facilities which serve an area wider than the settlement itself.  
 
5.15 Therefore i n defining the settlement hierarchy we have assessed the different  
settlements within the district in terms of the range of services and facilities available .  26 
 Services  looked at include schools, post office, general store, doctors surgery, 
recreational and community facilities as well as accessibility by public transport and 
non-car modes.  The frequency of public transport services to and from settlements 
and also the r ange of destinations of services have also been taken into account.   
Consideration has also been given to th e role of specific settlements.  Those 
settlements with fewer facilities and services are less self-sufficient  in their ability to 
meet the daily req uirements of residents.  
 
5.16 In North West Leicestershire the following settlements (in alphabetical order) offer the 
most comprehensive range of services and facilities and they also, to some extent, 
serve other settlements as well:  
 
 Ashby de la Zouch;  
 Castle Donington;  
 Coalville Urban Area;  
 Ibstock;  
 Kegworth ; and  
 Measham  
 
5.17 Therefore, these six settlements form the central part of our settlement hierarchy and 
will accommodate the vast majority of new development.  
5.18 Outside of these settlements the re are a number of settlements which have some 
services and facilities but on a much lesser scale. Some development in these 
settlements will be appropriate, although there is already a significant level of 
provision made through planning permissions. Any further development in such 
settlements will be restricted to either in filling or previously developed land which is 
well related to the settlement concerned . We term these as Sustainable Villages and 
they comprise:   
Albert Village, Appleby Magna, Belton, Blackfordby, Breedon on the Hill, Coleorton (the 
Lower Moor Road area only), Diseworth, Donisthorpe, Ellistown, Heather, Long 
Whatton, Moira (including Norris Hill), Oakthorpe, Packington, Ravenstone, 
Swannington, Worthington.  
5.19 Beyond these the remaini ng settlements have very few services and facilities. 
Development in these locations would inevitably require the use of private vehicles to 
access services and facilities. Such an approach is at odds with the aim of the NPPF and 
so is inappropriate.    
Battram, Coleorton (the part not considered to be a Sustainable Village), Griffydam, 
Hemington, Lockington, Lount, Newbold, Newton Burgoland, Normanton le Heath, 
Osgathorpe, Peggs Green, Sinope, Snarestone, Swepstone, Spring Cottage, Tonge, 
Wilson.  27 
 5.20 Ther e are also small groups of buildings in the countryside that sometimes have a 
settlement name and may be best described as hamlets and that have no facilities.  
Development proposals in these settlements wil l be considered against Policy S3 
(Countryside).  
COUNTRYSIDE  
5.21 The NPPF recognises the  need to “take account of the different roles a nd character of 
different areas ,“ and that planning should recognise “the intrinsic character and 
beauty of the countryside. ” 
Policy S 3 – Countryside  
Land outside the L imits to Development is identified as countryside where those 
uses listed (a) to (s) below will be supported, subject to those considerations set 
out in criteria (i) to (vi) below . 
(a) Agriculture  including agricultural workers dwellings ; 
(b) Forestry  including fo restry workers dwellings ; 
(c) The preservation of Listed Buildings;  
(d) The re -use and adaptation of buildings for appropriate purposes 
including housing in accordance with the  Settlement Hierarchy (Policy 
S2); 
(e) The redevelopment of previously developed land in acc ordance with 
Policy S2;  
(f) Flood protection;  
(g) Affordable housi ng in accordance with Policy H 5; 
(h) The extension and replacement of dwellings;  
(i) Expansion of all types of business and enterprise in rural areas, both   
through conversion of existing buildings and well-designed  new 
buildings;  
(j) Sites for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople in 
accordance with Policy H7; 
(k) Small -scale employment generating development or farm 
diversification;  
(l) Community services and facilities meeting a proven local need;  
(m) Develop ment by statutory undertakers or public utility providers;  
(n) Recreation and tourism;  
(o) Renewable energy;  
(p) Development at East Midlands Air port in accordance with Policy Ec5 ; 
(q) Development at Donington Park Racetrack in accordanc e with Policy 
Ec8; 
(r) Transport infras tructure;  
(s) Employment land in accordance with the provisions of Policy Ec2 . 
 
Development s in accordance with (a) to (s) above will be supported where : 
(i)       the appearance and character of the landscape, including its historic 
character and features suc h as biodiversity, views, settlement 28 
 pattern, rivers, watercourses, field patterns, industrial heritage and 
local distinctiveness is safeguarded and enhanced.  Decisions in 
respect of impact on landscape character and appearance will be 
informed by the Lei cester, Leicestershire and Rutland Historic 
Landscape Characterisation Study, National Character Areas and any 
subsequent pieces of evidence;  and  
 
(ii)      it does not undermine, either individually or cumulatively with 
existing or proposed development, the physical and perceived 
separation and open undeveloped character between nearby 
settlements either through contiguous extensions to existing 
settlements or through development on isolated sites on land 
divorced from settlement boundaries; and  
 
(iii) it does not create or exacerbate ribbon development; and  
 
(iv) built development is well integrated with existing development and 
existing buildings, including the re -use of existing buildings, where 
appropriate; and  
 
(v) the development will not seriously u ndermine the vitality and 
viability of existing town and local centres ; and 
 
(vi) The proposed development is accessible, or will be made accessible, 
by a range of sustainable transport.  
 
 
5.22 North West Leicestershire is a mainly rural district and the area that separates our 
towns and villages consists of largely undeveloped countryside.  Although major 
infrastructure, urban and industrial influences are rarely far away, there remain 
substantial areas of open, mainly arable, farmland. We want to maintain , and where 
possible enhance, the environmental, economic and social value of the countryside.  
5.23 We have defined Limits to Development around most of our settlements as a means 
of distinguishing between areas of potential for new development and areas w hich 
can be regarded as countryside where development will be considered having regard 
to the provisions of Policy S3.  
5.24 The uses listed above are those which it is considered would be potentially 
appropriate in the countrys ide but it will be necessary  to ensure that proposed 
development does not unduly impact upon the character and appearance of the 
countryside.  29 
 5.25 The landscape of the countryside varies in character and appearance across the 
district. It is important that account is taken of these d ifferences in considering 
development proposals in the countryside.  
 
5.26 Whilst policy seeks to facilitate the diversification of the rural economy, there are also 
benefits to the protection of the best and most versatile agricultural land.  Where 
appropr iate we shall seek the use of areas of poorer quality land in preference to that 
of agricultural land of a higher quality.  
 
5.27 Natural England has defined National Character Areas across the whole country. There 
are five National Character Areas  within N orth West Leicestershire : 
 
 Trent Valley Washlands (Area 69)  
 Melbourne Parklands (Area 70)  
 Leicestershire and South Derbyshire Coalfield ( Area 71)  
 Mease/Sence Lowlands (Area 72)  
 Charnwood (Area 73)  
5.28 Each of these areas has a profile associated with it which describes in detail the key 
landscape features and identifies any issues and opportunities. We will have regard to 
these , along with the Leicester, Leicestershire and Rutland Historic Landscape 
Characterisation Assessment,  National Character Areas, a nd any subsequent pieces of 
evidence  when considering proposals in a countryside location . Regard will also be had 
to the potential impact on landscape beyond the district’s boundaries, where 
appropriate, along with supporting evidence.  
5.29 In respect of transport infrastructure it is recognised that sometimes these will either 
pass through the countryside (for example roads) or may be located within a 
countryside setting (for example, a road side service facility adjoining a main road and 
which cannot be accommodated in a built up area).  30 
 6  DESIGN  
6.1 Good design is indivisible from good planning and is central to creating places for 
people. Well -designed places are those that relate well to their environment, are 
attractive, safe and offer a better qua lity of life for those that live and work there. The 
Council therefore requires all new development to offer, as a minimum, a good 
standard of design responding positively to the opportunities to make our towns and 
villages better places.  
6.2 National pla nning policy places a strong emphasis on good design as an important 
means by which we can make places better for people. Good design is not restricted 
to how buildings look. It involves carefully considering how new development 
integrates with its surroun dings; how it contributes towards creating cohesive places, 
rather than a patchwork of disconnected developments that fail to relate to one 
another and the streets and spaces around them.  
6.3 As such, design considerations include but are not restricted t o: views into, out of and 
through development sites, distinctive local characteristics, relationship to topography 
and other landscape features, habitat creation and the responsible management of 
surface water. It is therefore essential that a robust oppor tunities and constraints 
assessment forms the basis of any development proposal.  
6.4 It is important that the Council is objective in assessing the quality of proposed new 
developments. In order to do this, the Council has considered the qualities and 
deficiencies of buildings, streets and spaces within the district.  
6.5 The Council has identified a series of principles that when followed result in better 
designed buildings, streets and spaces. These are called  our ‘Place making principles 
for North West L eicestershire’. These principles will be used to structure pre -
application discussions for proposed new non-residential developments and be used 
to support decisions on planning applications. For residential developments we will 
use Building for Life 12 as  this would satisfy the Council’s Place Making Principles.  
6.6 These principles are aligned to: a) the National Planning Policy Framework, b) The 
National Forest Design Charter, c) Building for Life and  d) OPUN’s Place Making 
Checklist.  
The principles are :   
1. A National Forest or locally inspired identity  
2. Street and spaces shaped by buildings  
3. A greener footprint  
4. Vibrant, mixed use communities  
5. Responsive to their context  
6. Connected communities  
7. Easy to get around  
8. Well designed and well managed public spaces  31 
 9. Architectural quality  
 
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT AND BUILDING FOR LIFE 12   
6.7 Building for Life 12 is a design quality indicator for new residential developments that 
is actively supported by the Home Builders Federation and endorsed by government. 
Building f or Life 12 is aligned to the National Planning  Policy Framework and its 12 
questions are also aligned to our Place Making Principles.  
6.8 Building for Life 12 is designed to be used at the start of the design process and as a 
way to structure pre -applicat ion discussions and as a community engagement tool. 
The 12 questions are divided over three chapters: 1. Integrating into the 
neighbourhood, 2. Creating a Place, 3. Street and Home.  
6.9 The Council has been using Building for Life 12 and its predecessor s ince 2008. As 
such, most house builders that build in our district are already well accustomed to the 
Council using Building for Life 12 as a way of structuring pre -application discussions 
and as our preferred method of determining the design quality of re sidential planning 
applications.  
6.10  Building for Life 12 is based on a traffic light system. One or more ‘reds’ indicates that 
the design of a scheme needs to be reconsidered. ‘Ambers’ indicate that one or more 
aspects of a scheme could be improved; how ever these may be justified in certain 
circumstances. ‘Greens’ indicate a good resolution to one or more of the twelve 
questions.  
6.11 The Council expects all residential developments to perform well against Building for 
Life 12, i.e.  
- as many ‘greens’ as possible are achieved.  
- Any ‘ambers’ are robustly justified and restricted to factors beyond an applicant’s 
control (only applies to Bui lding for Life questions 1 to 4 . Viability considerations 
may justify  ‘amber’  against question 5 in exceptional circumsta nces).  
- ‘reds’ are avoided.  
Planning applications with one or more ‘reds’ will not be supported by the Council.  
Applicants are required to submit a Building for Life assessment as part of their 
planning application in accordance with the Local Scheme of Validation.  
  32 
 Policy D1  – Design of New Development  
The Council will support proposed developments that are well designed  and as a 
minimum offer  a good standard of design:  
 
(1) All developments must be based upon a robust opportunities and  
   constraints asses sment and be informed by a comprehensive site and 
contextual appraisal ; 
 
(2) New non-residential  developments must positively address our Place  
Making principles:  
 
a) A National Forest or locally inspired identity ; 
b) Streets and Spaces shaped by buildings ; 
c) A greene r footprint ; 
d) Vibrant and Mixed communities ; 
e) Responsive to their context ; 
f) Connected places ; 
g) Easy to get around ; 
h) Well designed and well managed public spaces ; 
i) Architectural quality . 
 
(3) For residential developments Building for Life 12 will be used instead  
of the Place Making Principles.  New residential development will  
 need to perform positively against Building for Life 12;  
 
(4) Existing neighbour amenity should be safeguarded in accordance with Local 
Plan Policy D2;  
 
(5) New development should have regard to sust ainable design and  
construction methods.  
 
New development designed in accordance with the above principles should be 
able to demonstrate that they have been designed to reduce  anti-social 
behaviour and the risk of crime.  
 
 
6.12 The Council has approved a  Supplementary Planning Document which  include s more 
detail on all aspects of design including each of  the North West Leicestershire p lace 
making principles summarised below:  
6.13 National Forest  or locally -inspired identity : The National Forest offers a source of 
inspiration for the design and environmental performance of buildings, the design and 
management of green spaces and the integration of green and blue infrastructure. 33 
 References for new development can  also be drawn from local architectural 
characteristics where there is a distinctive local  architectural identity.  
6.14 Streets and spaces shaped by buildings:  The most successful streets and spaces are 
those where  buildings help to enclose and define a n etwork of streets and spaces; and 
relate well to them by providing active frontages at street level. As such, successful 
streets and spaces require more than physical (spatial) qualities . They require life 
(people) to make them attractive, enjoyable, socia ble and safe places . The relationship 
between buildings and the public realm is therefore c ritical ly importan t.  
6.15 A greener footprint:  Creating buildings and spaces with a reduced environmental 
impact and that offer people opportunities to live lower c arbon lifestyles (for instance, 
where people are encouraged  to rely less on private cars , particularly for shorter 
journeys ), are suitable for future adaptation, conversion or expansion, and as such 
designed to stand the test of time will be encouraged.  
6.16 Vibrant and mixed -use communities :  By mixing uses (for example, shops with homes) 
we can create places that are more socially and culturally stimulating and where more 
day to day facilities and services are a short walk or cycle from people’s homes and  
workplaces.  
6.17 Responsive to context:  New development must respond positively  to their site and 
wider context, for example by respecting the nature of existing  development and by 
using features, such as landscape and views into, through and out of a sit e.   
6.18 Connected places:  Creating connected street patterns  help s to encourage higher levels 
of walking and cycling, particularly for shorter local journeys thereby helping to reduce 
car dependency and tackle issues related to the lack of physical activ ity. 
6.19  Easy to get around:  Routes must  be safe, direct and attractive, recognising the impact 
that urban, landscape, highways and architectural design can have on  the travel 
choices people make . Streets within settlements, town and village centres must be 
regarded principally as places for pedestrians and cyclists; rather than purely places 
for the movement and parking of vehicles. Streets within settlements, town and 
village centres should seek to limit vehicle speeds to 20 mph or less  through design 
features and/or the use of legal designations: 20 mph zones, Home Zones and Quiet 
Lanes.  
6.20  Well -designed and well -managed public spaces : Public spaces must be well designed, 
well managed with a clear public function. National Forest planting requirements must 
be used creatively to help create an interesting, attractive and ecologically diverse 
network of streets and spaces.   
6.21  Architectural quality:  New or converted buildings must be fit for purpose with careful 
attention afforded to the design and amo unt of internal space; and access to natural 
lighting. Buildings should be designed to respond to their solar orientation and 
adjacent buildings, streets and spaces with which they will have a relationship.  34 
 Sustainable Design and Construction  
6.22  The su stainable design and construction of new building s and extensions to existing 
buildings has an important role to play in reducing running costs and improving energy 
efficiency and the reduction of  greenhouse gas emissions (notably CO 2). Improving the 
energ y efficiency of buildings is an essential part of achieving targets for a reduction in 
carbon emissions as almost half of the UK’s current carbon emission s come from 
domestic (27%) and non -domestic buildings (17%) . 
6.23  The creation of buildings and spaces  with a reduced environmental impact and that 
offer people opportunities to live lower carbon lifestyles, are suitable for future 
adaptation, conversion or expansion, and as such designed to stand the test of time 
will be encouraged . 
6.24  The Council encou rages developers to consider the integration of environmental 
‘optional extras’ for residential led developments, i.e. features that would enable a 
development to exceed the environmental performance of new homes required by 
Building Regulations.  
6.25  The following measures are examples of what could be incorpo rated in to new 
developments to mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change:  
 Planting, shading and advanced glazing systems to reduce solar heat gain 
during the summer;  
 Using materials to prev ent penetration of heat, including the use of cool 
building materials , green roofs and walls and using fl ood resilient materials ; 
 Increasing natural ventilation and the remov al of  heat by using fresh air ;  
 Orientating windows of habitable rooms within 30 d egrees of south and 
utilising southern slopes;  
 Locating windows at heights that maximise heating from lower sun angles 
during the winter;  
 Incorporating flood -resilient measures such as raising floor levels, electrical 
fittings and rain -proofing and overha ngs to prevent infiltration of heavy rain 
around doors and windows;  
 Integrating water management into the design of new development through a 
network of attractive and functional features such as swales, rills, rainwater 
harvesting/storage (such as water b utts and underground water storage) and 
rain gardens;  
 Incorporating waste reduction and recycling measures through the design of 
the development to ensure there are appropriate storage and segregation 
facilities;  
 Incorporating small scale renewables into t he design of new developments 
where there would be no significant adverse impacts on landscape, ecology, 
heritage assets and amenity;  
 Incorporating car charging points where viable and appropriate to do so;  35 
  Providing sufficient, safe and sheltered cycle s torage in locations where the 
use of bicycles is closer to the front door of buildings than car parking spaces,  
where it is practical to do so;  
 Connect to an existing or approved district energy scheme where available. 
Major development proposals should ut ilise opportunities to incorporate a 
district energy network . 
 
AMENITY  
6.26 Impact on amenity is one of the most important determining considerations within the 
planning application process, as it can impact greatly on the quality of life for those 
affecte d. Noise, odour, light and overlooking are key factors affecting amenity, 
together with issues such as disturbance and pollution. In addition , the scale and 
massing of development if too large can have an overbearing and dominating impact 
on surroundings, and in particular on neighbouring properties which adversely affects 
amenity.  
 
6.27 Design can have a direct influence on the relationship between new and existing 
development, and the distribution of activities within a development. In some cases,  
amenity  reasons will rule out the provision of a development at a particular location 
either through the impact of the proposed development on existing residents or the 
impact on future occupants from existing lawful uses; in others, it may be possible for 
the im pact on amenity to be made acceptable through appropriate design, layout and 
distribution of uses within the development or throu gh suitable planning condition s. 
 
Policy D2  – Amenity  
Proposals for development should be designed to minimise their impact on the 
amenity and quiet enjoyment of both existing and future residents within the 
development and close to it. As such, development proposals will be supported 
where:   
 
1)     They do not have a significant adverse effect on the living conditions of 
existin g and new residents through loss of privacy, excessive overshadowing 
and overbearing impact.  
 
2)     They do not generate a level of activity, noise, vibration, pollution or 
unpleasant  odour emission, which cannot be mitigated to an appropriate 
standard an d so, would have an adverse impact on amenity and living 
conditions.  
 
Development which is sensitive to noise or unpleasant odour emissions will not be 
permitted where it would adversely affect future occupants.  
 
Proposals for external lighting scheme s should be designed to minimise potential 36 
 pollution from glare or spillage of light.  The intensity of lighting should be 
necessary to achieve its purpose, and the benefits of the lighting scheme must be 
shown to outweigh any adverse effects.  
 
The Council wil l prepare a Supplementary Planning Document which will include 
new Development Guidelines.  
 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS  
6.28  Mobile communications are an essential element in both the national and local 
economy.  They are now considered an integral part of the su ccess of most business 
operations and individual lifestyles.  With the growth of services such as mobile 
internet access, demand for new telecommunications infrastructure is continuing to 
grow.   
6.29  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) at paragr aph 42 confirms that 
“advanced, high quality communications infrastructure is essential for sustainable 
economic growth and plays  a vital role in enhancing the provision of local community 
facilities and services.” The Council supports the enhancement of t elecommunications 
in the District whilst at the same time seeking to ensure that environmental impacts 
are minimised, including the impact on the environment and the amenities of those 
living or working in close proximity to telecommunication instalments.  
6.30   It is the Council’s aim to reduce the proliferation of new masts by encouraging mast 
sharing where possible.  Existing masts and other structures should be used, unless 
the need for a new site has been justified.  Where new sites are being sought, 
applicants will be required to demonstrate that they have explored the possibility of 
erecting apparatus on existing buildings or structures.  
Policy D3 – Telecommunications  
Proposals for telecommunications will be supported where;  
(1) If proposing a new mast,  it is demonstrated that the applicant has explored 
the possibility of erecting apparatus on existing buildings, masts or other 
structures.  Such evidence should accompany any application made;  
 
(2) The siting and appearance of the proposed apparatus and associat ed 
structures ensures that the impact on the visual amenity, character or 
appearance of the surrounding areas is minimised;  
 
(3) If on a building, apparatus and associated structure are sited and designed so 
as to ensure that impact to the external appearance of the host building is 
minimised;  
 37 
 (4) The proposed development does not have an unacceptable effect on an area 
of ecological interest, areas of landscape importance, archaeological sites, 
conservation areas or buildings of architectural or historic interest.  
 38 
 7 HOUSING  
INTRODUCTION  
7.1 As already noted the NPPF  seeks to boost significantly the supply of housing to meet 
the needs of the country and to contribute to the economic recovery following the 
recession of recent years.  
7.2 In accordance with policy  S1 provision needs to be made for a minimum of 9,620 
dwellings during the plan period. However, it should be appreciated that in p reparing 
this Local Plan we are not starting from a blank sheet of paper. Some development has 
already occurred or provision i s in place. The following section outlines the current 
position in respect of housing provision.  
Housing provision – current position  
7.3 As already noted s ome  development has taken place since 2011 and there  are a 
number of sites where the Council has pre viously granted planning permission for 
housing development. In addition, there are also sites where the Council has 
previously agreed to grant planning permission subject to the completion of a legal 
agreement (usually referred to as a S106 Agreement) bet ween the Council and the 
applicant, but the agreement has yet to be completed and so no permission has been 
issued. These are referred to as ‘resolutio ns’.   
7.4 Table 2 below,  summarises the position in terms of  the various components of housing 
supply.  
Table 2  – Housing provision as at 1 October 2016  
 Number of 
dwellings  
Completions 1  April 2011  - 31 September  2016  (A) 2,690  
Under construction (B)  471 
Planning permission (C)  8,851  
Resolution to grant planning permission (D)  541 
Total provision (A+B+C +D) 12,553  
 
7.5 The figures above include dwellings on sites of less than 10 dwellings. We have 
considered whether we should make an allowance for unidentified sites which may 
come forward over the plan period. These can either be small sites (usually tho se of 
less than 10 dwellings) or larger sites (for example perhaps a former factory site).  
Whilst historically such sites have provided an important part of the supply, the 39 
 provision of such sites is, by its nature, very uncertain. Therefore, for the purp oses of 
estimating housing supply we have not made any allowance for such sites coming 
forward. However, should such sites come forward and planning permission be 
granted then they would count towards the housing supply at that point in time just as 
those which currently have planning permission are included in the figures at Table 2 .  
7.6 Table 2 shows that as a result of permissions and resolutions the requirements have 
already been met. However, we have to be sure that all of these new homes will 
actuall y be built. Therefore, we have undertaken an assessment of how many 
dwellings we think are likely to be built during the plan period on each of the sites 
which are committed.  
7.7 A significant number of the committed dwellings (3,500) are on sites which ar e 
collectively referred to as south -east Coalville. It is estimated that during the plan 
period that only 1,900 of these 3,500 dwellings are likely to be built.  
7.8 In addition, two of the sites with permission at Kegworth for 260 dwellings (Ashby 
Road Keg worth and south of A6, Derby Road, Kegworth) are both potentially affected 
by the route of HS2. There is, therefore, considerable doubt as to whether these sites 
will be able to be built during the plan period.   
7.9  Allowing for the sites referred to abov e, together with uncertainties in respect of a 
small number of other sites with planning permission, it is estimated that about 9,000 
dwellings (including those already built) will be built in the plan period. Therefore, we 
need to make provision for at le ast a further 600 dwellings.  
PROVISION FOR HOUSING  
7.10 Policies H1, H2 and H3 set out how we will ensure that the overall housing 
require ment is met over the plan period . The se policies address three types of housing 
provision - permission , a resolution o r allocation.   
HOUSING PROVISION : PLANNING PERMISSIONS  
7.11 In respect of sites with planning permission  these are those sites where development 
has yet to start. The principle of development on these sites has already been 
established and it is not possib le for the Council to reverse these decisions unless the 
permissions were to lapse.  However, if this did happen the Council would have to 
have robust reasons for not renewing permission. Generally speaking the Council 
would wish to support renewals and Po licy H1 allows for this.  The sites listed in Policy 
H1 had the benefit of planning permission as at 1 October 201 6 but development had 
not started.  
Policy H1 – Housing provision:  planning permissions   
The following sites have the benefit of planning perm ission for housing 
development. In the event that planning permission lapses on these sites it will be 40 
 renewed subject to the policies of this Local Plan and any other material 
considerations including any evidence in respect of deliverability of any parti cular 
site.  
Any development provided for within this policy which discharges wastewater into 
the Mease catchment will be subject to the provisions of policy En2. Any such 
development which does not meet these provisions will not be permitted.  
 Site Capacit y 
H1a Holywell Mill, Ashby de la Zouch  44 dwellings  
H1b Land north of Ashby de la Zouch  605 dwellings  
H1c South of Park Lane, Castle Donington  895 dwellings  
H1d Standard Hill/West of Highfield Street, Coalville  400 dwellings  
H1e Off Jackson Street Co alville  129 dwellings  
H1f Off Kane Close Coalville  21 dwellings  
H1g Acresford Road, Donisthorpe  36 dwellings  
H1h Land north and south of Grange Road, Hugglescote  3,500 dwellings  
H1i South of Grange Road, Hugglescote  105 dwellings  
H1j Station Road, Ib stock  142 dwellings  
H1k Ashby Road, Kegworth  110 dwellings  
H1l Slack & Parr , Long Lane, Kegworth  188 dwellings  
H1m  Land south of A6, Derby Road, Kegworth  150 dwellings  
H1n Cresswells Coaches, Shortheath Road, Moira  24 dwellings  
H1o Home Farm, Main Str eet, Oakthorpe  29 dwellings  
H1p Dawsons Road, Osgathorpe  16 dwellings  
H1q South of Normanton Road, Packington  30 dwellings  
H1r Heather Lane, Ravenstone  50 dwellings  
 
 
As noted in Table 2 as at 1 October 2016 some 8,851  dwellings  had the benefit of 
planning permission for housing. Most of these dwellings are on sites of 10 or more, 
but there are also a significant number on smaller sites.  
HOUSING PROVISION : RESOLUTIONS  
7.12 The sites listed in Policy H2 are those where the Council has resolved to gran t planning 
permission. Whilst the Council has agreed that the proposed development would be 
appropriate, changes in circumstances could mean that the Council has to re -consider 
the proposal.  Such changed circumstances could occur where it takes a long tim e to 
reach agreement with the developer/applicant on a legal agreement. Therefore, it is in 
the interest of providing certainty for all that any legal agreements can be completed 
and permissions issued as quickly as possible. Policy H2 provides this commit ment 
from the Council. Those sites listed in Policy H2 were the subject of a resolution as at 1 
October 20 16. 
Policy H2 – Housing provision : resolutions   
The Council has resolved to grant planning permission for housing development on 41 
 the sites listed belo w. The Council will work with developers and applicants to 
ensure that the legal agreements associated with these developments are 
completed as efficiently as possible so that permission can be issued. Once planning 
permission is granted it will be subject  to the provisions of Policy H1.  
Where there has been a delay in the signing of a legal agreement and a planning 
permission not granted, it may be necessary for the application to be referred back 
to Planning Committee for account to be taken of any materi al change in 
circumstances since the initial resolution to grant permission.  
Any development provided for within this policy which discharges wastewater into 
the Mease catchment will be subject to the provisions of policy En2. Any such 
development which do es not meet these provisions will not be permitted.  
 Site Capacity  
H2a West of High Street, Measham  450 dwellings  
H2b Land at Blackfordby Lane, Moira  18 dwellings  
 
 
As noted in Table 2 as at 1 October 2016  some 541 dwellings had the benefit of 
resoluti on to grant planning permission for housing. The vast majority of  these 
dwellings are on sites of 10 or more although there are also a number on smaller sites.  
HOUSING PROVISION : NEW ALLOCATIONS  
7.13 As outlined at paragraph 7.9 it is necessary to identif y additional sites to ensure that 
the overall provision of housing will be sufficient to meet the housing requirement of 
9,620  dwellings .  
7.14 In the 2002 Local Plan there were outstanding housing allocations on land at 
Waterworks Road , Coalville and Went worth Road , Coalville. The Wentworth Road site 
was originally identified in the Coalville District Plan in the late 1970s. There is no 
evidence to suggest that this site will come forward for development and therefore 
this allocation has not been retained . The land at Waterworks Road is owned by the 
District Council and it remains our intention for the site to be developed for housing.  
Therefore, the site has been allocated for housing as part of this plan. This site is 
capable of accommodating about 95 dw ellings and so there remains a need to identify 
additional sites.  
7.15 We have considered a range of potential locations and sites to make this provision and 
have concluded that the most appropriate allocation is north of Ashby de la Zouch 
(more details ab out this assessment can be found in the supporting Background Paper 
and the Sustainability Appraisal). This area includes  two sites which are identified in 
our Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment Site A5 (Land north of Ashby, 
Money Hill) and Sit e A22 (Former Arla dairy, Smisby Road). Part of site A5 has planning 
permission for 605 dwellings (H1b). The remainder of A5 together with the whole of 
A22 adjoin each other and are included as a single allocation. The overall scale of 42 
 development that cou ld be realised on the site (including that part which has planning 
permission) is about 2,050 dwellings . 
7.16  The overall scale of development that could b e realised (2,050  dwellings ) is more than 
that required to make up the identified shortfall ( 600). The site lies within the river 
Mease catchment and so development has to avoid having an adverse impact upon 
the integrity of the river Mease Special Area of Conservation (more on this can be 
found in the Environment chapter of this Local Plan). It has been agreed that pumping 
sewage effluent from Packington and Measham sewage works out of the Mease 
catchment is the most effective long term solution  to deal with issues relating to 
phosphate levels in the catchment. It is considered that pumping out could be 
achieved by 2025. Therefore, the amount of development which will be allowed to be 
built on this site until such time as pumping out is taking place is restricted to 600 
dwellings.  
 
7.17 In respect of access to the site the primary point will be from the A 511. There will also 
be a secondary point of access from Smisby Road. It is important that any link between 
these two points is designed so that it does become used as a short cut between  the 
A511 and Smisby Road . A third p oint of access from Nottingham R oad will be allowed 
but this is primarily designed to enable sustainable transport access, such as  buses, 
walking and cycling. This access will serve no more than 70 dwellings.  
7.18 Land west of High Street Measham (H2a) is potentially affected by the route  of HS2. In 
order to provide flexibility in the event that the final route of HS2 does impact upon 
the site it is proposed to  make alternative provision to ensure that the overall 
requirement is still met. Our preference would be to make this provision els ewhere in 
Measham. We have assessed the various sites identified in the SHLAA.  Whilst a 
number o f the sites are quite small and/ or now have planning permission there are 
two large areas identified in the SHLAA; one off Atherstone Road (sites M6 and M7) 
and one off Ashby Road/ Leicester Road (sites M11 and M12).  The site off Atherstone 
Road is largely in use as a brick and pipe manufacturi ng works. Our preference , 
therefore, is to identify land off Ashby Road/Leicester Road as a reserve site should 
the rou te of HS2 prohibit the development of land west of High Street . 
7.19 Both sites H3a and H3c are within the Minerals Consultation Area (and proposed 
Minerals Safeguarding Areas) as they contain potential near surface coal resources. 
Development should respo nd to the minerals safeguarding policies in the relevant 
Minerals Plan.  
7.20  As noted at paragraph  7.8 two sites at Kegworth are also potentially affected by the 
route of HS2. Land south of Ashby Road , Kegworth is therefore  proposed as an 
alternative to t hese sites in the event that the final route of HS2 does prohibit their 
development. The site is capable of accommodating about 110 dwellings so it will not 
make up all the shortfall that would result from the loss of these two sites.  43 
 7.21 Policy H3 identi fies any specific requirements which will be expected to be met as part 
of the development of these allocations .  
Policy H3 – Housing provision : new allocations   
The following sites are allocated for housing development, subject to meeting the 
specified re quirements set out below. These sites will be subject to a Section 106 
Agreement to secure the provision of any specific requirements including on and 
off-site infrastructure.  
H3a - Land north of Ashby de la Zouch (about 2,050  dwellings  in total )  
Develop ment will be subject to the following requirements:  
(i) provision for suitable and safe access from  the A511 (the principal vehicular 
access route), Smisby Road (the secondary vehicular access point) and 
Nottingham Road  (primarily as a sustainable transport ac cess, with some 
potential for very limited vehicular access ); and 
(ii) any highway link between the A511 access and Smisby Road access should 
be designed in such a way that it would not provide an attractive through 
route from the  A511 to Smisby Road ; and 
(iii) provi sion of suitable and safe walking and cycling connections from the site 
to Ashby town centre, and adjoining employment areas (existing and 
proposed) and the wider countryside ; and  
(iv) provision of a range of infrastructure including a new primary school, 
exten sions to secondary schools, affordable housing, open spaces, green 
infrastructure and community facilities and enhanced public t ransport 
provision ; and 
(v) design and layout of the proposed developme nt should have due regard to 
the protection and enhancement o f Heritage Assets including  Ashby Castle 
Scheduled Ancient Monument , Parish Church of St Helen and Ashby de la 
Zouch Conservation Area;  and 
(vi) provision for the  disch arge of  wastewater into the Mease catchment in 
accordance with the provisions of policy En2. Development which does not 
meet these provisions will not be permitted.  In addition, development will 
not be permitted unless a ‘development window’ for the Developer 
Contri butions Scheme is current.  No more than 600 dwellings will be 
allowed to be built until provision is made for pumping wastewater from 
the sewage treatment works at Packington out of the river Mease 
catchment ; and 
(vii) provision of a mineral assessment identifying the potential effect of the 
proposed development on the mineral resources beneat h and adjacent to 44 
 the sit e; and 
(viii) A comprehensive Masterplan  prepared in consultation with stakeholders, 
including both the district and town council and  agreed in writing with the 
local planning authority for the comprehensive development of the site 
which identifies a range of land uses (including residential, employment 
and commercial uses, green infrastructure and open spaces, pedestrian and 
cycle links within and beyond the site and community facilities) and their 
relationship to each other and existing development in the vicinity of the 
site and what measures will be put in place to protect amenity of existing 
residential areas.   
H3b – Land off W aterworks Road Coalville (about 95 dwellings)  
(i) provision of a range of infrastructure including contributions towards 
education provision, affordable housing, green infrastructure and 
community facilities and enhanced public transport provision . 
H3c - Land of f Ashby R oad/Leicester Road, Measham (about  300 dwellings)  
Development of this site will be supported when:  
(a) The Government confirms the line of HS2 in the vicinity of Measham ; and 
(b) The confirmed route passes through land West of High Street Measham 
(H2a) ; and 
(c)   The s ite West of High Street Measham  is not capable of being developed in 
its entirety as a result  of the alignment of HS2 . 
Development will be subject to the following:  
(i) provision of vehicular access from Ashby Road and Leicester Road ; and  
(ii) provision of walking and cycling connections from the site to Measham 
town centre and existing bus routes ; and  
(iii) provision of a range of infrastructure including contributions towards 
education provision,  affordable housing, open  spaces, green infrastructure 
and community facilities and enhanced public transport provision ; and 
(iv) design and layout of the proposed developme nt should minimise the 
impact upon  the setting of Measham Conservation Area ; and 
(v) protection and enhancement of heritage assets, including their setting ; and  
(vi) provision for the discharge of wastewater into the Mease catchment in 
accordance with the provision s of policy En2. Development which does not 
meet these provisions will not be permitted.  In addition, development will 45 
 not be permitted unless a ‘development window’ for the Developer 
Contributions Scheme is current and there is sufficient capacity to 
acco mmodate t he proposed development in full ; and 
(vii) provision of a mineral assessment identifying the potential effect of the 
proposed development on the mineral resources beneath and adjacent to 
the site.  
H3d - Land south of Ashby Road, Kegworth (about 110 dwel lings)   
Development of this site will be supported when:  
(a) The Government confirms the line of HS2 in the vicinity of Kegworth ; and 
(b)  The confirmed route passes through those sites north of Ashby Road 
Kegworth and/or south of Derby Road Kegworth which cur rently benefit 
from planning permission for housing development ; and 
(c) Either of the two sites is not capable of being developed in their entirety as 
a result of the alignment of HS2 . 
Development will be subject to the following:  
(i) Provision of vehicular acces s from Ashby Road;  and 
 
(ii) The proposed development being compatible with the route of  the 
proposed Kegworth bypass; and  
 
(iii) Provision of walking and cycling connections from the site to Kegworth 
centre;  and 
 
(iv) Provision of a range of infrastructure including cont ributions towards 
education  provision, affordable housing,  open spaces, green infrastructure 
and community facilities and enhanced public transport provision ; and 
 
(v)  The incorporation of appropriate measures to mitigate the impact of any 
noise issues as sociated with the M1, HS2 or East Midlands Airport.  
 
HOW MANY DWELLINGS WILL BE BUILT AND WHEN?  
 
7.22 Having regard to the provisions in Policies H1, H2 and H3 and other commitments, we 
have assessed how we expect these various sites to be developed throu ghout the plan 
period as set out in the housing trajectory in Appendix 2 . 
 
7.23 The NPPF requires that the Council maintain a 5 year supply of housing sites. As at 1 
October  2016  for the 5 year period to October 202 1 and based on the projected 46 
 completions in the trajectory there is a supply of between  6 years  (with a 20% buffer)  
and 7  years  (with a 5% buffer).   
7.24 The trajectory identifies that 7,902 dwellings will be developed by 2031, in addition to 
the 2,690 which were built from April 2011 to 1 Octobe r 201 6. Therefore, it is 
projected that 10,592 dwellings will be developed over the plan period. This is more 
than the identified requirement of 9,620 dwellings  by about 1,000 dwellings. This 
additional provision in supply will provide a degree of flexibil ity in the unforeseen 
event that some of the identified sites do not come forward as predicted. In addition, 
as already noted there may be a need to accommodate additional housing 
development from elsewhere in the Housing Market Area. Therefore, this level  of 
supply will help to make an immediate contribution to any additional provision 
required and so will ensure that supply continues to be made whilst the review of the 
Plan which is committed to in Policy S1 takes place . 
PROVISION OF AFFORDA BLE HOUSING  
7.25 We are required to identify whether there is a need for affordable housing in the  area 
and then plan to meet this need. The NPPF defines affordable  housing as: social 
rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to  eligible households 
whose needs are not met by the market. Eligibility is  determined with regard to local 
incomes and local house prices.  
 
7.26 There are three main classificati ons of affordable housing:  
 
 Social rented housing is owned by local authorities and private register ed 
providers (as defined in Section 80 of the Housing and Regeneration Act 2008),  
for which guideline target rents are determined through the national rent  
regime.  
 Affordable rented housing is let by  local authorities or private registered  
providers of soc ial housing  (as defined in Section 80 of the Housing and 
Regeneration Act 2008) to  households who are eligible for social rented  
housing. Affordable rent is subject to rent controls that require a rent of n o 
more than 80% of the local market rent (includin g service charges, where  
applicable).  
 Intermediate housing is housing for sale and rent provided at a cost above 
social  rent, but below market levels , subject to the criteria in the affordable 
housing  definition above. These can include shared equity (shar ed ownership 
and equity loans), other low -cost housing for sale and intermediate rent, but  
not affordable rented housing . 
 
7.27 Housing that does not meet the above definition of affordable housing, such as  ‘low 
cost market housing’, is not defined as affo rdable housing for the purpose of  this 
policy.  
 47 
 Policy H4  – Affordable Housing  
(1) To support the provision of mixed, sustainable communities the 
Council will seek the provision of affordable housing on new housing 
developments . The provision of affordable ho using will be  subject to 
the following thresholds above which the level of contributions  will 
be sought : 
Greenfield Sites  
Settlement  Affordable 
Housing 
Contribution  Threshold  
Ashby de la Zouch  30%  11 or more dwellings OR 
1,000sqm (gross floor space)  
Castle Donington  30%  11 or more dwellings OR 
1,000sqm (gross floor space)  
Coalville Urban Area  20%  11 or more dwellings OR 
1,000sqm (gross floor space)  
Ibstock  20%  11 or more dwellings  OR 
 1,000sqm (gross) floor space  
Kegworth  30%  11 or more dwellings  OR 
 1,000sqm (gross) floor space  
Measham  30%  11 or more dwellings  OR 
 1,000sqm (gross) floor space  
All other settlements  30%  11 or more dwellings  OR 
 1,000sqm (gross) floor space  
 
Previously Developed Land  
 
Settlement  Affordable 
Housing 
Contribution  Thre shold  
Ashby de la Zouch  
 15%  30 or more dwellings OR sites 
of 1Ha or more  
Castle Donington  
 5% 30 or more dwellings OR sites 
of 1Ha or more  
Coalville Urban Area  
 5% 30 or more dwellings OR sites 
of 1Ha or more  
Ibstock  5% 30 or more dwellings OR sites 
of 1Ha or more  
Kegworth  5% 30 or more dwellings OR sites 
of 1Ha or more  
Measham  15%  30 or more dwellings OR sites 
of 1Ha or more  
All other 
settlements  5% 30 or more dwellings OR sites 
of 1Ha or more  
 
 48 
 (2) In agreeing  the provision of affordable housing acco unt will be taken of:  
 site size and site constraints; and  
 financial viability, having regard to the individual circumstances of the 
site.  
 
Where it can be demonstrated that the full affordable housing requirement 
would adversely affect the viability of a p roposed development then  the 
Council will agree to look at other measures to increase viability in  
accordance with policy IM1 (Implementation and Monitoring of the Local 
Plan) before agreeing to a lesser amount of affordable housing subject to 
the provisio n of part (4) below.  
 
(3) The Council’s preference is for on -site affordable housing provision which 
should:  
 include a mix of types and tenure that reflects the type and nature of any 
need at the time that the application is determined ; and 
 be integrated withi n the design and layout of a development such that 
they are externally indistinguishable from market housing on the same 
site.  
(4) Planning permission will be subject to a legal agreement to secure the 
provision of the agreed amount of affordable housing. Where a site is likely 
to be developed in phases over the longer term the agreement will include a 
suitable mechanism to review the amount of affordable housing provided 
over time as viability improves.  
 (5) The Council will encourage the provision of affo rdable homes to meet the 
need s of elderly people. Where bungalow provision is made the Council will 
consider reducing the overall level of affordable housing contribution , 
having regard to the type and size of other affordable housing provided 
across the s ite.  
 
7.28 The need for affordable housing was one of the issues considered in the HEDNA .  This 
identified that in North West Leicestershire the estimated level of annua l need for 
affordable housing o ver the period 2011 -2031 was 199 dwellings. This equat es to 
about 41% of the highest Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) identified in the HEDNA  for 
the same period (481 dwellings each year)   
7.29 It is important to note that the affordable housing need figure identified in the HEDNA  
is not in any way related to or influenced by the overall housing need figure, but  is 
simply an estimate of the need for affordable housing having regard to a range of 49 
 factors including the number of emerging households, housing waiting list demand, 
house prices and income levels.  
7.30 A significant amount of affordable housing has already been built since 2011 or is 
already committed. In the period April 2011 to October 2016  some 491 affordable 
dwellings were b uilt out of an overall total of 2,690  which equates to 18%  of all new 
build s. 
 
7.31 The percentage of affordable housing achieved since 2011 is  less than the percentage 
above, primarily due to the impact of the recession and the reduced availability of 
finance, both public and private.  It is important to note that the  number of affordable 
homes that can be provided is constrained by both available public sector funding and 
the amount of cross subsidy that can realistically be achieved from increased land 
values associated with planning permissions for general market housing. In t he recent 
and current housing market conditions, the number of affordable homes which can be 
delivered is linked with the development of market homes and if planning policies 
push for too high a quota of affordable homes it may both reduce the overall numb er 
of dwellings built, and the proportion of those that are affordable. It is also important 
that the delivery of all types of housing is not undermined by development sites 
becoming unviable, which can happen during times of recession when residential  
values and access to borrowing  is reduced . During periods of a strong  and viable  
housing market the provision of affordable housing should be less of an issue.  
 
7.32 Going forward, whilst most new housing is already committed it is important that we 
set out both a target and a threshold above which we will see k affordable housing.  
This policy  will be us ed to inform negotiations in respect of additional sites which 
come forward during the remainder of the plan period. However, in doing so we must, 
as outlined  above, have regard to issues in respect of viability. We have undertaken a 
separate viability study which looked at the potential impact of all of the policies in 
this Local Plan upon the viability of new development. In respect of affordable housing 
we considered a number of options and our preferred approach is set out in policy H4.   
 
7.33 A number of large schemes which already have planning permission fo r housing 
development include a n element of affordable housing and the Section 106 
Agreement allows for a renegotiation of the amount of provision as market conditions 
improve. We will apply this approach to future Section 106 Agreements as well so that 
it is likely that we will achieve more affordable housing than currently anticipated.  
 
7.34 In accord ance with the NPPF our preference is for any provision to be made on -site. 
However, in exceptional circumstances, for example because of site specific  
constraints or demonstrable viability issues, then we may accept a sum of money 
(usually referred to as a  commuted sum) instead and use this money to make 
provision for affordable housing on another site(s).   
  50 
 7.35  In regards to previously developed land, the Viability Study tested a range of scenarios 
to assess the viability of affordable housing on both g reenfield and brownfield sites. 
The Study identified that affordable housing viability on brownfield sites is generally 
more constrained compared to greenfield sites.  
 
7.36  The Viability Study identifies that brownfield sites in areas such as Coalville an d Castle 
Donington, for example, have a higher value for employment land compared to 
residential.  
 
7.37  The generally higher development costs of previously developed land (compared to 
greenfield sites) can impact upon site viability and so will require a  different approach 
in respect of associated development costs, including affordable housing.  
 
7.38  Therefore, to ensure the Local Plan responds to this evidence and to assist the viability 
and therefore delivery of brownfield sites Policy H4 provides for  different affordable 
housing requirements for greenfield and brownfield sites.   
 
7.39 All of the available evidence identifies that the population of the district, in common 
with the rest of the country, is ageing.  It is important to ensure that the need s of the 
elderly population are taken in to account when providing affordable housing.  Such 
provision will often be best made in the form of bungalows. However, the cost of such 
provision, based on floor area, is generally more than that for 2 or more sto rey 
dwellings.  Therefore, the provision of bungalows can affect site viability. In 
recognition of this where the provision of bungalows to meet the needs of elderly 
people is agreed as part of a  development we will consider reducing the overall 
amount of affordable housing that we seek having regard to the types and size of 
other affordable housing to be provided.  
 
7.40 Whilst most affordable housing will be provided as part of general market housing 
developments some will  also be provided o n 100% affordab le housing developments. 
Over the last thirty years such provision has been made by h ousing associations 
(sometimes referred to as Registered Social Landlords) . However, recent changes 
introduced by the Government have allowed the  District Council to begin  investigating 
the possibility of providing some housing as well.  This work is ongoing and we do not 
know at this time how many homes it may be possible to provide.  
 
RURAL ‘EXCEPTION ’ SITES FOR AFFORDABLE  HOUSING  
 
7.41 We need to secure the provision of more affordable housing in rural areas  to meet the 
needs of local communities, as identified in the HEDNA .  One way to help do this is to 
have an exceptions site policy.  This approach enables the delivery of affordable 
housing to meet local need on land which is identified as countryside th at would not  
normally be released for housing.  ‘Exception’ sites are usually managed by a housing 51 
 association and can provide homes for existing residents or those with a family or 
employment connection to the local com munity.   
7.42 A genuine need to live in the village must be established before sites are considered 
and a planning application submitted; these should be done in consultation with the 
local community  and can be done using a variety of means such as survey s, 
consultation events and reviewing housing waiting list data.   Such a need could be 
someone who lives or is employed in the village or needs to give or receive support 
from a close family member who lives in the village.   
7.43 Due to the ongoing need fo r affordable housing in our rural areas and the limited 
grant funding available, we may allow for a small number of market homes to cross -
subsidise the provision of affordable homes in suitable locations.   
Policy H 5 – Rural Exceptions Sites for Affordable  housing  
1. The provision of affordable housing outside of the Limits to Development will be 
allowed as an exception where:  
(a) the housing is demonstrated to meet an identified local need for 
affordable housing, and  
(b)the development is well -related to  and respects the character and scale 
of the settlement and its landscape setting ; and  
(c) the development allows accessibility to community services and 
facilities within it, where appropriate . 
 2. Planning permission for ‘Exception’ Sites will be subjec t to conditions, or a 
planning obligation will be sought, to ensure that all initial and subsequent 
occupiers of the affordable dwellings will:  
 (a) be local people in housing need ; and 
 (b) benefit from the status of the dwellings as affordable housing in 
perpetuity . 
3. On sites that are outside of, but well related to, a sustainable village or a small 
village  the inclusion of market housing on ‘Exception’ Sites will be supported 
where:  
(a) it is demonstrated that there is insufficient subsidy for the sche me to 
go ahead without the inclusion of market housing; and  
(b) it can be demonstrated through detailed financial appraisal that the 
scale of the market housing component is the minimum necessary for 
the successful delivery of the development; and  52 
 (c) the majority of the homes provided are affordable . 
4   Any development provided for within this policy which discharges wastewater 
into the Mease catchment will be subject to the provisions of pol icy En2. Any 
such development which  does not meet these provisio ns will not be permitted.  
A Supplementary Planning Document will be produced to aid those submitting 
applications for rural exception sites for affordable housing.  
 
7.44 The District Council will work with the Leicestershire Rural Housing Partnership Grou p 
to facilitate the provision of affordable homes in our rural areas. We have a rolling 
programme of rural housing need surveys in the district.  We will continue to identify  
the need for affordable housing in our Sustainable and Small Villages as part of the 
Partnership but by also in consultation with local communities, parish councils or 
other appropriate partners.  
HOUSE TYPES AND MIX  
7.45 The NPPF requires Local Planning Authorities to plan for a mix of housing to meet the 
different needs of the communi ty including families with children, older people and 
people with disabilities.  In order to ensure that the housing provision meets local 
housing needs of our current and future residents, it is important that a range of 
house types and sizes are provided  as part of new developments within the district. 
We will therefore plan for a mix of housing on the basis of the different types of 
households that are likely to require housing over the plan period.  The policy below 
relates to open market housing scheme s.  Affordable housing schemes are covered by 
Policies H4 and H5. 
 
Policy H6  – House types and mix  
(1) We will seek a mix of housing types, size and tenures in new housing 
developments  of 10 or more dwellings , in order to meet the identified needs 
of the whole  community.   
 
(2) In considering proposals for developments of 10 or more dwellings we will 
have regard to the following:  
 
(a) evidence of housing needs including the most up to date Housing and 
Economic Development Needs Assessment , Older People’s Housings Needs  
Study, local housing needs surveys , parish plans  and other evidence of 
market demand ; and 
(b) the mix of house types and sizes already  built and/or approved when 
compared to the available evidence;  and 
(c) the size of the proposed development  in terms of numbers of dwellings 53 
 proposed ; and 
(d) nature of the local housing sub -market;  and 
(e) needs and demands of all sectors of the community ; and  
(f) character and context of the individual site; and  
(g) development viability and deliverability.  
 
(3) Developments of 50 or more dwellings will provide :  
 
(a) A proportion of dwellings that are suitable for occupation by the elderly , 
including bungalows , having regard to factors (c) and (g) above ; and  
(b) A proportion of dwellings which are suitable for occupation or easily 
adaptable for people with disabilities  in accordance with Part M4  (2) of the 
Building Regulations.  
 
7.46 The HEDNA indicates a need for various types and sizes of housing  as set out below in 
Table 3.         
Table 3 – dwelling mix suggested by  HEDNA  
Type of Housing  Dwelling size  
1 bed  2 bed  3 bed  4 bed  
Market  0-10%  30-40%  45-55%  10-20%  
Affordable  30-35%  35-40%  25-30%  5-10%  
 
7.47 It is recognised that there may be a need for local variations and therefore the above 
percentages are not intended to be prescriptively applied to ev ery site.   Other relevant 
factors include population profiles, location, balancing recent local delivery, 
rebalancing the current mix and the turnover of properties at  the local level as well as 
the nature of the development site and the character of the a rea. 
 
7.48 In respect of local delivery Table 4 below identifies the dwelling sizes permitted 
(where known , as many dwellings are only approved in outline ) since 1 April 2011 
within the district , whether in the form of houses, flats or bungalows . This show s that 
in respect of market housing there are significantly more 4 bed houses with planning 
permission than the HEDNA  suggest s is required, less 3 bed and significantly less 2 bed 
properties.   In respect of affordable  housing there are more 2 bed and les s 1 bed 
properties than suggested by the HEDNA , although this partly reflects the fact that 1 
bed properties are generally not regarded as providing sufficient flexibility for 
changing household composition and are therefore not considered sustainable in the  
long term.  54 
 Table 4 – dwelling mix based on current planning permissions  
Type of 
Housing  Dwelling size   
1 bed  2 bed  3 bed  4+ bed  Total  
Market  105 
(2.5%) 466 
(11.2 %) 1,462 
(35%) 2,146 
(51.4 %) 4,179  
Affordable  131 
(16.2%)  430 
(53.2%)  241 
(29.8% ) 7     
(0.9%)  809 
 
7.49 As a result when compared to the HEDNA there is a need now to ensure that future 
developments, including those sites where only outline planning permission has been 
granted  need to focus on delivering 2 and 3 bedroom  properties in order to  provide  a 
better  balance in the housing market.    
 
PROVISION FOR GYPSIES AND TRAVELLE RS AND TRAVELLING SH OWPEOPLE.  
7.50 In helping to provide decent housing for all, we must also meet the accommodation 
needs of Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling S howpe ople.  The Planning Pol icy for 
Traveller Sites (PPTS) August 2015 , which relates to Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople, sets out the Government’s planning policy and should be read in 
conjunction with the NPPF.  
Policy H7  – Provision for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
(1) Provision will be made to meet the accommodation needs of Gypsies and 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople between 2012  - 2031 for a minimum 
of: 
 2012 – 2017: 27 pitches plus 20 transit pitches  
 2017 – 2022: 11 pitche s plus 3 plots for showpeople  
 2022  - 2027: 14 pitches plus 3 plots for showpeople  
 2027  - 2031: 16 pitches plus 3 plots for showpeople  
 
(2) The required provision will be identified through the production of a Gypsy 
and Traveller Site Allocations Development Pl an Document, taking into 
account the most -up-to-date Gypsy and Traveller Accommodations Needs 
Assessment.  
(3) A five year supply of deliverable sites will be identified as well as a supply of 
developable sites or broad locations for the following years.  The f ollowing 
criteria will be used to guide the site allocation process, and for the 
purposes of considering planning applications for such sites.  55 
 (4) Proposals for new sites or extensions to existing sites should meet the 
following requirements:  
(a) Be located  with r easonable  access to a range of services, such as 
shops, schools, welfare facilities or public transport ; 
(b) Be proportionate to the scale of the nearest settlement, its local 
services and infrastructure ; 
(c) Have suitable highway access, and is not detrimental to  public 
highway safety ; 
(d) Provides for adequate on -site parking and turning of vehicles as 
well as appropriate facilities for servicing and storage ; 
(e) Be capable of being provided with  adequate services including 
water supply, power, drainage , sewage disposal,  and waste 
disposal facilities ; 
(f) Be compatible with landscape, environment , heritage  and 
biodiversity as well  as the physical a nd visual character of the area;   
(g) Be compatible with the amenities of neighbouring properties and 
land uses.  
 
(5) Authorised, existing  and new, sites will be safeguarded for Gypsy and 
Travellers and Travelling Showpeople groups unless they are no longer 
required to meet an identified need.  
(6) Any development provided for within this policy which discharges 
wastewater into the Mease catchmen t will be subject to the provisions of 
policy En2. Any such development which does not meet these provisions will 
not be permitted.  
 
7.51 The Leicestershire, Leicester and Rutland Gypsy and Traveller’s Accommodation Needs 
Assessment (GTAA) (2007) identifi ed the existing level of provision and provided a 
reliable estimate of future needs for the period 2006  - 2016.  However the PPTS 
requires the use of a robust evidence base to establish accommodation needs.  Local 
authorities should also provide a five yea r supply of deliverable sites against these 
locally set targets, as well as a supply of developable sites or broad locations for years 
6 to 10 and where possible years 11 to 15.  
7.52 In light of this, and to ensure that evidence is up to date, a 2013 refre sh of the original 
2007 GTAA Study has been undertaken.  This has assessed the need for pitches and  
plots for Gypsies and Travellers and Travelling Showpeople respectively, up to 2031, 
taking into account any unmet need identified in the initial GTAA. Thes e GTAA 
requirements for the period 2012 -2031 are set out in the policy above .  This study also 
identified that a significant proportion of new accommodation provided should be for 
social rented pitches.  56 
 7.53 In light of the time that has passed since the 2013 refresh was prepared and published 
it is considered beneficial for this work to be updated in order to ensure a robust 
evidence base is maintained.  Therefore we, along with Leicester City Council and the 
majority of the other Leicestershire authoriti es, have commission ed consultants to 
complete a new GTAA, for which the policy accommodates.   
7.54 The amount of accommodation needed for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople may be small in comparison to wider housing needs but the Council has a  
responsibility to address the need.  Permitting new pitches to meet need will help 
avoid unauthorised encampments and developments.   
7.55 In order to provide for a range of sites to meet identified need the local authority is 
committed to producing a Gyp sy and Traveller Site Allocations Development Plan.  
When developing this planning document and its policies the authority, under its duty 
to co -operate obligations, may need to discuss the distribution of pitch provision with 
neighbouring local authoritie s if it is found that the district’s need cannot be fully met 
within its boundaries.   57 
 8  ECONOMIC  
INTRODUCTION  
8.1 The NPPF requires that “significant weight should be placed on the need to support 
economic growth through the planning system”.  It goes o n to note that “to help 
achieve economic growth, local planning authorities should plan proactively to meet 
the development needs of businesses  and support an economy fit  for the 21st 
century.”   
8.2 The district benefits from its central location at the he art of England with good 
motorway connections and has the added benefit of East Midlands Airport which 
provides international links for both people and freight. There are a number of town 
and local centres which provide for a range of shopping and other ne eds, although the 
proximity of major centres such as Derby, Leicester and Nottingham provides 
significant competition which affects their performance.  
8.3 The district lies at the heart of the National Forest with about 55% of the district being 
within th e Forest area. This provides a range of economic opportunities including 
tourism and leisure, as well as emerging economic opportunities  such as the woodland 
economy.  
8.4 The District Council is committed to supporting the creation of a sustainable local 
economy which provides a variety of job opportunities and meets the needs of our 
communities.  
8.5 The Leicester and Leicestershire Local Enterprise Partnership Strategic Economic Plan 
identifies five growth areas across Leicester and Leicestershire , two o f which are 
located in the district;  the East Midlands Enterprise Gateway  and the Coalville Growth 
Corridor  (see Appendix 4). 
8.6  The East Midlands Enterprise Gateway is focussed upon a number of existing major 
economic activities in the north of the dis trict (principally East Midlands Airport, East 
Midlands Distribution Centre and Donington Park) and potential major employment 
opportunities associated with the development of a Strategic Rail Freight Interchange 
(SRFI) west of Junction 24 of the M1 and no rth of East Midland s Airport (referred to as 
Roxhill).  
8.7 The job opportunities associated with these existing and potential developments not 
only benefit s the immediate locality, but also the district and further afield such that 
the area is of consider able importance to the wider regional economy. We need to 
ensure that in addition to a significant amount of new housing development already 
planned for Castle Donington and Kegworth (over 1,500 dwellings) that the area is as 
accessible as possible by publ ic transport to potential employees from elsewhere, 
including the Coalville Urban Area and other centres in the district.  58 
 8.8 The planning system has an important role to play in delivering some aspects of the 
Enterprise Gateway, for example future growth  at East Midlands Airport and 
Donington Park  which are covered by policies Ec 4 and Ec 7 respectively and a range of 
infrastructure. However , other measures will be delivered outside of the planning 
system as they are not directly related to development. Th ese include  matters such as 
training, access to job opportunities at existing places of work and the delivery of 
Broadband to existing businesses.  We are currently working with a range of partners, 
including the  Leicester and Leicestershire Local Enterprise  Partnership  and East 
Midlands Airport, to address these  issue s. 
8.9 The Coalville Growth Corridor is focussed  on the A511 from Junction 22 of the M1 to 
Junction 13 of the A42.  The Growth Corridor recognises the potential for housing and 
economic opportun ities, especially in the Coalville area, many of which already benefit 
from planning permission. Such development will assist in meeting the Council’s aim 
to revitalise Coalville Town Centre.  
8.10 However , road  improvements along the A511 corridor are requ ired to support this 
development. The District Council is working with the highway authorities (Highways 
England and Leicestershire County Council) together with Hinckley and Bosworth 
Borough Council to prepare a strategy to bring forward these improvement s. 
8.11 We have also developed our own Local Growth Plan to complement the Strategic 
Economic Plan. This identifies a range of actions to address the Council’s growth and 
investment priorities to 2018. Many of these actions are associated with issues such as 
training and skills and about how the Council interacts with businesses. In terms of 
headline outcomes these include:  
 the potential to create over 15,000 new jobs within the district,  
 halve youth unemployment by 2019; and  
 increase female participation  and wage rates to the regional average.  
 
8.12 Other features of our strategy for the economy include seeking to protect key 
employment areas from non -employment uses, promoting and protecting our town 
and local centres for shopping and other related uses and supporting the development 
of other complementary sectors such as the National Forest.  
Employment Land provision - current position  
8.13 In considering employment land needs we mean those uses falling within Use Classes 
B1, B2 and B8 of the Use Classes  Order 2015 . 
8.14 As noted in policy S1 , provision needs to be made for a minimum of 66 Hectares of 
land for employment purposes during the plan period.  As with housing,  we are not 
starting with a  blank sheet of paper; a number of development s have taken place since 
2011 and there are also a number of sites where planning permission has previously 
been granted for some form of employment development .  59 
 8.15 In addition to the existing provision, we need to consider whether some land currently 
in use for emp loyment purposes could be lost to other uses. For example, o lder stock 
which may become not fit for purpose during the plan period. An Asses sment of 
Employment Sites was a comprehensive survey of employment sites in the district that 
considered which the m ost suitable sites were to retain in employment use and which 
might reasonably be considered for other uses. Those sites which were identified as 
being potentially suitable for release to other uses totalled 25.8ha. Of these 15.4ha 
has already been (or are  being) redeveloped for other uses, principally housing. 
Therefore, this leaves only 10.4ha as potentially suitable for release to other uses . 
8.16 Table 5 below identifies  what the residual requirement is when taking account of 
completions since 2011 , existing  commitments  and the loss allowance outlined above . 
Table 5 – Employment land provision  as at 1 October 2016   
Requirement 2011 -31 66 Ha  A 
Starts 2011 -16 6.81 Ha  B 
Commitments (excluding Class B8 sites over 9,000sqm)  29.86  Ha C 
Residual requirement  (A-B-C) 29.33  Ha D 
Allowance for potential  loss of employment land  10 Ha E 
Residual requirement (D -E) 39 Ha  
 
8.17 It can be seen that ther e is a shortfall of about 39 hectares compared to the 
requirements identified in the HEDNA  (including an allowan ce for the potential loss of 
existing employment land) . This shortfall is addressed at Policy Ec2.  
8.18 It should be noted that the employment land requirement and provision figures are 
net of land occupied by major peripheral structural landscaping and ma in distributor 
roads. Other on -site infrastructure, such as access roads, ancillary landscaping, car 
parking and buildings are all included in the net figure  
EMPLOYMENT PROVISION , PERMISSIONS  
8.19 As with housing there are a number of sites where the Counc il has granted planning 
permission for some form of employment use but where development has yet to 
commence. It is possible that some of these permissions could lapse. It is appropriate 
to indicate the likely response in such circumstances.  
8.20 In addit ion to those sites listed below, it should be noted that there are a number of  
other sites with outstanding planning permission  but where  development has already 
commenced and are protected under policy Ec 3 (e.g. East Midlands Distribution 
Centre).  60 
 Policy  Ec1 – Employment provision: permissions   
The following sites have the benefit of planning permission for employment 
development and where development has yet to commence. In the event that 
planning permission lapses on these sites it will be renewed subje ct to the policies 
of this Local Plan and any other material considerations including any evidence in 
respect of deliverability of any particular site.  
Any development provided for within this policy which discharges wastewater into 
the Mease catchment wil l be subject to the provisions of policy En2. Any such 
development which does not meet these p rovisions will not be permitted.  
 Site Site Area 
(Hectares)  Use 
Class  
EC1a  Former Lounge disposal point, Ashby de la 
Zouch  25.5  B8 
EC1b  Rear of Charnwood Arms,  Bardon  1.2 B1 
EC1c  Land at Sawley crossroads, Sawley  24.88  B1, B8  
 
Planning permission has also been granted for a Strategic Rail Freight Interchange 
on land north of East Midlands Airport/west of Junction 24 of the M1 (site  EC1d on 
the policies map). I n the event that the permission lapses the Council will support 
its renewal through the Nationally Significant Infrastructure Project process (or any 
equivalent replacement process) subject to  the policies of this Local Plan and any 
other material consider ations including any evidence in respect of deliv erability.  
 
EMPLOYMENT PROVISION , ALLOCATIONS  
8.21 As noted at Table 5  there is a shortfall in employment provision of about 39 hectares. 
In deciding which site (or sites) should be allocated to address thi s shortfall we have 
had regard to a range of sites which have previously been notified to the Council as 
part of an Employment Land Availability Assessment (ELAA) we undertook in 2013/14.  
8.22 Having regard to the settlement hierarchy this  identifies Coal ville Urban Area as the 
Main Town and so was the first place to be looked at.  However, no suitable sites were 
considered to be available in Coalville.  In addition, as noted in Policy Ec1 there is a 
supply of employment land in Coalville.  
8.23 In accordanc e with the settlement hierarchy the next places to consider were Ashby 
de la Zouch and Castle Donington. Whilst the ELAA identifies a number of potential 
sites in the vicinity of Castle Donington it is considered that in view of the fact that 
there is alre ady a significant amount of employment in this area, along wit h the 
Strategic Rail F reight Interchange , that additional employment would represent an 
imbalance with housing provision in the locality.  61 
 8.24 In terms of Ashby de la Zouch two potential sites are included in the ELAA – south of 
Ashby and north of Ashby. It is considered that land at  north of Ashby (Money  Hill) 
would be the more appropriate of the two sites.  
8.25 An issue in recent years in Ashby de la Zouch has been the loss of employment land  to 
other uses, principally housing. Therefore, it is considered that making further 
provision in Ashby  de la Zouch  would help to offset some of these losses. On the basis 
of this assessment we concluded that it would be appropriate to allocate land north of 
Ashby de la Zouch as part of a comprehensive , mixed use  development involving 
housin g. 
Policy Ec2 – New Employment sites  
(1)   Land north of Ashby de la Zouch (Money Hill) is allocated for employment 
development for up to 16 Ha subject to the following : 
(a)   The provision of vehicular access to the A511 in conjunction with the 
adjoining housing development proposed under policy H3a ; and 
(b)   The provision of employment units of varying sizes to meet the needs of a 
wide range of employers ; and 
(c)   Land adjoining the A511 and Smisby Road will be restricted to those uses 
falling within the B1 Use Class ; and  
(d)   The provision of appropriate landscaping, planting and other features so as 
to minimise the impact upon the adjoining housing development prop osed 
under Policy H3a as well as the impacts on the wider landscape and 
biodiversity ; and  
(e)   Design and layout of the proposed development should have due regard to 
the protection and enhancement of Heritage Assets including Ashby Castle 
Scheduled Ancie nt Monument, the Parish Church of St Helen and Ashby de 
la Zouch Conservation Area;  and 
(f)    The provision of cycle and walking links to the adjoining housing  
development proposed under Policy H3a ; and  
(g)   The provision of green infrastructure links, p roviding both an ecological 
connectivity and footpath and cycle links, within the development and to 
the wider area ; and  
(h)   A comprehensive Masterplan prepared in consultation with stakeholders, 
including both the district and town council and agreed in  writing with the 
local planning authority for the comprehensive development of the site 
which identifies a range of land uses (including residential, employment 
and commercial uses, green infrastructure and open spaces, pedestrian and 
cycle links within a nd beyond the site and community facilities) and their 
relationship to each other and existing development in the vicinity of the 
site and what measures will be put in place to protect amenity of existing 62 
 residential areas ; and 
(i)   Provision for the disc harge of wastewater into the Mease catchment in 
accordance with the provisions of policy En2. Development which does not 
meet these provisions will not be permitted. In addition, development will 
not be permitted unless a ‘development window’ for the Devel oper 
Contributions Scheme is current, and there is sufficient capacity to 
accommodate the proposal in full . 
(2)   Where evidence indicates an immediate need or demand for  additional 
employment land (B1, B2 and B8) in North West Leicestershire that cannot 
be met from land allocated in this plan, the Council will consider favourably 
proposals that meet the identified need in appropriate locations subject to 
the proposal:  
(a)  Being accessible or will be made accessible by a choice of means of 
transport, inclu ding sustainable transport modes, as a consequence of 
planning permission being granted for the development; and  
(b)  Having good access to the strategic highway network (M1, M42/A42 and 
A50) and an acceptable impact on the capacity of that network, includ ing 
any junctions; and  
(c)  Not being detrimental to the amenities of any nearby residential properties 
or the wider environment.   
 
8.26 The allocated provision  will result in a shortfall compared to the HEDNA  (excluding an 
allowance for the potential los s of existing employment land)  of about 13 hectares. 
This will be addressed through the review of the Local Plan committed to in Policy S1 
(taking account of any additional employment land which might be redistribut ed to 
the district from elsewhere in the HMA) and through the determination, against Ec2 
(2) of any planning applications which come forward in the meantime.    
EXISTING EMPLOYMENT AREAS  
8.27 Objective 5 of the Local Plan seeks to support the continued economic growth of the 
district. Whilst thi s can be partly achieved through the provision of new sites, there 
are already a large number of sites and buildings across the district in use for 
employment purposes.  
 
8.28 It is important to seek to maintain the existing stock of land and buildings in order to 
provide a basis for the continuing economic prosperity of the area.  
8.29 Whilst it is important to seek to maintain the existing stock of employment land and 
buildings , in order to provide a basis for continuing economic prosperity of the area , 
the NPPF advises against the “long term protection of sites allocated for employment 
use where there is no reasonable prospect of a site being used for that purpose”.  63 
 8.30 A qualitative assessment of employment sites was undertaken in 2010 by Roger Tym 
and P artners working with Lambert Smith Hampton. This looked at sites in terms of a number 
of factors to assess whether the sites continued to meet market requirements:  
 accessibility by road,  
 accessibility by public transport,  
 external environment , and 
 internal  environment  
 
8.31 The assessment concluded that whilst most sites were still relevant from an 
employment point of view and should therefore be retained in employment use, there 
were some sites where this was not the case and so release to another use woul d be 
appropriate.  Those sites identified in the study as being worthy of retention for 
employment use are accordingly identified as Primary Employment Areas in policy Ec3.  
8.32 It should be noted that some of these Primary Employment Areas have  yet to be 
completed. The remaining parts of these sites which have yet to be built are included 
in the commitments figure set out in table 5.  
 
8.33 In respect of other sites not identified as Primary Employment Areas it is recognised 
that notwithstanding the role t hey play in the local economy it may sometimes be 
appropriate to allow their redevelopment for non -employment uses. Often such sites 
were built some time ago and can no longer meet the needs of modern businesses, or 
it may be that the site was built for a specific employment use which is no longer 
appropriate. In other cases it may be that the surrounding area has changed in terms 
of the predominant use and continuation for employment would be likely to be 
detrimental to the local amenity.  In such cases th e Council will want to ensure that 
the potential for reuse for employment purposes has been fully explored before 
agreeing to release the site for non -employment use.  
8.34 Land at Ashby Business Park was originally allocated for the development of a High 
Quality Business Park in the  2002  North West Leicestershire Local Plan. The initial 
permission included a condition which sought to restrict the use of the site to B1 and 
B2 uses only, in order to maintain a Business Park environment. Development 
commenced  in the 1990s but in recent years there has been limited progress in 
developing the remainder of the site. There have been previous planning applications 
for other uses including retail, hotel and public houses. These have been resisted for 
various reasons , including non -compatibility with the original aims of the 2002 Local 
Plan and design issues which conflict with the original aim of creating a business park 
environment at this important approach to Ashby de la Zouch. A study undertaken in 
2010 of existi ng and proposed employment areas concluded that whilst the site should 
continue to be protected for employment use that it would be appropriate to consider 
allowing some B8 development to the rear of the site so as to add value to the site. In 
recognition of this it is proposed to allow for some B8 uses on the site. In order to 
maintain the original business park appearance of the overall site it is proposed that 64 
 B8 uses would be allowed on those parts of the site which do not adjoin the A42 or the 
A511. In  terms of other non -employment uses these will be considered against the 
provisions of Ec3(2).  
Policy Ec3  – Existing employment areas  
(1) The Primary Employment Areas defined on the Policies map  will be retained for 
employment generating uses within the U se Classes B1, B2 and B8.  
 
Planning permission will be given for Class B1 (light industrial and office), B2 
(General industrial) and B8 (Storage and distribution) uses subject to the 
proposed development not resulting in:  
 
(a)  Significant harm to the amenity  of any nearby residents ; and 
(b)   Significant harm to the general environment.  
Regard will also be had to its impact on infrastructure requirements and the 
merits of the proposal in terms of other Local Plan policies.    
(2) Other uses will only be permitted wit hin the Primary Employment Areas where 
they:  
 
(a)   Are small scale or ancillary to the above uses ; or 
(b)   Maximise job outputs and are compatible with the character and function 
of the area and with other nearby uses and policies in this Local Plan.  
 
(3) In other employment areas proposals for non -employment  development will 
be supported subject to it being demonstrated that  one of the following criteria 
is satisfied : 
 
(a) The property has been vacant for at least 6 months and has been the subject 
of genuine mar keting for commercial (B class) uses for  at least that period of 
time , at reasonable market values, and which has proved  unsuccessful , or, 
where the use is no longer economically viable ; 
(b) The site is no longer capable of meeting the needs of modern business es; 
(c) Continuation in employment use would be inappropriate in terms of 
adjoining uses or the amenity of the wider area . 
 
(4) The Council will, notwithstanding previous permissions for B1 and B2 uses 
commensurate with a high quality Business Park environment, al low some B8 
development on land at Ashby Business Park as identified o n the Policies map  
(Policy Ec3(4) ), on those parts of the site not adjoining the A42 or A511 . 
(5) Any development provided for within this policy which discharges wastewater 
into the Mease c atchment will be subject to the provisions of policy En2. Any 65 
 such development which does not meet these provisions will not be permitted. 
In addition, new development provided for within this policy (i.e. that which 
does not already have planning permissi on) will not be permitted unless a 
‘development window’ for the Developer Contri butions Scheme is current, and 
there is  sufficient capacity to accommodate the proposal in full .”  
 
EAST MIDLANDS AIRPOR T 
8.35 The NPPF recognises that airports have a role to  play in creating a successful economy. 
It notes that “plans  should take account of their [ports, airports and airfields] growth 
and role in serving business, leisure, training and emergency service needs .” National 
aviation policy is set out in the Aviati on Policy Framework (DfT , 2013) that recognises 
the benefit of aviation and sets out a primary objective to achieve long -term economic 
growth. As aviation is a major contributor to the economy, its growth is supported 
within a framework that maintains a ba lance between its benefits and costs, 
particularly climate change and noise.  
8.36 East Midlands Airport,  which forms part of the East Midlands Enterprise Gateway, is a 
nationally important asset  providing domestic and international flight connections, a 
hub for air freight and a vital contribution to the growth of the regional economy. East 
Midlands Airport is:  
 The 11th busiest passenger airport in the UK handling 4.4 million passengers in  
2015  
 The UK’s larg est pure cargo airport handling 320,000 tonnes in   2015 and the 15th 
largest cargo airport in Europe  
 The UK’s major air mail hub  
 The UK’s leading airport for express freight, with three of the major global 
integrated freight airlines based at the airport  
 On-site employment was about 7,100 jobs in 2015  
 
8.37 In January 2013 the Government published revised aviation forecasts to inform long -
term strategic aviation policy, including the development of its Aviation Policy 
Framework and the work of the Airports Commission. The central forecasts of 
passenger nu mbers in 2030 have been reduced by around 7% from levels forecast in 
August 2011 reflecting revised forecasts for the UK economy and changed projections 
of oil prices.  Demand for air travel is forecast to grow annually between  1% and 3% 
over the next 15 y ears , which is lower than the previous annual growth of 5% .  
 
8.38 The Aviation Policy Framework has provided a framework for the East Midlands 
Airport Sustainable Development Plan prepared by the airport company and which 
was finalised in 2015. The Sustai nable Development Plan sets out objectives for the 66 
 growth and development of East Midlands Airport and is supported by four detailed 
plans that cover:  
 Community  
 Economy and Surface Access  
 Environment  
 Land Use  
 
8.39 The Land Use Plan identifies the developm ent that is needed to support the growth of 
the airport so that it is capable of handling 10 million passengers annually and 1.2 
million tonnes of cargo. There are no plans for the development of a second runway 
but the airport has implemented a planning p ermission that was granted in 2011 for 
the construction of a 190 metre runway extension. The airport also want to bring 
forward commercial development proposals associated with the airport, including 
offices, logistics, general warehousing and hotels at Pe gasus Business Park. Pegasus 
Business Park covers some 26 hectares in the south -west corner of the airport site and 
there is around 10 hectares still available for development.  
 
8.40 The Council wants to support these growth plans but needs to balance the economic 
benefits they will bring against their local impacts, particularly with regards to noise 
and transport.  
 
8.41 Aircraft and airport operations at East Midlands Airport result in high levels of noise 
disturbance, particularly at night when backgroun d noise is generally lower. As a result 
of the recent implementation of a permission to extend the runway there are now 
some restrictions in respect of night time noise associated with planes using the 
airport. Notwithstanding these restrictions there rema in concerns about night time 
noise issues on local communities and so we will continue to work with the airport to 
ensure that any impacts are minimised as far as possible.  
8.42 The airport is very well connected by road, with direct access to the M1 and A42 and 
very close to the A453, A50 and A52. There is a 24 -hour a day, 7 days a week bus 
network connecting the airport to Derby, Nottingham, Leicester and other centres. 
There is no direct rail link although the East Midlands Parkway rail station is 
appro ximately 6 miles away.  
8.43 Whilst improving public transport remains a key priority, the need for access to the 
strategic highway network is important, particularly for cargo and freight distribution. 
East Midlands Airport is the main UK base for DHL and UPS, along with significant 
operations by TNT. It is also the major mail airport in the UK. The express freight 
operators provide an international next -day delivery service that relies on excellent 
road connectivity along with the ability to operate aircra ft at night. There are in the 
region of 500 HGV movements to and from East Midlands Airport on a typical 
weekday, but with freight aircraft flying overnight, the vast majority of these vehicle 67 
 movements take place very late at night and very early in the m orning and as such 
have no impact on peak motorway traffic levels.  
8.44 The private car will continue to be the primary mode of airport access, but we want to 
encourage wider public transport use by developing the network of bus routes and 
services. We wil l work with the Airport and its partners to do this.   
Policy Ec 4 – East Midlands Airport   
(1) The growth of East Midlands Airport will be supported provided 
development that gives rise to a material increase in airport capacity  or 
capability : 
(a) Is limited to th at necessary to support an airport capable of handling 
up to 10 million passenger and 1.2 million tonnes of cargo per year;  
and 
(b) Incorporates measures that will reduce the number of local residents 
affected by noise as a result of the airport’s operation , as well as the 
impact of noise on the wider landscape ; and 
(c) Incorporates measures to ensure that local air quality satisfies  
relevant standards; and  
(d) Is accompanied by improvements in public transport access to the 
airport and other measures that will reduce  the level of airport -
generated road traffic (per passenger) ; and  
(e) Will protect and enhance heritage  assets within the vicinity of the 
airport.  
(2) Within the boundaries of the airport, as defined on the Policies Map, 
development will be limited to:  
(a) Operational  facilities and infrastructure;  and 
(b) Passenger and terminal facilities;  and 
(c) Cargo facilities;  and 
(d) Airport ancillary infrastructure where the proposed development  
requires and benefits from an airport location and is of a scale that is 
appropriate to that r elationship;  and 
(e) Landscape works; and  
(f) Internal highways and infrastructure ; and  
(g) Improvements to public transport and airport customer car parking.  68 
 East Midlands Airport - Safeguarding  
8.45 Major airports, because of their importance to the UK air traffic system are also 
protected through a process known as aerodrome safeguarding. An officially 
safeguarded area has been established for East Midlands Airport and we are required 
to consult the airport operator on those developments that could potentially affe ct 
the safety of aircraft and air traffic control operations. These developments can 
include the construction of tall structures, developments that have the potential to 
attract birds and wind turbines because they can interfere with radar and navigation 
systems.  
8.46 Guidance on aerodrome safeguarding is set out in Circular 1/2003 which  details the 
process and the consultation requirements.  
Policy Ec 5 – East Midlands Airport: Safeguarding  
(1) Development which would adversely affect the operation, safety or p lanned 
growth of East Midlands Airport will not be permitted.  
(2) The outer boundary of the Safeguarded Area is shown on the Policies Map 
and within this area consultation with East Midlands Airport is required on 
the following proposals:  
(a) All buildings, struc tures, erections and works that exceed the 
height specified on the safeguarding map;  
(b) Any proposed development in the vicinity of East Midlands Airport 
which may have the potential to interfere with the operation of its 
navigational aids, radio aids and tel ecommunication systems;  
(c) The lighting elements of a development which may have the 
potential to distract or confuse pilots, particularly in the 
immediate vicinity of the aerodrome and of the aircraft approach 
paths;  
(d) Any proposal for an aviation use within a  13km circle centred on 
East Midlands Airport;  
(e) Any proposal within a 13km circle centred on East Midlands 
Airport which has the potential to attract large numbers of birds. 
Such proposals include:  
(i) significant landscaping or tree planting;  
(ii) minerals extracti on or quarrying;  
(iii) waste disposal or management;  69 
 (iv) reservoirs or other significant water bodies;  
(v) land restoration schemes;  
(vi) sewage works;  
(vii) nature reserves;  
(viii) bird sanctuaries.  
(f) Any proposal for a wind turbine development within a 30km circle 
centred on East Midlan ds Airport.  
 
East Midlands Airport - Public Safety Zones  
8.47 Public Safety Zones are areas of land at the end of runways at the busiest airports in 
the UK, within which certain planning restrictions apply.   These aim to control the 
number of people on th e ground at risk in the unlikely event of an aircraft accident on 
take -off or landing.  
8.48 East Midlands Airport’s Public Safety Zones extend over part of Donington Park to the 
west and a small area on the southe rn edge of Kegworth  to the east . The extent  of the 
Public Safety Zones may be reviewed to reflect changes in aircraft technology and 
changes in the numbers of aircraft movements .  
Policy Ec 6 – East Midlands Airport Public Safety Zones  
(1) There will be a general presumption against new or replacement 
development  or changes of use of existing buildings within the designated 
East Midlands Airport Public Safety Zones identified on the Policies Map. 
Within those areas of the Public Safety Zones lying outside the identified 1 
in 10,000 risk contours, the fol lowing developments may be permitted:  
(a) an extension or alteration to a dwelling house  which is for the 
purpose of enlarging or improving the living accommodation for the 
benefit of the people living in it, such people forming a single 
household, or which is  for the purpose of a ‘granny annex’;  
(b) an extension or alteration to a property (not being a single dwelling 
house  or other residential building) which could not reasonably be 
expected to increase the number of people working or congregating 
in or at the pr operty beyond the current level, or, if greater, the 
number authorised by an extant planning permission;  
(c) a change of use of a building or of land which could not reasonably 
be expected to increase the number of people living, working or 
congregating in or at the property or land beyond the current level 70 
 or, if greater, the number authorised by any extant planning 
permission;  
(d) other forms of new or replacement development which would 
involve a low density of people living, working or congregating 
within the s ite, such as:  
(i)     long stay and employee car parking (where the minimum stay 
is expected to be in excess of six hours);  
(ii)    open storage and other forms of storage and distribution use 
(excluding those, such as distribution centres, sorting depots 
and retail warehouses) which would result in very few, if any, 
people being present on a site at any given time, and subject 
to conditions to prevent the future intensification of the use 
of the site and limit the number of employees present;  
(iii)  develo pment likely to introduce very few or no people on to a 
site on a regular basis, such as unmanned structures, 
engineering operations, buildings housing plant or machinery, 
agricultural buildings and operations, buildin gs and structures 
in domestic cu rtilag e incidental to dwelling house  use, and 
buildings for storage purposes ancillary to existing industrial 
development;  
(iv)  public open space, where there is a reasonable expectation of 
low intensity use, but excluding such uses as children’s 
playgrounds, p laying fields or sports grounds which would be 
likely to attract significant numbers of people on a regular 
basis;  
(v)     golf courses, but not clubhouses; and  
(vi)     allotments.  
(2) Within the identified 1:10,000 risk contours only development which would 
involve a very low density of people coming and going may be permitted as 
exceptions to the above general presumption, such as:  
(a) long stay and employee car parking (where the minimum stay is 
expected to be in excess of six hours);  
(b) built development for the purpose of housing plant or machinery, 
and which would entail no people on site on a regular basis, such as 
boiler houses, electricity switching stations or installations 
associated with the supply or treatment of waste; and  71 
 (c) golf courses, but not clubhouse s. 
 
DONINGTON PARK  
8.49 Donington Park racetrack dates back to 1931 and was originally part of the Donington 
Hall estate. It now hosts a wide range of national and international motorsport events 
and is used extensively for vehicle testing and by track da y operators. The track, 
associated buildings and infrastructure are contained within a “10 foot wall”. There is 
also an exhibition centre which is used for a wide range of events.  
8.50 Complementing  the race circuit, Donington Park is used by many differen t businesses 
for vehicle related activities. This includes : 
 vehicle launches by car manufacturers;  
 driver training for commercial vehicles, cars and motorbikes ;  
 various types of off -road and 4x4 use, incl uding a purpose built 4x4 track ; 
 operational  centre  for track day operators; and  
 use of the Western Paddock as the International Head Quarters for a new 
electrically powered global race championship  - FIA Formula E.  
 
8.51 Other activities within the estate include a large long -term car park for East Midla nds 
Airport , a plant & machinery auction site  and the m useum housing the Grand Prix as 
well as, now, the Wheatcroft Military Collections . In June of each year Donington hosts 
the Download music festival. There has been a weekly Sunday Market in operation o n 
the tarmac areas to the west of the race track for a number of years.  
8.52 The ongoing investment required to manage and operate a race circuit to an 
international standard is significant and without income generation from other uses 
on site the circuit alone would not be viable. As a consequence, Donington Par k 
Racing’s growth plans include extensions  to the  west and south of the circuit to 
provide for motorsport development and related activities. Only the westerly 
extension is allowed for on the Polici es Map, as it is considered that a southerly 
extension would be injurious to the appearance and character of the local landscape.  
8.53  As noted already Donington Park lies within the area of the East Midlands Enterprise 
Gateway and t he Council wants to su pport these growth plans but needs to balance 
the economic benefits they will bring against their local impacts, particularly with 
regard to noise, transport and impact on heritage assets.  
8.54 Motorsport is a noisy activity and this is part of the enjoyme nt of the sport for many 
enthusiasts. However, noise from the racetrack has been the source of complaint, 
particularly from the communities of Weston on Trent and Aston on Trent in South 
Derbyshire. Noise from racetrack activity is controlled by the condit ions contained in 
the current planning permissions for the racetrack, and a Noise Abatement Notice 72 
 issued in 2010. These conditions allow Donington Park Racing to maximise the 
business opportunities available to the racetrack whilst limiting the number of events 
per year which are likely to give rise to local annoyance as well as limiting the duration 
of noisy events and limiting the noise produced by each individual vehicle during an 
event.  
8.55 The circuit is located about 4km from Junction 23A of the M1 and is connected to the 
M1 and the A42 via the A453. At weekends the traffic flows in its vicinity are 
particularly high due to the combination of visitors attracted to the circuit and East 
Midlands Airport. From time to time there has been various traffic  problems 
associated with the events at the racetrack. In particular, problems of excessive traffic 
have affected Castle Donington and, on occasions with very high attendance, there has 
been severe congestion on the wider network including the A453 and jun ctions 24 and 
23A on the M1. The nearest train station to Donington Park is East Midlands Parkway, 
through which East Midlands Trains  operate regular trains, but there is no r egular bus 
service linking it to Donington Park.  
Policy Ec 7 – Donington Park  
(1) The development of Donington Park as a national and international racing 
circuit will be supported provided development that gives rise to a material 
increase in the use of the ra cetrack or number of visitors:  
(a) Incorporates measures to reduce the impact of noise as a result of 
the racetrack’s operation on local residents and the wider area ; 
and 
(b) Ensures that existing mature trees and woodland are retained and 
incorporated into a land scaping scheme that mitigates the effects 
of the development on the local landscape;  and 
(c) Is accompanied by improvements in public transport access to the 
racetrack and other measures that will reduce the impact of event 
traffic on the local and strategic r oad network; and  
(d) Conserves or enhances the site’s racing and parkland heritage  and 
heritage assets . 
(2) Within the boundaries of the Donington Park Racetrack, as defined on the 
Policies Map, development will be limited to:  
(a) Facilities and infrastructure meeting  the operational needs of the 
racetrack including motorsport and spectator facilities;  and 
(b) Facilities and infrastructure for driver training and driving 
experiences;  and 
(c) Motorsport and automotive ancillary infrastructure where the 73 
 proposed development has a clear functional relationship with the 
racetrack and is of a scale that is appropriate to that relationship. 
This shall include developments associated with the design, racing, 
testing and maintenance of motorsport vehicles;  and 
(d) Landscape works; and  
(e) Internal highways and infrastructure  
subject to:  
(f) The provision of improvements in public transport accessibility and 
other measures that will reduce the impact of event traffic on the 
local and strategic road network ; and 
(g) Any buildings being located, oriented and designed to reduce the 
impact of noise, especially for residents living in settlements to  the 
west of Donington Park;  and 
(h) The incorporation of appropriate landscaping to mitigate  the 
effects of the developmen t on the local landscape; and  
(i) The incorporat ion of appropriate measures to mitigate the effects 
on heritage assets.  
 
TOWN AND LOCAL CENTR ES  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
8.56 The NPPF identifies that “town centres should be seen as the heart of communities” 
and where policies should “support their viability and vitality”. It suggests that a 
network and hierarchy of centres should be defined along with the extent of town 
centres and primary shopping areas and that policies should set out what uses will be 
permitted in these locations.  It also requires that in con sidering proposals for 
development of what  are termed main town centre uses (i.e. retail uses, leisure and 
entertainment facilities) that a sequential test be applied whereby the preference is 
for developments to be located within town centres, then in edg e of centre locations 
and only if  suitable sites are not available in either of these locations should out -of-
centre locations be considered.  
 
8.57 The retail offer in North West Leicestershire is mainly located in the town and village 
centres of Coalvill e, Ashby de la Zouch, Castle Donington, Ibstock, Kegworth and 
Measham. These centres not only provide important shopping facilities and services, 
but also provide a focal point for communities and meet the day to day needs of local 
residents.   74 
 8.58 Our to wn centres face competition from other centres  as well as other forms of 
shopping . In particular, shopping from home has grown rapidly and with the continued 
expansion of superfast broadband to more rural and remote areas, it is suggested that 
this form of  retail offer could continue to grow.   
 
8.59 A Retail Capacity Study was undertaken in 2012 which assessed the health and role of 
the above centres and the contribution they make towards meeting future retail 
needs, apart from Kegworth due to the size of its centre and the smaller range of 
shops.  In addition, a household survey of shopping habits was undertaken to inform a 
forecast of future shopping needs. A summary of the main findings in re spect of the 
health of the centres  is set out below:  
 
Table 6 – Summary of main findings of the health of town centres  
 
Town 
Centre  Summary of comments  
Coalville   the district’s principal shopping area and should support the 
convenience and comparison shopping needs of a wider area;   
 struggling with vitality and viab ility and there is a clear need for 
improvement particularly if it is to fulfil its role as the district’s 
principal shopping centre and meet the needs of existing 
residents and an increased population in future years.   
Ashby de la 
Zouch   An historic mark et town which although smaller in scale than 
Coalville offers a good variety of retailers, restaurants and 
service providers and has a good level of diversity of uses and 
provides for day to day shopping needs.   
Castle 
Donington  
  A healthy district centr e that meets local resident’s day -to-day 
needs well with low vacancy rates and a range of local retail 
and service uses, including a number of convenience stores, 
and a good offer of independent retailers, financial services, 
hairdressers and restaurants.  
Ibstock   A local centre that provides day to day goods and services, 
primarily to meet the local needs of its residents.  
 Retailing is low key as a high proportion of its units are 
occupied by non -shop uses, in particular take away premises, 
as well as resi dential properties.  
Measham   A local centre that provides day to day goods and services, 
primarily to meet the local needs of its residents;  
 Retailing is low key due to a strong residential element and is 
considered relatively poorly served by food store p rovision.  
 
8.60 As noted a healthcheck of Kegworth was not included in the 2012 study. It is the 
smallest of the  centres and its role is of one that serves a more limited range of day -75 
 to-day needs.  This local centre provides a limited mix of retail uses  and only a small 
number of financial and professional services.  Over half of the uses perform a non -
retail function with strongest representation from residential properties, contributing 
to the low key retail character of the centre.   
 
8.61 This study was updated in 2014 in terms of assessing future retail requirements. The 
outcome of this is considered at paragraph 5.11 in respect of Policy S1  (Future housing 
and economic development needs) which identifies a need for an additional 7,300 sq 
metres of c omparison retail floorspace.  
 
8.62 The 2016 assessment of retail  operator demand  identifies Coalville to be the  main 
focus of interest from national and regional retail operators.  New development would 
assist in the centre’s regeneration and help reduce ‘l eakage’ of comparison retail 
expenditure.   However intervention will be needed to improve operator demand and 
retail representation in the town centre.  The Council has initiated the Coalville 
Project, as set out in paragraph 8. 68 to address this need for intervention.  
 
8.63 The 2016 assessment also identifies that Ashby receives good levels of interest from 
local retail operators, as and when units become available.  However o pportunities for 
modern retail floorspace development will be limited in this ce ntre.  
 
RETAIL HIERARCHY  
 
8.64 Having regard to the advice in the NPPF we have identified a hierarchy of retail 
centres. For the purposes of town centre policies this identifies both Coalville and 
Ashby de la Zouch as town centres in view bo th of their sca le and function serving a 
more than local area. The smaller centres of Castle Donington, Ibstock, Kegworth and 
Measham are identified  as Local Centres.  
 
Policy Ec 8 – Town and Local Centres: Hierarchy and Management of Development  
 
(1) The Council will support  retail and main town centre development in 
accordance with the following hierarchy of centres:  
 
 Town Centres:  Coalville and Ashby de la Zouch  
 Local Centres:  Castle Donington, Ibstock, Kegworth and Measham  
 
Proposals for retail and other main town centre uses will be expected to be 
located within the town and local centres, as defined on the Policies map . 
Development outside of the defined town and local centres will only be 
permitted if it can be demonstrated that a sequential approach has been 
followed w hich favours sites in a defined centre, then edge of centre and then 
out-of-centre.   
 76 
 (2) Coalville is the district’s principal shopping area and  is the Council’s preferred 
location for additional retail development to ensure that it continues to fulfil 
this role and to assist in the regeneration of the Town Centre .  The Council will 
work with landowners, developers and businesses to bring forward proposals 
for up to 7,300 square metres of comparison (non -food) retail floorspace in 
accordance with the hier archy set out in  this policy. In addition, improvements 
to the public realm will be sought, either in association with new development 
or as standalone schemes .  
(3) New retail and town centre uses development should:  
 
(a) Be of a scale appropriate to the role , function and character of the 
settlement and not undermine the balance of the hierarchy;  
(b) Conserve and enhance the character and distinctiveness of each centre in 
terms of design, and protect and enhance the built and historical assets of 
the centre, and their wider setting.  
 
8.65 The main Town and Local Centres uses as referred to in the NPPF are those uses listed 
below (as defined by the Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as 
amended)) : 
 A1 Shops,  
 A2 Financial and Professional,  
 A3 Resta urants and Cafes,  
 A4 Drinking Establishments,  
 A5 Hot Food Takeaways,  
 B1 Offices,  
 D2 Assembly and Leisure Uses , recreation uses (including nightclubs and 
casinos) and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, 
museums, galleries and con cert halls, hotels and conference facilities).   
 
8.66 Notwithstanding the fact that Coalville and Ashby de la Zouch are both identified as 
Town Centres, our priority for further retail development, as advised in the Retail 
Capacity Study, is in Coalville To wn Centre.   
 
8.67 Coalville is the largest town in the district which is reflected in the number of retail 
outlets and town centre uses that are located there. However, as noted in the 2012 
retail study  (paragraph 4.4)     “Whilst the town centre continues  to meet day -to-day 
convenience and comparison goods  shopping functions, plus the service needs of local 
residents, adequately, the overall picture is one of a centre ‘getting by’, and struggling 
for vitality and viability in a number of areas ”. 
 
8.68 The Council has initiated the Coalville Project as a means to address some of these 
issues. The Coalville Project is being led by the District Council but will involve a wide 
range of partners to deliver improvements.  Some steps have already been undertaken 77 
 including the redevelopment of the former Pick and Shovel at the corner of the High 
Street and Belvoir Road and the designation of a conservation area.  
 
8.69 A key focus of the Coalville Project is something referred to as the “Four squares 
proposal”; an ai m to link Stenson Square (where the Council Offices are located) with 
Marlborough Square, Memorial Square and the Belvoir Shopping centre area via 
vibrant streets, including  the regeneration of rundown buildings and areas and new 
development.  
 
8.70 In ord er to deliver on these aspirations the Council will work with landowners and 
developers to realise potential opportunities, including new retail floorspace. It is too 
early in the lifetime of the Coalville Project for any firm proposals for new 
development  to have been progressed and so no specific proposals are included in the 
Local Plan, but Policy Ec8 ( 2) sets out the Council’s aim to see additional floorspace 
provision made in Coalville to meet the need identified in Policy S1 .  
 
8.71 The 2016 retail as sessment suggests that the delivery of the identified comparison 
floorspace requirement could be challenging.  It recommends supporting the 
implementation of existing retail commitments in Coalville, as well as other 
interventions to promote investment in the centre, such as addressing funding gaps , 
improvement to accessibility and creating a stronger sense of place.   
 
IMPACT ASSESSMENT THRESHOLD  
 
8.72 Proposals for main town centre uses that are not in a centre should be assessed 
having regard to their im pact on centres.  The NPPF requires such an assessment 
particularly for developments over 2,500 square metres gross but does allow for us to 
set a local threshold for the scale of development which should be subject to an 
impact assessment.  The 2012 Retai l Study advised that the threshol ds set out below 
in Ec9 should  be used to require proposals outside of the defined centres  to provide 
an impact assessment .   
 78 
 Policy Ec 9 – Town and Local Centres: Thresholds for Impact Assessments  
 
For retail, leisure and office development proposed outside of the town and local 
centres as defined on the Policies map , an impact assessment will be required based 
on the following thresholds.  
 
Centre where development proposed  Development Threshold  
Coalville and Ashby de la Z ouch  1,000 sqm gross  
Castle Donington, Ibstock, Kegworth and 
Measham  500 sqm gross  
 
 
PRIMARY SHOPPING AREAS  
 
8.73 The NPPF suggest s that in addition to defining its town centres, local planning 
authorities should identify  primary shopping a reas. These a re an area where shopping 
developm ent is principally concentrated .    This area can also include those adjoining 
and closely related areas where a more diverse range of other main town centre uses, 
such as restaurants, public houses and businesses, can be found.  
 
8.74 We have researched the type and spread of uses within and around the various town 
and local centres. Having regard to this and the NPPF definitions, a Primary Shopping 
Area is proposed within  the centres of Coalville and Ashby de la Zouch and the totality 
of our Local Centres.  These Primary Shopping Areas are defined on the Policies map . 
 
Policy Ec1 0 – Town and Local Centres: Primary Shopping Areas – Non -Shopping Uses  
 
(1) Shops (Use Class A1) will be the predominant ground floor use within the 
defined Primary Shopping Areas of our Town and Local Centres, as identified on 
the Policies map . Development for other main town centre uses within the 
Primary Shopping Area will be acceptable where  all the following criteria are 
met  at the time that an app lication is determined;    
 
(a) They make a positive contribution to the diversity of uses on offer;  and 
(b) The proposal, along with any committed planning permission, does not 
undermine the shopping element within the immediate area of the site ; and 
(c) It would not  result in a cluster or over -concentration of non-shop  uses ; and  
(d) It would not lead to a negative impact on the retail character and vitality 
and viability of the Primary Shopping Area.  
 
(2) The residential use of the uppers floors of properties within thes e defined 79 
 Primary Shopping Area will be supported subject to parking and amenity 
considerations.   
 
8.75 Whilst the predominant use within the primary shopping area will be shopping it  is 
recognised that residential development within our centres can prov ide a range of 
economic, environmental, social and financial benefits.  It can assist with a centre’s 
regeneration and add to its  vitality, especially at night.  However residential 
development within the Primary Shopping Area should be restricted to the up per 
floors of premises, so as not to undermine the shopping function.  
 
8.76 In considering applications for a change of use from shopping to non -shopping regard 
will be had to various factors  including : 
 
 The need to maintain an appropriate balance between shopping and non -
shopping uses;  
 The type and characteristics of other uses within proximity of the application site;  
 Where the property is vacant the length of time that the premises have been 
vacant and marketed for retail purposes.   
 
HOT FOOD TAKEAWAY  USES 
 
8.77 Take away uses can serve the needs of local communities and contribute to the 
diversity of uses that a centre can offer, as well as provide an active frontage during 
the evening.  However harmful impacts, particularly if a number of these uses are  
sited within cl ose proximity to one another, can include noise and disturbance, 
negative impact on amenity, anti-social  behaviour and undermining the shopping 
function of a centre.   
 
8.78 Specific issues exist in  Ashby de La Zouch with reference to the c lustering of  hot food  
take away uses within parts of its Primary Shopping Area  whilst in Ibstock there is a 
high  number of  hot food take away s located within  the local centre.  
 
Policy Ec1 1 – Town and Local Centres: Primary Shopping Areas – Hot Food 
Takeaway  Balance  
 
(1) In considering applications for a proposed hot food take away use, within the 
defined Primary Shopping Areas of our Town and Local Centres, as identified 
on the Policies map , regard will be had to the following factors  at the time 
that an applicat ion is determined : 
 
(a) The number of existing take away establishments in the immediate area as 
related to the application site and their proximity to each other, in order 
to avoid clusters of take away uses;  80 
  
(b) Impact on the amenity of the immediate area  (including smells, fumes and 
noise), traffic or safety issues arising from the proposal itself or 
cumulatively with the existing uses in the area;  
 
(c) The potential impact upon the health of local residents where it can be 
demonstrated that the proposal will raise h ealth issues.  
 
(2) Proposals for a hot food takeaway use should also include the provision of a 
litterbin on land within the premises, of which the property will be 
responsible for its maintenance, emptying on a regular basis and for the area 
adjacent to the p remise to be kept clear.  Where a litterbin cannot be 
provided within the curtilage of the premises, a commuted sum will be 
sought towards the provision of a litterbin within the locality.   
(3) Within the Market Street frontage of Ashby de la Zouch, Nos 67 to  89 and Nos 
76 to 108, the Council will resist applications for new  hot food take away uses 
over and above those in existence, or permitted, at the time of the adoption 
of this Local Plan.   
(4) The concentration of hot food take away uses within the defined  local centre 
of Ibstock, as identified on the policies map , will not be permitted to increase 
above the existing number of those in existence, or permitted, at the time of 
the adoption of this Local Plan.  
 
LOCAL CENTRES  
8.79 Castle Donington, Ibstock, Kegwor th and Measham are local centres providing a 
valuable service in providing for day -to-day needs.  These local centres, as defined on 
the Policies map , also comprise their defined Primary Shopping Area and this policy 
should be read in conjunction with Poli cies Ec9 and Ec10.  It is important that the 
shopping and services function that these local centres provide is protected.  It is also 
recognised these local centres have a comparatively stronger residential character.  
  
Policy Ec1 2 – Local Centres  
 
Planni ng permission will only be granted for the loss of shopping and other main 
town cen tres uses within the defined local centre if the premises have been vacant 
for at least 6 months with evidence of marketing.  The following factors will also 
be taken into a ccount:  
 
(a) The need to maintain an appropriate balance between main town centre 
and non -main town centre uses;  and 
(b) The contribution the unit makes to the function of the centre in terms of 81 
 its size and location within the centre;  and 
(c) The nature and character istics of the proposed use and the type and 
characteristics of other uses within proximity of the application site ; and 
(d) The impact of the proposal on the shopping and service character and 
function of the local centre - for example, would it create an acti ve 
frontage, would the use bring visitors to the centre?  
 
The residential use of the upper  floors of properties within these defined Local 
Centres will be supported subject to parking and amenity considerations.   
 
 
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT  
8.80 As a district  which benefits from a number of established tourist attractions, the 
tourism industry forms an important part of the local economy and can support the 
provision of local services and facilities.   
8.81 The district has a range of attractions aimed at thos e attending specific events or day 
visits.  These include Ashby de l a Zouch Castle, the Ashby Canal and Donington Park 
and Grand Prix Collection as well as a number of destinations located within the 
National Forest including Moira Furnace, Sence Valley Co untry Park and the award 
winning Conkers Visitors Centre. The National Forest is overseen by the National 
Forest Company, and is a growing tourist destination.  The National Forest Strategy 
2014 – 2024 seeks to improve the visitor experience and future pla ns are being 
developed for further development in the district through the National Forest 
Company’s Destination Development Plan. This seeks to advance the profile of the 
National Forest as a  tourist destination, encourage the development of overnight 
visitor accommodation  and attract high profile events to the National Forest.  
8.82 Business travel also makes a contribution to the local visitor economy with hotels in 
the north of the district catering for business travellers, supported by the presence of 
conference and exhibition space, as well as those visiting the district for leisure 
purposes.   
8.83 The Council will continue to work with other organisations to best pro mote  the 
tourism that is on offer in the district. We will continue to be actively eng aged with 
bodies representing the National Forest as well as retain a working relationship with 
the Leice stershire Promotions Ltd and any  Tourism Strategy for Leices ter and 
Leicestershire .   
8.84 The North West Leicestershi re: Local Growth Plan 2014 -2018  supports the 
development and enhancement of the local tourism offer in the district, and seeks to 
increase the number of visitors as well as the number of overnight stays, alongside 
increased private investment and employment opportunities in visitor relate d 
facilities.  82 
 Policy Ec1 3 – Tourism development  
(1) We will maximise the potential of tourism in the district and increase tourist   
opportunities for visitors by supporting the:  
(a) Retention of existing tourist attractions and accommodation which 
contr ibute to the local economy;  
(b) Enhancement of existing tourist attractions and accommodation, including 
their expansion, where it accords with the principles of sustainable 
development and is not detrimental to the surrounding area;  
(c) Development of new  tourist attractions, including the provision of new 
accommodation to facilitate the opportunity for overnight stays;  
(d) Development of attractions and accommodation that are well connected 
to other tourist destinations and amenities, particularly by publ ic 
transport, walking and cycling ; 
(e) Enhancement of the environment and local distinctiveness, including 
heritage and landscapes, which will increase the attractiveness of the 
district to visitors.  
(2) New tourist attractions and accommodation will be di rected to the Limits to 
Development where it can make use of existing infrastructure.  It is 
recognised however there may be instances where an initiative requires a 
countryside location or setting or is directly related to a specific tourist 
destination. Outside of the Limits to Development preference would be for 
tourism and tourism related development to re -use land and / or buildings.  
(3) Tourism in rural areas, which benefits business, communities and visitors, and 
respects the character of the country side, will be supported. Its scale should 
be appropriate to the local landscape and its surrounding environment and 
not adversely affect local transport infrastructure.  
(4)  When assessing new provision  for rural tourism  or the expansion of facilities, 
consideration will be given to whether needs can be met by existing facilities.  
(5) The Council will work with the National Forest Company and other tourist 
organisations to maximise the opportunities for tourism and cultural 
development within the district.  
 83 
 9 INFRASTRUCTURE AND FACILITIES  
INTRODUCTION  
9.1 When development takes places it makes additional demands on infrastructure, 
including water and energy supply, wastewater disposal, transport , education and 
health care as well as open space, and green infrastructure. Therefore it is important 
to ensure that appropriate levels of infrastructure are provided to support the growth 
required in this Local Plan.  
 
9.2 This chapter sets out our general approach to securing the provision of infrastructure 
and m ore specific requirements for different types of infrastructure.  
 
DEVELOPMENT AND INFR ASTRUCTURE  
9.3 Infrastructure is critical to support the provision of all development. Whether 
transport infrastructure, Information Communication Technology (particular ly 
superfast Broadband) , utilities such as water supply or sewerage (wastewater) 
systems, or energy generation, such supporting infrastructure must be in p lace for 
new development.  This is not only to ensure that the new development is properly 
served in respect of essential day -to-day infrastructure required by the occupants of 
any new development (for example superfast Broadband which many businesses rely 
on) but also to minimise the impact upon existing infrastructure.  
 
9.4 In accordance with the NPPF the need for infrastructure as part of new development 
needs to have regard to the viability of development .  
 
9.5 Policy IF 1 sets out how we will ensure that new development includes the provision of 
new infrastructure.  
 
Policy IF 1 – Development and Infr astructure  
Development will be supported by, and make contributions to as appropriate, 
the provision of new physical, social and green infrastructure in order to mitigate 
its impact upon the environment and communities. Contributions may be 
secured by mea ns of planning obligations and/or a Community Infrastructure 
Levy charge, in the event that the Council brings a Charging schedule in to effect.  
The type of infrastructure required to support new development includes, but is 
not limited to:  
(a) Affordable hou sing;  and 
(b) Community Infrastructure including education, health , cultural facilities  
and other public services;  and 
(c) Transport including highways, footpaths and cycleways, public transport 
and associated facilities;  and 84 
 (d) Green infrastructure including ope n sp ace, sport and recreation, National 
Forest planting  (either new provision or enhancement of existing sites)  
and provision of or improvements to sites of nature conservation value;  
and 
(e) The provision of superfast broadband communications;  and 
(f) Utilities and w aste ; and  
(g) Flood prevention and sustainable drainage .  
 
The infrastructure secured (on or off -site) will be provided either as part of the 
development or through a financial contribution to the appropriate service 
provider  and may include the long -term mana gement and maintenance of the 
infrastructure.  
In negotiating the provision of infrastructure the Council will have due regard to 
viability issues and where appropriate will require that the applicant provide 
viability information to the Council which will then be subject to independent 
verification.  
The District Council will work closely with infrastructure providers to ensure 
inclusion of infrastructure schemes within their programmes, plans and 
strategies, and delivery of specific infrastructure requirem ents in conjunction 
with individual development schemes and the expected timing of development 
coming forward .  The Council will also work with partners and other stakeholders 
to secure public funding towards infrastructure, where possible.  
 
 
9.6 As noted  elsewhere the majority of new development that the district requires is 
already committed as a result of planning permissions. These permissions include for 
the provision of infrastructure to mitigate the impact of development and support 
future residents  and users of the proposed developments, where appropriate and 
necessary. However, any further development which comes forward will still need to 
ensure that the impact on existing infrastructure is acceptable and where it is not 
additional infrastructure will need to be provided.  
 
9.7 The planning system and in particular the policies set by this Local Plan , will play a key 
role in helping to ensure that key strategic, local and site -specific infrastructure is 
provided at the right time and in the right pl ace to absorb the impact of and provide 
for new development. The provision of such infrastructure will require the 
involvement of a wide range of other organisations and mechanisms. The Council will 
co-ordinate this activity.  
 
9.8 An Infrastructure Delive ry Plan has been prepared which highlights the key 
infrastructure which is proposed or required. This will be kept up to date and added to 
as new requirements or needs are identified and will be used to inform negotiations 85 
 on proposed developments as well as discussions with other organisations  in respect 
of funding and delivery of infrastructure.  It is also recognised that the consideration of 
infrastructure contributions early on in the planning application process can be 
beneficial for all parties invol ved.   
 
9.9 The provision of new infrastructure is currently secured using a legal agreement 
(referred to as planning obligations or Section 106 Agreement). This agreement will be 
signed by the Council and the applicant, together with any other parties who  may be 
involved in the delivery of specific infrastructure.  Contributions agreed as part of the 
S106 Agre ement can only be spent on the  services and facilities specified in the S106 
Agreement.  Monies cannot be diverted to other facilities or areas.  For t he foreseeable 
future this is how we will continue to secure infrastructure provision. However, 
another option is for the Council to introdu ce a Community Infrastructure Lev y (or 
CIL), whereby the Council would specify the amount of money which would be 
charged for different types and sizes of development . This money would then be used 
to pay for identified new infrastructure. A CIL would have to go through a separate, 
detailed process including a public examination. We will consider whether to adopt a 
CIL approach once this Local Plan is adopted.  
 
COMMUNITY  AND CULTURAL  FACILITIES  
 
9.10 Local shops, community facilities, pubs , cultural buildings , places of worship  and other 
services provide the infrastructure required  to meet the everyday needs  of 
communit ies, which reduces the need to travel and provides  opportunities for social 
interaction helping to maintain active and socially inclusive communities. Generally a 
community facili ty is a building or space where community led facilities for community 
benefi t is the primary use.  They can include cultural facilities such as public libraries 
and museums.  It is also viewed that community safety is a form of community 
infrastructure.   
9.11 Access to community facilities is important for both urban and rural co mmunities. 
Community facility provision needs to reflect the needs of the population both ex isting 
and new and also reflect  how the population will change over time .  This is particularly 
important given  the ageing population of the district.  
Policy IF 2 – Community and Cultural Facilities   
The loss of key services and facilities will be resisted unless an appropriate 
alternative is provided, or there is demonstrable evidence that the facility is no 
longer required and/or viable and that suitable alternativ e community uses have 
been considered.  
Community and cultural services and facilities should be retained and wherever 
possible improvements facilitated to the quality, accessibility and levels of 
provision by:  86 
 a) Supporting the development of new community  and cultural  services and 
facilities where deficiencies in provision would be addressed, provided that 
adverse impacts on the environment and the settlement concerned can be 
avoided or mitigated;  
b) Allowing the expansion or enhancement of existing community a nd cultur al 
facilities to assist  continuing viability, particularly in areas where new 
development will increase the demand for facilities ; 
c) Guarding against the loss of land or buildings belonging to existing facilities 
wherever possible to ensure sites ar e retained for other form s of community  
or cultural  use.  Should the loss of a facility result in an equally beneficial 
replacement or enhanced existing facility for the local community 
consideration will be given to this matter.   
New development will be r equired to provide or contribute to community facilities  
and other local services to enhance communities and the residential environment , 
as part of the development, or if appropriate off -site, where no facilities exist or 
where existing facilities are def icient.  
 
9.12 The loss of local services or facilities can have a serious impact upon people’s quality 
of life and the overall vitality and sustainability of communities. With an ageing 
population access to locally based services will become increasingly important. The 
council will require that proposals demonstrate that a particular facility or service is no 
longer viable and explain the options that have been investigated to maintain the 
facility or service. In relation to commercial services, such as pu blic houses and shops,  
marketing of the property for a minimum of 6 months with an appropriate price will 
be required.   For other types of facilities, appropriate forms of evidence may  be the 
internal processes that have been undertaken by the disposal bod ies when identifying 
the future role of the facility.  
9.13 The Localism Act 2011 introduced the Community Right to Bid; this allows 
communities and parish councils to nominate a facility or land for listing as an asset of 
community value.  An asset can be listed if its principal use furthers their communities’ 
social well -being or social interests and is likely to do so in the future.  If a listed asset 
comes to be sold, a moratorium on the sale of up to six months may  be invoked 
providing the local communi ty with a better chance to raise finance, develop a 
business and to make a bid to buy the asset on the open market, in order to save the 
asset that they value.  However it should be noted that the seller doesn’t have to sell 
to the local community.  The re gister of community assets can be viewed on the 
council’s website.  
 87 
 OPEN SPACES AND SPOR T AND RECREATION   
9.14 It is important that local communities have access to high quality open spaces and 
opportunities for sport and recreation as this makes an impor tant contribution to the 
health and well -being of communities.  Open spaces can provide benefits for 
recreation and biodiversity and contribute to the wider network of Green 
Infrastructure.   Open space can provide for a range of users and uses, and can 
com prise for example, parks and gardens, informal recreation areas, outdoor sports 
facilities, and equipped play areas and allotments.    It is therefore important to both 
protect our existing open spaces and sport and recreational facilities but to also 
impr ove provision, either through new or enhanced facilities.   
9.15 There are various national standards of provision which relate to the different types of 
open space. For example, the National Society of Allotment and Leisure Ga rdeners 
(NSALG) has produced a national allotment standard for a minimum provision of 20 
standard plots of 250 square met res per 1,000 households or 0.5 ha per 1,000 
household s.  
9.16 The Fields in Trust (FIT) recommend benchmark standards for playing fields as part of 
the ‘Planning a nd Design for  Outdoor Sport and Play’ concludes that the total 
recommended standard for outdoor sport is 1.6  ha per 1,000 population. In addition 
to the quality standards the document also recommends standards for children’s 
playing space  - 0.8 ha of child ren’s play space is recommended per 1,000 population. 
This is then split into 0.25 ha of designated equipped play space and a further 0.55 ha 
of informal playing space.  
9.17 In addition work undertaken on a Playing Pitch Strategy and Sports Facility Model ling 
will be used to inform and understand the need for indoor a nd outdo or sports 
facilities for our local communities.   
Policy IF 3 – Open Space, Sport and Recreation facilities  
(1) In order to meet the needs of the community, provision of open space, sport 
and recreation facilities will be sought as part of new housing development 
of 50 or more dwellings having regard to:  
(a) The scale of the proposed development and the mix and type of 
dwellings to be provided;  
(b) The nature and scale of existing open space, sport and recreation 
provision within the locality of the proposed site;  
(c) The likely  population characteristics resulting from the proposed 
development as well as that of the existing population in the locality;  
(d) Local evidence of need , including (but not limited to) a Playing Pitch 88 
 Strategy, open space assessment of need or equivalent sources . 
(2) Any open space, sport and recreation provision should be designed as an 
integral part of the proposed development in accordance with Policy S52 in 
respect of Design . 
(3) Provisi on of open space, sports and recreation facilities should be located 
on-site unless an off-site or partial off -site contribution would result in an 
equally beneficial enhancement to an existing open space, sports and /or 
recreation facility which is of ben efit to the local community.  
Loss of Open Space  
(4) In assessing the appropriateness of development which would result in the 
loss of a site which at the time the development proposal is considered, is 
an open space, sports or recreation facility within the Limits to 
Development, the following principle s will be taken into consideration : 
(a) The developer  / applicant will need to provide clear evidence that the 
open space, sports or recreation facility is surplus to the applicable 
quantitative standard;  
(b) The loss of the open space , sports or recreation facility results in an 
equally beneficial replacement or enhanced existing facility for the local 
community;  
(c) The loss of the open space, sports and recreation facility is for the 
purpose of providing an a ncillary development which improves the 
functioning, usability or viability of the open space, sport and recreation 
uses e.g. changing rooms, toil ets, assembly and function uses;  
(d) The loss of the open space, sports or recreation facility will not result  in 
the fragmentation or isolation of a site which is part of a green 
infrastructure corridor.  
(5)    Proposals involving the potential loss of an open space, sports or recreation 
facility outside of the limits to development will be considered under the 
provisions of the Countryside policy (Policy S3). 
(6)    Any proposals resulting in a loss of an open space, sports or recreation 
facility should be able to clearly demonstrate that the facility is not only 
currently surplus to requirements, but taking into  account the population 
needs of the community over the plan period.  
Further guidance will be set out within a SPD to be prepared by the Council.  
                                                           
2 Addendum: the reference to Policy S5 was included in error.  It should instead refer to  Policy D1.  89 
 9.18 We will have regard to the national standards referred to above when assessing the 
need for new or enhan ced provision as part of new housing proposals. However, we 
also need to have regard to a range of other factors as it is not a case of ‘one size fits 
all’. For example, the size and type of properties being provided will influence the type 
and amount of o pen space which may be needed; family homes are more likely to 
require more open space than development s aimed at more elderly people. Similarly 
there may already be sufficient provision in the locality such that further provision is 
not required or is lim ited.  
TRANSPORT INFRASTRUC TURE  
9.19 Economic growth relies on an effective and efficient transport system to move goods 
and people from one place to another. Land use and transport must be planned 
together to give people genuine choice of travel and so red uce the number of journeys 
using private cars. New and improved transport infrastructure, and making the best 
use of existing infrastructure, is vital to achieving the objective of sustainable 
development.  
 
Policy IF 4 – Transport Infrastructure and new de velopment   
(1) The Council, working with the highway authorities, will ensure that 
development takes account of the impact upon the highway network and the 
environment, including climate change, and incorporates safe and accessible 
connections to the transport  network to enable travel choice, including by 
non-car modes, for residents , businesses and employees. In assessing 
proposals regard will be had to any Transport Assessment/Statement and 
Travel Plan prepared to support the application.  
 
(2) New developmen t will be expected to maximise accessibility by sustainable 
modes of transport, having regard to the nature and location of the 
development site , and contribute towards improvement of the following 
where there is a demonstrable impact as a result of the pr oposed 
development:  
(a) The provision of cycle links within and beyond sites so as to create a 
network of cycleways across the district, including linkages to key Green 
Infrastructure ; 
(b) The provision of public footpath links within and beyond sites so as to 
enhance the network of footpaths across the district, including linkages to 
key Green Infrastructure ; 
(c) The provision of new public transport services, or the enhancement of 
existing services, to serve new developments so that accessibility by non -
car modes to essential services and facilities, such as shops, schools and 
employment, is maximised . 
 
(3)   Where new development has a demonstrable impact upon the highway 
network contributions towards improvements will be sought commensurate 
with the impact. The foll owing specific highway improvements are identified 90 
 as priorities:  
(a) Strategic road improvements  
 J22 of M1  
 J13 of A42  
 
(b) Local road improvements  
 the A511 corridor between J22 of the M1 and J13 of the A42  
 
9.20 The NPPF places considerable emphasis upon ensur ing that new development is 
“loca ted where the need to travel is minimised and the use of sustainable transport 
modes can be maximised”.  Our settlement hierarchy (Policy S2) seeks to reduce the 
need to travel by locating development in the most sustainabl e locations. The policy 
above seeks to ensure that new development considers and makes provision for 
access by all modes of transport.  
9.21 The provision of cycling and walking links within and beyond a development should be 
an important element in the des ign of the development and so should be an integral 
part of the design process.  
9.22 It is recognised that access to new development by private car will remain essential. 
Whilst the District C ouncil is not the highway authority, the impact of development 
upon the highway network is an important consid eration in determining proposals for 
new development.  For motorways and trunk roads the highway authority is Highways 
England , whilst for all other roads Leicestershire County Council is the highway 
authority . As part of the preparation of this Local Plan and in determining planning 
applications we consult and work with the two authorities.  
9.23 Leicestershire County Council’s third Local Transport Plan (LTP3) provides the 
transport policy framework for North West Leicestershire. This sets  out how the y will 
seek to ensure that transport continues to play its important role in helping 
Leicestershire to continue to be a prosperous, safe and attractive County  and covers 
the period 2011 -2026 .  
 
9.24  The LTP3 is ma de up of a long -term transport strategy supported by a rolling three 
year Implementation Plan, the second of which runs from 2014 -2017. This identifies a 
range of actions that impact upon North West Leicestershire, including:  
 Various low cost schemes to de al with congestion and parking issues around 
Coalville Town Centre;  
 Implementation of schemes around Coalville as  part of the Government’s 
Local Sustainable Transport F und; and  
  Various schemes to resolve safety issues or as routine maintenance .  
 91 
 Travel Plans, Transport Assessments and Statements also form part of the decision -
making process.  
 
9.25 A number of key highway improvement schemes have been identified  (through the 
LTP3 and work in preparing this Local P lan) which both impact on and are impacted  by 
new development,  particularly in the Coalville U rban Area and Ashby de la Zouch. 
These include Junction 22 of the M1 and junction 13 of the A42 as well  as junctions  
along the A511 corridor between these two junctions. In addition, it is recognised that  
the Hugglescote crossroads requires improvements. A further significant piece of 
transport infrastructure in the district is the construction of the Kegworth Bypass that 
will accompany the East Midlands Gateway – Strategic Rail Freight Interchange (SRFI).  
RAIL INFRASTRUCTURE  
9.26 There are no passenger rail services in North West Leicestershire although a freight -
only rail line connects Leicester with Burton -on-Trent via Coalville  and another runs 
from Long Eaton to Willington , passing through the district  north of Castle Donington . 
9.27 The Government believes that a national high speed rail network offers a once -in-a-
generation opportunity to transform the way we travel in Britain.  An initial preferred 
route was published on 28 Januar y 2013  for the Birmin gham to Leeds leg of HS2 . This 
passe d through North West Leicestershire  mainly follow ing the A42 corridor and then 
through a tunnel under the East Midlands Airport and across the M1 and River Trent 
Valley to a new station at Toton near Long Eaton. On 15 No vember 2016 revised 
proposals were published. Whilst most of the route through North West Leicestershire 
was unchanged the revised route is now proposed to go east of Measham rather than 
to the west, whilst it is no longer proposed to have a tunnel under E ast Midlands 
Airport. Instead the route follows the A42 and then follows the M1 to the west of 
Kegworth.   
9.28 Alongside the revised proposals a Safeguarding Direction was published which has the 
effect of requiring the Council to consul t with HS2 on plann ing applications which fall 
within the safeguarded  area. A decision on the final route of HS2 is expected in 2017 .  
Policy IF 5 – Leicester to Burton rail line  
The Council will support the provision of public transport services on the 
Leicester to Burton r ail line . 
New development will not be permitted which would prejudice the route of the 
Leicester to Burton rail line . 
The provision of stations, together with ancillary car parking and facilities such as 
platforms and shelters, at appropriate locations, in cluding Coalville and Ashby de 
la Zouch, will be supported.  92 
 Any development provided for within this policy which discharges wastewater 
into the Mease catchment will be subject to the provisions of policy En2. Any 
such development which does not meet thes e provisions will not be permitted.  
In addition, development will not be permitted  unless a ‘development window’ 
for the Developer Contributions Scheme is current, and there is sufficient 
capacity to accommodate the proposal in full . 
 
9.29 The Leicester t o Burton rail line closed to passenger traffic in  the 1960 s. In the early 
1990 s it was proposed to re -open the line to passenger services ( initially promoted as 
the Ivanhoe Line ) linking Loughborough to Derby via Leicester and Burton on Trent. 
The project was split into two stages and Ivanhoe Stage I was implemented in May 
1994 running between Loughborough and Leicester. The Stage II section between 
Leicester and Burton on Trent was not progressed partially due to rai l privatisation in 
the mid-1990 s, and st ructural alterations in the make -up of the UK rail industry. 
Following a scheme re -appraisal in October 1996, which concluded there would be an 
annual operating deficit of £0.8  million, the project was not progressed any further.  
9.30 In response to planne d housing growth west of Leicester and the potential to increase 
passenger traffic on the line, Leicestershire County Council commissioned a study in 
2009 to give an indication of the impact of growth on the viability of a reopened line 
(now referred to as  the National Forest Line ). The  re-appraisal concluded that the 
scheme would not be good value for money and that the project would be unlikely to 
cover its operating costs without some form of ongoing subsidy.  
9.31  In view of the time that had elapsed si nce this study the District Council together with 
the County Council commissioned further work in 2015 to look at the potential for the 
re-introduction of a passenger rail service along the former route. The study once 
again concluded that such a servic e would not be viable without significant public 
subsidy. Nevertheless, the re -instatement of passenger services on the National Forest 
Line has been a long -term ambition of North West Leicestershire District Council and 
remains  as such, although it is recogn ised that this may need to take the form of some 
other form of public transport rather than traditional rail.  
9.32 As part of the Council’s response to the proposals for HS2 the Council has requested 
that consideration be given to the potential for re -open ing the Leicester to Burton 
line. Even if the current route is confirmed and it is agreed to re -open the Leicester -
Burton railway to passenger traffic it is likely that it would be some time before it 
became operational.  
ASHBY CANAL  
9.33 The Ashby Canal  is a 31 -mile (50  km) long  canal  which connected the mining district 
around  Moira  with the  Coventry Canal  at Bedworth  in Warwickshire . It was ope ned in 
1804 to convey coal and limestone from the extensive deposits in the Ashby Woulds. 93 
 The canal suffered from mining subsidence during the first half of the 20th century, 
and was progressively closed to the current terminus  at Snarestone in 1966.  
9.34 Leicestershire County Council is now leading the restoration of the Ashby Canal from 
its current terminus at Snarestone to the Heart of the National Forest at Moira.  
Policy IF 6 – Ashby Canal  
Development which would prejudice the restoration of the Ashby C anal  and its 
historic route , as identified on the policies map, or the provision of canal side  
facilities will not be permitted.  
The reconstruction of the Ashby Canal from Snarestone to Measham, to include 
the construction of a new canal wharf at Measham, is supported.  
The principle of the provision of an alternative route for the Ashby Canal  will be 
supported where it can be demonstrated that the existing historic route is no 
longer appropriate.   
 
9.35 To date  the northern section of the canal has been restored from Moira to 
Donisthorpe and links Conkers, Moira Furnace  and Donisthorpe Country Park in an 
area that is developing as a tourist destination.  
9.36 Restoration is now focused on extending the current terminus of the canal from 
Snarestone northwa rds for a distance of 4.5km to a new canal wharf at Measham. The 
power to acquire the necessary land and to construct and maintain the canal was 
provided in October 2005 when the Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and 
Rural Affairs confirmed the Leicestershire County Council (Ashby de la Zouch  Canal  
Extension) Order made under the powers of the Transport and Works Act 1992. In 
making the Order , the Secretary of State noted that “the scheme is consistent with 
national, regional and local policies, would contribute significantly to regeneration 
objectives and would produce considerable economic, environmental and social 
benefits .” 
9.37 The main objectives of the next phase of restoration are to:  
 Advance and accelerate continuing economic regeneration  of the area and 
contribute to rural diversification and social inclusion through opportunities 
for employment, leisure, recreation, learning and skills;  
 Provide a green gateway to the National Forest and develop and link the 
recreat ional tourism facilitie s; 
 Improve the en vironmental quality of the area;  
 Provide a recreational, cultural and social r esource for the local community; 
and 
 Connect Measham, and ultimately Moira, to the national waterways network.  94 
 9.38 Since the Transport and Works Order was made in 2005 a great deal has been 
achieved; the necessary site investigations and studies have been carried out, planning 
requirements have been met, land acquisition has been secured and development 
proposals have been prepared. The first phase of constructio n, the Snarestone 
connection and the first of three nature reserves was completed in August 2009. The 
restored section has since been extended to 600 metres with a new bridge and 
temporary terminus completed in 2015.   The canal is proposed to be constructe d in 
further phases northwards to Ilott Wharf and then to Measham. Ultimately it is 
proposed to extend the canal further north from Measham to connect to the restored 
canal at Donisthorpe.  
9.39 The Ashby Canal Trust has since proposed an alternative route option for the Ashby  
Canal  between Measham and Donisthorpe . Advantages of this alternative route 
include a shorter route , a lot of which is on Leicestershire County Council land, as well 
as avoid ing most of the areas where there is uncertainty over mining subsidence.  
Detailed work, such as consultation and feasibility, has  not been carried out on this 
option, and it has not bee n identified as the chosen route.  However the above policy 
has been worded to allow for the support of an alternative route to the  existing 
historic and identified route, should this be an option that is ultimately pursued 
further by the Ashby Canal Trust.  
PARKING AND NEW DEVELOPMENT  
9.40  The availability of car parking can have a significant effect on people's choice 
of transport. It is important to ensure that parking provision in new developments is 
designed to meet expected demand whilst making the most efficient use of land and 
maintaining the principles of sustainable development.  
9.41  Given the rural nature of the district an d the limited availability of public transport in 
parts of the district, it is considered inappropriate to under -provide for parking. 
Insufficient parking associated with new development can lead to inappropriate 
parking on streets and verges creating high way safety problems and unsightly 
environments.  
9.42  The promotion of cycling as a travel opportunity is part of the drive to promote 
alternatives to the private car and encourage more sustainable means of travel. 
Therefore the needs of cyclists should be  fully taken into account in the development 
process through improvements to the provision, safety, convenience and general 
environment for cycling. To help promote cycle use the amount of good quality cycle 
parking needs to be increased. It is important th erefore that secure cycle parking is 
provided as an integral part of new development.  
 
 
 
 
 95 
 Policy IF7 – Parking provision and new development  
 
(1) Development should incorporate adequate parking p rovision for vehicles and 
cycle s in order to avoid highway safe ty problems and to minimise the impact 
upon the local environment .  This should be designed so that it is an integral 
part of the development and does not dominate the public realm;  
(2) In cons idering the provision of parking , both vehicles and cycling, as par t of 
new development the Council will:  
(a) Have regard to local highway and parking conditions;  
(b) Have regard to the most up -to-date 6C’s Design Guidance or equivalent 
issued b y the County Highway Authority in respect of parking 
standards;  
(c) Have regard to any tra nsport assessment/statement and travel plan 
associated with a proposed development and, in appropriate 
circumstances, agree to reduce the required car parking  provision 
where the proposed development has, or is, proposed to have good 
access to other modes of transport;  
(d) In terms of cycle parking seek the minimum requirements specified in 
the 6C’s Design Guidance (or equivalent issued by the County Highway 
Authority). Where it is not possible to provide cycle parking on -site a 
financial requirement will norma lly be sought towards providing public 
facilities where such provision is possible.  
 
9.43  The 6C’s Design Guide provides the starting point for proposals which affect transport 
in the district and includes car parking standards to  be applied in new devel opments, 
as well as advice on cycle parking provision.  
9.44  In respect of housing developments developers are required to assess the likely 
demand for parking using a research method published by the Department for 
Communities and Local Government. In ass essing demand regard is to be had to 
various factors including car ownership levels and the size and type of housing to be 
provided.   
9.45  Given the car ownership levels in the district as well as th e low  level of public 
transport and instances in the pas t where new developments have been dominated by 
cars parked on roads , due to the lack of off -street parking, the Council wish to  ensure 
that new development creates attractive places to live and work and is not dominated 
by parked cars.   Therefore , to ensu re that car parking provision is adequate  the 
provision of 2 car parking spaces per dwelling, increasing  to 3 spaces per dwelling for 
four or more bed properties  will be appropriate in many instances.    
9.46 In respect of non -housing development the 6C’s G uidance sets out the normal 
parking requirements for those developments over identified thresholds.  This is set 
out at Appendix 5 of the Local Plan for information purposes. For developments 
below the threshold,  the standards contained in the document Highway 96 
 Requirements for Development (HRfD)  will continue to be applied as the normal 
maximum standards.  
9.47  We will seek to improve  the quality of car parking in the district’s town centres to 
ensure it is convenient, safe and secure. To enable us to do this there is currently a 
review underway of town centre car parking provision. We will use the results of the 
review to identify whe re and what improvements are required.  
9.48  In any new development i t is important that car parking is sensitively designed in 
order to not be obtrusive or damaging to the character of an area or the development 
and should be an integral part of the design  process.  
 97 
 10 ENVIRONMENT  
INTRODUCTION  
10.1 The NPPF recognises the need to ensure that planning contributes to conserving and 
enhancing the natural environment, including valued landscapes and areas of 
biodiversity and geological importance.  
GREEN INFRA STRUCTURE  
10.2 Different types of high quality green spaces and connections between them are known 
as ‘Green Infrastructure’. Green Infrastructure is used for recreation and leisure, 
provides routes for walking and cycling, supports wildlife and helps us to manage 
flooding.  
10.3 Green Infrastructure is important because it can provide many social, economic and 
environmental benefits close to where people live and work including:  
 Places for outdoor relaxation and play ; 
 Space and habitat for wildlife w ith a ccess to nature for people;  
 Climate change adaptation – for example flood alleviation .  Th ey also counter 
the ‘heat island’ effect in urban areas by cooling the heat retained in buildings 
and streets ; 
 Improving air quality ; 
 Environmental education ; 
 Local f ood production – in allotments, gardens and agr iculture;  
 Improved health and well -being – lowering stress levels and provi ding 
opportunities for exercise;  
 Attract economic investment.  
 
10.4 It is therefore important that Green Infrastructure is upgraded an d expanded in line 
with any growth, in the same way that grey infrastructure (e.g. roads and sewers) is 
required to be developed or enhanced in line with the community’s needs.  This is 
allowed for in policies IF1 and IF3.  Policies En1 to En6 set out our a pproach in respect 
of specific aspects of the Green Infrastructure network.  
10.5 The Government has declared its intention to give local communities the power to 
designate green spaces valued by local people;  Local Green Spaces are a way to  
provide special  protection against development.  
10.6 Local Green Spaces can be designated through either local or neighbourhood plans, 
providing that they meet the criteria set out within paragraph 77 of the National 
Planning Policy Framework.  We do not propose to design ate any Local Green Spaces 
as part of this Local Plan but instead leave such designations to be considered as part 
of Neighbourhood Plans.  98 
 NATURE CONSERVATION  
10.7 The 2011 White Paper ‘The Natural Choice’ highlighted the important role a healthy, 
proper ly functioning natural environment has in sustained economic growth, 
prosperous communities and personal wellbeing. This is recognised in the NPPF, which 
seeks to minimise the potential impacts of development on areas of biodiversity 
importance and, where possible, achieve net gains in biodiversity.  
Policy En1  – Nature Conservation  
(1) Proposals for development will be supported which conserve, restore or 
enhance the biodiversity in the district.  
(2) Where a proposal for development would result in significant har m to one of 
the following and which cannot be avoided, or mitigated or compensated for, 
then planning permission will be refused:  
(a) Special Areas of Conservation (SAC);  
(b) Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) ; 
(c) Local and Regionally Important Geodiversity Sites (RIGS)  and candidate 
Regionally Important Geodiversity Sites (cRIGS) ; 
(d) Local Wildlife Sites (LWSs), Local Nature Reserves (LNRs) and candidate 
Local Wildlife Sites (cLWSs) which meet the Leicester, Leicestershire and 
Rutland LWS criteria;  
(e) Local and Na tional Biodiversity Action Plan -related (BAP) priority habitats;  
(f) River corridors;  
(g) Irreplaceable habit ats (defined as Ancient woodlands; Mature plantation 
or secondary woodland; Species -rich ancient hedgerows; A ged or veteran 
trees; Species -rich neutral gra ssland; Acid grassland and  heath grassland; 
Dry and wet heathland; Bogs and Sphagnum pools and Rock outcrops) . 
(3) New development will be expected to mainta in existing ecological networks , 
hotspots and landscape features (such as water courses and waterways, 
disused railway lines, trees and hedgerows) for biodiversity, as well as for 
other green infrastructure and recreational uses.  
(4) Where a proposed development would attract additional visitors to an area 
or facility  it should be demonstrated how any potential  impact  upon an area 
or feature of biodiversity  interest will be managed as part of the new 
development.  
(5) The use of Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (S uDS) to create wetland and 99 
 marshland habitats will be encouraged subject to the provisions of Policy Cc4. 
(6) We will prepare a Supplementary Planning Document to provide more 
guidance on this issue.  
 
10.8 Biodiversity information about the district is available from the Leicestershire and 
Rutland Environmental Records Centre (LRERC). LRERC can also provide in formation 
about the status of protected species in the district.  
10.9 There are 17 Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) within the district, of which 2 
have further designations; Charnwood Lodge, which is also a National Nature Reserve, 
and the ri ver Mease, which is also a Special Area of Conservation.  
10.10 New sites are still being identified and this will co ntinue; especially post -industrial and 
former mineral land, which can naturally regenerate very quickly after activity ceases.  
10.11 An Eco logical Network report for North West Leicestershire has also been prepared. 
This was a comprehensive survey of the area, attempting to categorise all land parcels. 
This also revealed clusters and groups of designated sites in areas of high biodiversity 
value and low intensity management. These clusters form the ‘hotspots’ and ‘stepping 
stones’, which are the main areas for priority nature conservation and are linked to a 
variety of wildlife corridors such as hedges, watercourses, canals, railways and roads . 
10.12 It is important to look beyond the boundaries of the development site to identify 
corridors that link habitats in the site, to those outside. The priority for retention of 
hedges and other habitats within the site should be:  
 Thos e that have connect ivity beyond  the site;  
 Those that link to important habitats within for foraging bats and birds ; 
 Those that are spec ies rich and/ or meet the local wildlife criteria . 
 
10.13 The geological interest in the district includes unique pre - Cambrian volcanic rock s, 
Carboniferous limestones, coal -bear ing rocks, fossils and rare minerals.  The 
Charnwood Lodge is designated as a National Nature Reserve due to its geodiversity. 
In addition, the district has eleven Regionally Important Geodiversity Sites (RIGS) and 
candidate RIGS (cRIGS). RIGS and cRIGS do not have statutory protection but are 
encouraged to be protected in the planning process.  
RIVER MEASE SPECIAL AREA OF CONSERVATION  
10.14 Special Areas of Conservation (SACs)  are areas which have been given special 
protection under the European Union’s Habitats Directive. They provide protection to 
a variety of wild animals, plants and habitats and are a vital part of global efforts to 
conserve the world’s biodiversity.  100 
 10.15 The river Mease SAC includes the river Mease  and its tributaries, parts of which are in 
North West Leicestershire (although it also encompasses parts of Staffordshire and 
Derbyshire as well ). The North West Leicestershire Parishes wholly located within the 
River Mease Catchment include Ashby Woulds,  Oakthorpe and Donisthorpe,  Chilcote, 
Stretton en le Field,  Appleby, Measham, Packington and Snarestone.  The following 
Parishes are partly located within the catchment – Ashby Town, Coleorton, Heather, 
Normanton le Heath, Ravenstone and Swepstone.    
10.16 The SAC is also a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI).  
10.17 Survey work carried out by the Environment Agency revealed that the quality of the 
water in the river was poor, mainly due to high phosphorous levels.  Agriculture 
contributes to the pho sphate issues from organic (farm yard manure) and inorganic 
(manmade fertilisers)  sources . These can directly end up in watercourses via different 
pathways or when soil with phosphate and other nutrients bound to it are washed 
into a watercourse.  
10.18 We have worked with a range of partner organisations ( The Environment Agency;  
Natural England;  Severn Trent;  South Derbyshire District Council; and  Lichfield District 
Council) to address this problem, including plans and strategies which will allow 
developmen t to take place within the river Mease catchment area whilst ensuring that 
the integrity of the river Mease is protected. T he policy below reflects the approach 
we have agreed together.  
Policy En2  – River Mease Special Area of Conservation   
(1) The Council wil l work with Natural England, the Environment Agency, Severn 
Trent Water, other local authorities and the development industry to 
improve the water quality of the river Mease Special Area of Conservation.  
 
(2) In order to achieve this, new development within t he River Mease catchment 
will be allowed where:   
(a) There is sufficient headroom capacity available at the Wastewater 
Treatment Works to which it is proposed that flows from the development 
will go; and  
(b) The proposed development is in accordance with the provi sions of the 
Water Quality Management Plan including, where appropriate, the 
provision of infrastructure or water quality improvements proposed in the 
Developer Contributions Scheme.  
(3) In the event that there is no headroom capacity available at the appropri ate 
wastewater treatment works, or there is no capacity available within the 
Developer Contributions Scheme in operation at the time that an application 
is determined , or exceptionally where as part of the development it is 
proposed to use a non -mains drai nage solution for the disposal of foul water 101 
 and this is supported by the Environment Agency, development will only be 
allowed where it can be demonstrated that the proposed development, on its 
own and cumulatively with other development, will not have an adverse 
impact, directly or indirectly, upon the integrity of the river Mease Special 
Area of Conservation.  
 
10.19 Under the Habitats Directive we are responsible for ensuring that proposals for new 
development will have no significant adverse impact upon  the SAC. This is done 
through a Habitats Regulations Assessment (referred to as an Appropriate 
Assessment). To help with this process, people applying for permission for new 
development need to include detailed information about drainage (both surface and  
foul water).  
10.20 Unless an applicant can demonstrate no adverse impact on the River Mease SAC, a 
planning application must be refused.   
10.21 A Water Quality Management Plan (WQMP) identifies a range of measures designed 
to ensure that the status of t he River Mease SAC achieves the Conservation Obj ectives 
and is brought back into favourable condition.  
10.22 In addition, a Developer Contribution Scheme (DCS 1) was adopted by the District 
Council on 22 November 2012. This sets out the level of financial contribution 
expected from new developments within the river M ease catchment.  Due to the 
capacity in DCS1 being taken up, the Council approved DCS2 in September 2016.  The 
contributions required under DCS1 and DCS2 (together with any subsequent DCS) are 
to be used to implement measures in the WQMP designed to reduce phosphorous 
levels thereby ensuring that new development does not lead to deterioration in water 
quality, or cause a net increase in phosphorous levels.  
10.23 The DCS estimates the amount of pho sphorous likely to be generated by new 
development. This is used to create a ‘Development Window’ – the total amount of 
phosphorous which will need to be removed from the river Mease via a range of 
measures to ensure that new development will not adversely  impact upon the SAC. 
These measures are to be funded by contributions from new development.  The 
contribution will depend on the number of properties built, their size and the water 
efficiency of each new home. Commercial developments will also be expected  to pay a 
contribution dependent on the size and scale of the development proposed.  
10.24 As noted in DCS2 there is now agreement by Severn Trent, the Environment Agency 
and Natural England that in order to meet the conservation objectives the mo st 
effecti ve long term solution  is that all sewage effluent derived from developments 
within North West Leicestershire which currently discharge to the Waste Water 
Treatment Works at Packington and Measham will be pumped out of the catchment. 
This will not be funded  by new development and will need to be included in Severn 102 
 Trent’s period review in 2019. This will need to be approved by OFWAT. When 
pumping o ut has been achieved this will mean that future development will not need 
to be restricted in terms of numbers a s has been the case over the last few years.  
10.25  The implementation of the DCS and the WQMP are overseen by a Programme Board 
comprising of representatives from the partner organisations  who will also be 
responsible for subsequent reviews and amendments  as deemed necessary . 
THE NATIONAL FOREST  
10.26 The National Forest covers 52,000 hectares of the Midlands and includes parts of 
Derbyshire, Leicestershire and Staffordshire. It was established in the 1990s to 
transform the landscape and link two ancient w oodlands - Charnwood Forest on its 
eastern fringe and Needwood Forest to its west. At December 2014 there was some 
20% woodland cover, but the aim is to increase cover to about a third of all the land 
within the National Forest boundary.  
10.27 The creation  of the National Forest is overseen by T he National Forest Company which 
is responsible for the production, implementation and monitoring of the National 
Forest Strategy.  
10.28 About 56% of North W est Leicestershire lies within T he National Forest; this i ncludes 
the Coalville Urban Area, and the Rural Centres of Ashby de la Zouch, Ibstock and 
Measham.  
10.29 In addition to enhancing the physica l appearance of the landscape, T he National Forest 
also provides a range of other benefits including enhanced biodi versity; recreation, 
leisure, tourism and economic opportunities. It also provides a “carbon sink” which 
helps store CO 2; forest carbon sinks are considered the best natural mitigation 
measure against global warming.  There is also evidence that woodland cr eation and 
woodland management can help in reducing flood flows, particularly in smaller 
catchments . 
10.30 One of the main ways of increasing woodland cover across the National Forest has 
been to include tree planting as part of new developments, both on  - and off -site in 
accordance with National Forest Planting Guidelines. This helps to create an attractive 
forest setting for the development as well as green space for the local community. We 
will continue with this approach and applicants are advised to di scuss their proposals 
with the National Forest Company as part of their pre -application preparations.  
Furthermore t he National Forest is not just about planting woodlands but increasing 
tree cover within urban areas;  large trees with space to grow are requ ired for 
community wellbeing and health as well as for their intrinsic beauty and cultural 
heritage.   We will also work with The National Forest Company and others to exploit 
other ways of providing additional planting  and to help deliver The National For est 
Strategy 2014 -24.  103 
 10.31 The National Forest Charitable Trust is a charity which aims to create a vibrant heart in 
the midst of The National Forest. This will include a 400 hectare woodland park, in 
which Conkers has already been created, with opportun ities for walking, cycling and 
discovery in the emerging woodland environment.  
Policy En3 – The National Forest  
(1) Within the area of the National Forest, as defined on the Policies map , North 
West Leicestershire District Council will work with the National Forest 
Company, other local authorities and partners to:  
(a) Provide opportunities for diversification of the economy, especially in 
relation to the woodland economy and tourism, including overnight 
accommodation;  
(b) Create an attractive, sustainable environment ;  
(c) Enhance its role as a natural carbon sink;  
(d) Provide a range of leisure opportunities for local communities and 
visitors; and  
(e) Achieve the National Forest Company's woodland cover target . 
(2) New developments within the National Forest will contribute towards the 
creation of the forest by including provision of tree planting and other 
landscape areas within them and  /or elsewhere within the National Forest in 
accordance with National Forest Planting Guidelines  in place at the time an 
application is determined. Landscaping will generally involve resilient 
woodland planting, but can also include the creation and management of 
other appropriate habitats, open space provision associated with woodland  
and the provision of new recreational facilities. Landscaping does  not just 
include woodland planting and t he appropriate mix of landscaping features 
will depend upon the setting and the opportunities that the site presents.  
(3) In exceptional circumstances, a commuted sum may be agreed where 
planting and landscaping cannot be accommodated within or close to the 
development site. This will be used to purchase land for planting, create new 
woodland, provide public access to it and maintain the site for at least 5 
years.  
(4) Within the National Forest new development should ensure  that:  
(a) The siting and scale of the proposed development is appropriately 
related t o its setting within the Forest;  and 
(b) The proposed development respects and does not adversely affect the 
character and appearance of the National Forest or  the wider 104 
 countrys ide; and  
(c) The character of the National Forest is enhanced through incorporating a 
National Forest or locally inspired identity.  
(5) The area between Ashby de la Zouch, Measham and Swadlincote will be 
recognised as ‘The Heart of the National Forest’ where there  will be a 
concentration of tourism and leisure activities associated with the National 
Forest, and economic opportunities based on the woodland and 
environmental economy.  Linkages to nearby urban areas will be 
strengthened and new development will be exe mplars of sustainable design 
and construction, with an emphasis upon the use of Forest -themed 
construction materials where appropriate.  
 
CHARNWOOD FOREST  
 
10.32 Charnwood Forest is a distinctive area of rugged upland landscape towards the north -
west of Le icester. It is valued for its geological importance, rich biodiversity, landscape 
beauty, historical importance, and recreational role. It is also a traditional working 
landscape with a high proportion of land in agricultural use and, in some parts of the 
area, mineral working.  
10.33 About 8% of it lies in North West Leicestershire. The area is surrounded by growing 
urban centres such as Leicester, Loughborough and Coalville, as well as by other 
smaller settlements. It is therefore exposed to the pressures  which this growth brings. 
However, development could also provide opportunities to improve parts of the area 
and develop stronger green links to the surrounding towns, villages and landscapes, 
and linkages beyond this to other green areas such as the Nati onal Forest.  
10.34 Previous st rategic plans and the 2002  Local Plan all have recognised the importance of 
the area due its unique character and appearance. The former East Midlands Regional 
Plan recognised the importance of the Charnwood Forest as a key Gr een 
Infrastructure asset and proposed the creation of a Charnwood Forest Regional Park.  
10.35 A Charnwood Forest Regional Park Steering Group has been established comprising  of 
North West Leicestershire District Council, Leicestershire County Council, Char nwood 
Borough Council, Hinckley & Bosworth Borough Council and other key sta keholders 
such as the National F orest  Company,  Natural England and the Leicestershire Local 
Access Forum. Th e Steering Group has agreed a  vision for the Charnwood Forest 
Regional P ark. The agreed vision is that “ The unique natural and cultural heritage 
features of the Charnwood Forest will be managed and promoted through the 
Charnwood Forest Regional Park. The Regional Park will be recognised as an essential 
part of the growing comm unities in the Derby, Leicester and Nottingham area, now 
and in the future .” 105 
 10.36 To achieve the Vision, the overall aim is the retention, enhancement a nd, where 
necessary, protection  of the resource and its important landscape, ecological, 
geological and  historical features, to maintain the integrity of the Charnwood Forest.  
10.37 A detailed landscape appraisal has been undertaken to define the extent of the 
Regional Park in landscape terms. The boundary results in some parts of the Coalville 
Urban Area b eing within the Regional Park.  
10.38 The Charnwood area is recognised a s one of a number of National Character Areas 
which cover North West Leicestershire. Th e National Character Area profile for the 
Charnwood Forest recognises that “ There is great scope to build on and support the 
partnership work of the Charnwood Forest Regional Park to protect and enhance this 
area, and the work of The National Forest in promoting sustainable woodland 
management and extending woodland (where appropriate)”.  
 
10.39  It is not the intention that the Charnwood Forest Regional Park should be a barrier to 
new development in its own right. Therefore, the  provisions of the policy below have 
to be read in conjunction with the countryside policy (Policy S 3). Instead we want to 
maintain the traditional working landscape of the Charnwood Forest while supporting 
rural diversification that encourages sustainable tourism. In some areas mineral 
workings are a part of this landscape (for example at Bardon Quarry) and can provide 
biodivers ity, geodiversity and access opportunities . 
10.40 It is important that the design and construction of any new development which is 
considered to be appropriate should pay particular attention to the need to maintain 
and enhance the character and appearance  of the area.  
10.41 The part of the Charnwood Forest which is in North West Leicestershire is also within 
the National Forest. The aim of increasing woodland cov erage across T he National 
Forest may not always be appropriate within the Charnwood Forest hav ing regard to 
landsc ape character and biodiversity. In these instances, the provision of alternative 
habitats or the protection  / enhancement of existing habitats will be expected in lieu 
of the woodland creation expected by Policy En3.  
Policy En4 – Charn wood Forest Regional Park  
(1) Within the Charnwood Forest, the Council will work in partnership with 
Leicestershire County Council, Charnwood Borough Council, Hinckley and 
Bosworth Borough Council and other partners to protect and enhance the 
landscape, biodiv ersity, natural history and cultural heritage of the 
Charnwood Forest Regional Park (CFRP).  
(2) Priority will be given to those proposals that:  
(a) Maintain the traditional working landscape of the forest, particularly 
those which involve farming or rural diversif ication or tourism, 
including green tourism initiatives;  and 106 
 (b) Enhance the biodiversity of the CFRP, consistent with the aims of the 
Charnwood National Character Area profile (SEO3);  and 
(c) Provide new recreation facilities appropriate to the character of the 
area; and  
(d) Provide access to and from the rural areas into and within the Regional 
Park by non -vehicular means.  
 
(3) Any new development within the CFRP will be expected to respect the 
character and appearance of area in terms of design and materials used.  
 
AREAS OF SEPARATION  
10.42 It is important to ensure that individual settlements retain their own character and 
identity. This is recognised in the Countryside policy (policy S 3) where the potential 
impact upon the separation between settlements is an importa nt consideration in 
determining proposals for development. However, in the Coalville Urban Area there 
are two large, open, undeveloped areas of land which are within the Limits to 
Development and not subject to the countryside policies, as they are surroun ded by  
built development , but  which perform a very important role in maintaining the 
physical separation between Coalville and Whitwick. Development in this area, if 
permitted, would result in the physical coalescence of Coalville and Whitwick and  the 
loss of the separate identity of the two settlements. Therefore, these open areas are 
identified  as Areas  of Separation and subject to the policy below.  
Policy  En5 – Areas of Separation  
 
(1) Land between Coalville and Whitwick , as identified on the Policies Map , is 
designated as an Area of Separation where only agricultural , forestry, 
nature conservation , leisure and sport and recreation uses  will be allowed . 
Any other proposed uses will need to demonstrate why they cannot be 
accommodated elsewhere within the district.  
 
(2) Development will not be permitted which, either individually or 
cumulatively, would demonstrably  adversely affect or diminish the present 
open and undeveloped character of the area.  
 
LAND AND AIR QUALITY  
10.43 The NPPF advises that in meeting deve lopment needs planning should “prevent  both 
new and existing development from contributing to or being put at unacceptable risk 
from or being adversely affected by unacceptable levels of soil, air, water or noise 
pollution or land instability .”  
10.44 Policy En 6 sets out our approach to ensure that the aim of the NPPF is achieved.  107 
 Policy En6  – Land and air quality  
Proposals for development on land that is (or is suspected of being) subject to land 
instability issues or contamination, or is located within th e defined Development 
High Risk Area  or within or close to an Air Quality Management Area or close to a 
known source of noise will be supported where:  
(a) A planning application is accompanied by a detailed investigation and 
assessment of the issues; and  
(b) Appro priate mitigation measures are identified which avoid any 
unacceptably adverse  impacts upon the site or adjacent areas, including 
groundwater quality.  
Development should avoid any unacceptably adverse impact upon soils of high 
environmental value (for exam ple wetland and other specific soils) and ensure 
that soil resources are conserved and managed in a sustainable way.  
 
10.45 North West Leicestershire has a long history of coal mining  and heavy industry. This 
has left a legacy of potential land instabilit y and contamination issues. T he Coal 
Authority has defined a  ‘Development High Risk Area’  that covers most of the district. 
In this area the potential land instability and other safety risks associated with former 
coal mining activities are likely to be gr eatest. They include, for example, areas of 
known or suspected shallow coal mining, recorded mine entries and areas of former 
surface mining. Other than householder developments  and those exceptions as 
identified on the Coal Authority’s exemptions list , all new development proposals 
within the defined Development High Risk Area must be supported by a Coal Mining 
Risk Assessment, or equivalent, in order to identify any potential risks to the new 
development and any  required remediation measures .  These asses sments must be 
carried out by a suitably qualified person to the current British Standards and 
approved guidance.   
10.46 The responsibility for determining the extent and effects of such constraints lies with 
the developer.  
 
10.47 Groundwater provides a third of our drinking water in England and Wales, and it also 
maintains the flow in many of our rivers. It is crucial that we look after these sources 
and ensure that water is completely safe to drink.  
10.48 Sometimes a proposed development may be located  near to  a known source of noise. 
Such noise could potentially impact upon the users of a proposed development, 
particularly residential development. It is important therefore to ensure that the likely 
impact is fully understood and, where necessary, mitig ated to protect the future 
occupiers. Furthermore, implementing appropriate mitigation should ensure that an 108 
 existing use is not subject to complaints in the future which could require the 
implementation of measures by the existing user at their expense.  
 
10.49  The Council has a duty to assess the present and future air quality of the area in 
relation to the requirements of the National Air Quality Strategy and to identify the 
main sources of the pollutants affecting air quality. Within the district t here  are five 
Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA s): 
 M1 Mole Hill Kegworth;   
 High Street Kegworth;   
 Stephenson Way/Bardon Road Coalville ;  
 High Street/Bondgate Castle Donington ; and  
 Copt Oak Road Copt Oak.  
10.50 An annual assessment and review  of the AQMAs  is undertaken and published. The 
planning system has an important role to play by ensuring that new development does 
not contribute to or exacerbate existing air quality issues .  
 109 
 11 HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT   
INTRODUCTION  
11.1 The Council is committed to conserving the significance of designated  and non –
designated heritage assets , and the important contribution that they make to the 
quality of  the environment so that they can be e njoyed by future generations. Once a 
heritage asset is lost it cannot be replaced.   
11.2 Heritage assets are the valued components of the historic environment which have 
been identified as having a degree of ‘significance’ i.e. archaeological, architectur al, 
artistic or historic. They can include for example buildings, monuments, sites, places, 
area s or landscapes. Designated Heritage assets include listed buildings, conservation 
areas, World Heritage Sites, registered parks and gardens and scheduled monum ents. 
The term heritage assets also cover s those assets that have not been designated and 
afforded protection by separate legislation. The significance of these ‘non -designated  
heritage assets’ is a material consideration in determining planning applicatio ns as 
identified in the NPPF . 
11.3 The NPPF defines significance as ‘the value’ of a heritage asset to this and future 
generations because of its heritage interest. Significance derives not only from a 
heritage asset ’s physical presence, but also from its setting.  
HISTORIC ENVIRONMENT NORTH WEST LEICESTERSHIRE   
11.4  The heritage of North West Leicestershire is characterised by pre -industrial 
settlements that range in size from hamlets to market towns; about twenty of these 
settlements have been designated as conservation areas. The conservation areas are 
mainly representative of rural, agricultural areas with traditional houses, cottages and 
farm buildings.  Also represented are areas characterised by the industrial revolution 
(Measham  Canal) Georgian Archi tecture (Ashby de la Zouch and Castle Donington) and 
country homes (Staunton Harold and Coleorton Hall).  For example the district still 
shows signs of its industrial heritage including the Midland Railway signal box, former 
collieries, bridges and cottage s.  
There is also evidence of earlier settlement in the area, including an Iron Age hill fort 
at Breedon -on-the-Hill (‘The Bulwarks’) and a Roman villa near Lockington.  
11.5  The landscapes at Coleorton Hall, Staunton Harold Hall and Whatton House are 
included on the national register of parks and gardens. The remains of farming 
practices on the landscape with evidence of ridge and furrow within Appleby Magna 
also make the local  landscape an important heritage  asset.  
11.6  Ashby de la Zouch is the primary historic settlement in the district. The settlement 
core is a designated conservation area; it covers about 35ha and contains to date 
about 140 listed buildings, including six grade II* listed buildings. Castle Donington is 110 
 the secondary historic settlemen t in the district. The settlement core is a designated 
conservation area; it covers about 35ha and contains to date about 50 listed buildings.  
11.7  North West Leicestershire is recognised for the survival of castles and moated sites, 
including the castles  at Ashby -de-la-Zouch, Castle Donington and Whitwick and the 
moated manor houses at Appleby Magna and Hemington. It is also significant for the 
survival of religious houses including Grace Dieu Priory, Langley Priory and the Priory 
Church of St Mary and St  Hardulph at Breedon -on-the-Hill. 
11.8  Coal was mined in North West Leicestershire from the medieval period; early coal 
mining remains at Coleorton and Lount have been designated as scheduled 
monuments. North West Leicestershire is recognised for the surv ival of industrial 
structures including the Ashby Canal, Moira Blast Furnace and Snibston Colliery.  The 
conservation of assets which reflect the district ’s industrial and coal  mining heritage 
will be a particular priority for the Council.   
11.9   There are  also other key heritage assets that have not been designated that are still of 
significance to the architectural, social and cultural history of the district. A number of 
these important assets are listed on the Leicestershire Historic Environment Record 
(HER). The identification of these buildings or features of local importance is often 
supported by parish councils, civic societies and historic interest groups as part of the 
preparation of a local list. They are also set out within Conservation Area Appr aisals.  
11.10  There will be a particular focus on Coalville town centre as Historic England described 
Coalville in response to the consultation on the designation  of the Coalville 
conservation area ‘as a good example of the type of commercial and industria l 
settlement that grew up rapidly in the nineteenth century following the discovery of 
coal, but which in Leicestershire is somewhat unusual. Its value is also an ensemble ; it 
is more than the sum of its parts due to the extent of survival. This significan ce has in 
certain areas been masked by later alterations to buildings, but this provides a rich 
seam of enhancement opportunities would help to facilitate’.  
11.11  When looking to protect and enhance the historic environment and heritage assets 
there is the  opportunity to help deliver on other objectives, such as economic 
development and tourism. Conservation and sustainable economic growth are 
complementary objectives and should not generally be in conflict with one another. 
Conservation can play a key part  in promoting economic prosperity by ensuring that 
an area offers attractive living and working conditions that will encourage inward 
investment.  
11.12  The Council has a key role to play in the protection, conservation and enhancement of 
the heritage asset s that exist throughout the district by:  
 Supporting proposals  for planning permission and listed building consent 
where the historic environment and heritage assets are conserved and 
enhanced in line with their significance;  111 
  The use of planning obligation s to secure the enhancement of the significance 
of any heritage asset, where development might impact on that significance ;  
 Adopting a Local List ;  
 Undertaking and Implementing Conservation Area Appraisals and 
Management Plans and using up to date evidence  when determining planning 
applications.  The most up to date evidence can be viewed at  
http://www.nwleics.gov.uk/pages/conservation_information ; 
 Making use of Article 4 Directions  and Local Development Orders where 
appropriate ;  
 The use of grant schemes, as resources permit, to safeguard heritage assets at 
risk and encourage sympathetic maintenance and restoration of listed 
buildings and historic shop fronts;  and 
 Strengthening the dis tinctive character of the district including:  
a) Conserving and enhancing the character and appearance of the 
historic market towns of Ashby de la Zouch and Castle Donington as 
well as its rural settlements such as Snarestone.  
b) Recognising and protecting the district’s industrial, transport and 
recreational heritage such as coalmining heritage, canals and spa 
heritage.  
c) Protecting the rural character and landscape including historic 
landscape features such as ancient or mature woodland, and ridge and 
furrow fiel d patterns.  
 
Policy He1 – Conservation and enhancement of North West Leicestershire’s 
historic environment   
(1) To ensure the conservation and enhancement of North West Leicestershire’s 
historic environment, proposals for development, including those des igned to 
improve the environmental performa nce of a heritage asset, should : 
a) Conserve or enhance the significance of heritage assets within the dis trict, 
their setting , for instance  significant views  within and in and out of 
Conservation Areas;  
b) Retain build ings, settlement pattern s, features  and spaces, which form 
part of the significance of the heritage asset and its setting;  
c) Contribute to the local distinctiveness, built form and scale of heritage 
assets through the use of appropriate design, materials and  workmanship;  
d) Demonstrate a clear understanding of the significance of the heritage 
asset and of the wider context in which the heritage asset sits . 
(2) There will be a presumption against  development that will lead to substantial 
harm to, or total loss of  significance of a designated heritage asset. Proposals  
will be refused  consent, unless it can be demonstrated that  the substantial 112 
 harm or loss is necessary  to achieve substantial  public benefits that outweigh 
the harm or loss or all of the following ap ply: 
 The nature of the heritage asset prevents all reasonable uses of 
the site; and  
 no viable use of the heritage asset itself can be found in the 
medium term through appropriate marketing that will enable its 
conservation; and  
 conservation by grant -fund ing or some form of charitable or public 
ownership is demonstrably not possible; and  
 The harm or loss is outweighed by the benefit of bringing the site 
back into use.  
 
Where a development proposal will lead to less than substantial harm to the 
significanc e of a designated heritage asset, this harm should be weighed 
against the public benefits of the proposal, including s ecuring its optimum 
viable use.  
 
(3) Where permission is granted, where relevant the Council will secure 
appropriate conditions and  / or seek to negotiate a Section 106 Obligation to 
ensure that all heritage assets are appropriately managed and conserved.  
(4) The District Council will support development that conserves the significance 
of non -designated heritage assets including archaeologic al remains.  
 
11.13   The Council will continue to produce and revise Conservation Area Appraisals for all 
designated conservation areas within the district.  Conservation Area Appraisals offer 
an opportunity to identify ways in which their significance can  be reinforced and 
strengthened.  Such appraisal s can help as sist the removal of elements within the built 
environment which have a negative impact on surrounding heritage assets.  
11.14  In certain areas including Staunton Harold conservation area and Locki ngton 
conservation area Article 4 directions to remove permitted development rights are 
adopted. A Local Development Order is in place for Coalville Town Centre to help 
facilitate the Coalville shop front improvement scheme, by streamlining the planning 
process.  
11.15  At October 2015 there were 6 heritage assets listed on the Historic England Heritage at 
Risk Register. We will continue to monitor these and work with Historic England and 
other stakeholders to address the future of these buildings.   The Risk Register includes 
grade I, grade II* and grade II places of worship  - therefore a comprehensive survey of 
grade II listed buildings will be required at a district level.  
11.16  The reuse of historic buildings for a use other than their original use represen ts a 
sustainable use of resources. However, it will be necessary to ensure that any physical 
changes to the fabric of the building do not detract from the heritage asset. Similarly, 113 
 physical changes to a building designed to improve the buildings energy ef ficiency will 
also require careful attention in order to not detract from the quality of the heritage 
asset. There are opportunities in most historic buildings to improve energy 
conservation without causing harm through measures such as secondary glazing, 
improved loft insulation using natural materials, low energy lighting and the use of fuel 
efficient boilers.  
 
11.17  Where conflict is unavoidable the benefits of energy conservation measures should be 
weighed against the extent of harm to the significance.  
 
SHOP FRONT S 
11.18  The towns and villages of North West Leicestershire also have some very good 
examples of old shop fronts, a shop front serves a number of purposes to provide an 
attractive frame for goods displayed, to advertise the presence of the shop , and to 
project an image for the business inside.  
11.19  The shop fronts within Ashby de la Zouch and Castle Donington town centres are 
predominately of late nineteenth century, often inserted into former dwellings of an 
earlier date. They typically have a stall riser below their display window along with 
architrave and cornice above. Many premises also have pilasters which frame the 
overall shop frontage and a number retain elaborate consoles.  
11.20  With regard to advertisement signage to traditional sho p frontages, the introduction 
of signs which project beyond fascias, the installation of internally illuminated box and 
fascia signs and the use and means of illumination such as cowl lamps or projecting 
strip lighting are all considered to have been detri mental to the streetscape.  
11.21  Due to the overall character and historic interest of the core shopping areas within 
Ashby de la Zouch and Castle Donington it is important to conserve, protect and 
enhance where appropriate the historic shop fronts.  
Policy  He2 – Shopfront Design  
 
Shop front design, signage and proposal s to improve shop front security should:  
 
a) Retain existing historic shop fronts and features of architectural and historic 
interest;  and 
b) Respect the scale, proportions, character and materials of the whole building 
and where appropriate, adjoining buildings and the wider street scene;  and 
c) Incorporate materials appropriate to the age and character of the building; 
and 
d) Have regard to the guidance on shop fronts and signage.  
 
 114 
 12 CLIMATE CHANGE  
INTRODUCTION  
12.1 The NPPF notes that planning has a key role to play in helping to minimise  
vulnerability and providing resilience to the impacts of climate change. It also calls for 
planning to support a low carbon future. Low carbon living means reducin g the carbon 
emitted as a result of our lifestyles and to achieve this requires wide ranging changes 
to people ’s behaviour and the economy . The NPPF provides clear national guidance on 
how planning policy should be implemented and decisions taken to ensure  a 
sustainable, low carbon future.  
BACKGROUND  
12.2 The overwhelming scientific consensus is that the planet is warming, and that this 
warming is largely a result of increasing concentrations of “green house gases” in the 
atmosphere which trap solar radiati on in the atmosphere.  These “greenhouse gases” 
are largely attributed to human activities linked to the use of fossil fuels.  
12.3 To help reduce the impacts of climate change we must:  
 Mitigate : reducing greenhouse gas emissions; and  
 Adapt: helping the bu ilt and natural environment to be resilient to future 
climatic conditions, including extreme weather events and periods of water 
shortage . 
 
12.4 This Local Plan includes a number of policies which are designed to help tackle climate 
change including:  
 Ensu ring a sustainable  pattern of development, including improvement s to the 
self-containment levels of the principal town , key service centres and local 
service centres and a reduction in the  need to travel (see Policy S 2); 
 Supporting the supply of energy and  heat from renewable and low carbon 
sources (Policy Cc1);  
 Ensuring that new development incorporates sustainable building practices 
and where possible will contribute to improving the existing building stock 
(Policy Cc2);  
 Ensuring that new development inco rporates water efficiency measures 
(Policy Cc2);  
 Ensuring the incorporation of high energy efficiency into new development;  
 Ensuring that new developments incorporate appropriate adaptation and 
mitigation for climate change, particularly risk from flooding  and rising sea 
levels (Policy Cc3).  
 
 
 115 
 RENEWABLE ENERGY  
 
12.5 The NPPF notes that all communities have a responsibility to “contribute  to energy 
generation from renewable or low carbon sources .”  A  Minist erial Statement of 9 April 
2014  states that the need for renewable energy does not automatically override 
environmental protections and the planning  concerns of local communities  and this 
will also be a consideration in determining any proposals. A further Ministerial 
State ment  of 28 June 2015 states th at proposals for wind energy development should 
only be granted planning permission if the development site is in an area identified as 
suitable for wind energy development in a Local or Neighbourhood Pl an; and following 
consultation  it can be demonstrated  that the planning impacts identified by affected 
local communities have been fully addressed and therefore the proposal has their 
backing.  
12.6 Proposals for wind energy development will be supported in principle, cumulative 
impacts of existing operation al, consented and proposed developments must be 
assessed, and suitable mitigation measures proposed, to minimise the impacts on 
biodiversity and landscape character. Developers must demonstrate that cumulative 
impacts do not become significant or defining characteristics of the wider landscape, 
including across administrative boundaries and different landscape character types.  
12.7 Pre-application consultation must be undertaken in accordance with national 
legislation. Detailed technical assessments will be  expected to demonstrate that the 
proposed siting is appropriate and does not result in any unacceptable impacts in 
terms of , for example,  noise, highway safety, bats  and shadow  flicker when assessed 
against relevant standing advice .  
Policy Cc1  – Renewabl e Energy  
(1) Planning applications for renewable energy including an y new grid 
connection lines and any ancillary infrastructure and buildings associated 
with the development will be supported where:  
(a)       There is no unacceptable impact on residential amenit y in terms of 
noise, shadow flicker, vibration and visual dominance;  and  
(b)       There is no adverse impact on the landscape character taking account 
of the special qualities set out within the individual National Character 
Areas;  and 
(c)       All impacts on  biodiversity have been adequately mitigated or 
enhanced;  and  
(d)       Heritage assets and their settings are conserved or enhanced ; and  
(e)       Proposals take account of the cumulative effect that would result from 
the proposal in conjunction with permitted an d existing renewable 116 
 energy schemes ; and 
(f)       Proposals are accompanied by details to demonstrate how the site will 
be decommissioned to ensure the restoration of the site following 
cessation ; and  
(g)       Proposals for large scale renewable energy should  demonstrate that 
the economic, social and environmental benefits are for those 
communities closest to the proposed facility.  
We will consider the preparation of a Supplementary  Planning  Document to 
provide further guidance on this issue.  
(2) In addition to the  above considerations , proposals for  one or more wind 
turbines will be supported where:  
 
(a)       The site l ies within the ‘ Area Identified as potentially suitable for large 
or small scale turbines’  as defined on the policies map; and  
(b)       It can be demonstr ated there is support from the local community or is 
set out within an area defined as being suitable for wind energy 
development within an adopted Neighbourhood Plan ; and  
(c)       All impacts on air traffic safety as referred to in local plan policy Ec6 
and radar and communications have been assessed and consulted 
upon.  
 
12.8  Government guidance sets out that:  
 The need for renewable energy does not automatically override 
environmental protections and the planning concerns of local communities ; 
 Decisions shou ld take into account the cumulative impact of wind turbines and 
properly reflect the increasing impact on (a) the landscape and (b) local 
amenity as the number o f turbines in an area increases;  
 Local topography should be a factor in assessing whether wind turbines have a 
damaging impact on the landscape (i.e. recognise that the impact on 
predominately flat landscapes can be as great or greater than as on hilly or 
mountain ous ones) ; 
 Great care should be taken to ensure heritage assets are conserved in a 
mann er appropriate to their significance, including the  impact of any proposal 
on views important to their setting.  
 
12.9  A Planning for Climate Change report which considered sources of potential renewable 
energy across Leicestershire (except Charnwood Boroug h) was published in 2008. The 
report considered three specif ic sources of renewable energy - wind, water and 
biomass and made an assessment as to the potential for these to be harnessed.  117 
  
12.10  The areas around the six main settlements in North West Leices tershire (Ashby de la 
Zouch, Castle Donington, Coalville, Ibstock, Kegworth and Measham) all performed 
well in terms of availability of wind resource and accessibility to woodland, and 
therefore the report considered that the opportunity for harnessing the se resources is 
high. In addition, it identified the potential for hydro -power generation from two sites 
near Kegworth.  
 
12.11  In order to determine potentially suitable areas for wind energy development, a 
further study has been prepared based upon the Department for Energy and Climate 
Change ’s guidance “Renewable and Low Carbon Energy Capacity Methodology for the 
English Regions .”  This identifies three  key planning constraints:  
 
 Wind Speed ;  
 Environmental and Landscape Designations; and  
 Proximity to Res idential Properties.  
The areas identified as potentially suitable would require a detailed assessment during 
the planning process and will be assessed on a site by site basis.   
 
12.12   The study referred to above addresses the issues of wind speed and pro ximity to 
residential properties and t he areas identified as potentially suitable on the policies 
map reflect the study’s conclusions. In respect of heritage assets (and their settings) 
and landscape designations, this will require a detailed assessment du ring the planning 
process and will be assessed on a site by site basis. In respect of landscape 
designations these will have regard to the National Character Area profiles; more 
information about these can be found at paragraph 5.2 7 of this Local Plan.  
 
12.13 Large scale renewable energy technologies can be contentious as they are often land –
hungry and visually imposing. Early consultation wit h the local community, and pre -
application discussions , will be necessary to help ensure large -scale renewable ener gy 
installations are appropriately  designed and located.  
 
12.1 4 Micro renewable energy installations (such as solar panels) typically at the level of 
households are often permitted development and do not require a specific policy.  
 
WATER – FLOOD RISK  
12.15 Increased rainfall, which is one of the predicted consequences of climate change, will 
result in increasing the risk of flooding from  rivers.  A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA) has been undertaken which identifies those parts of the district most a t risk 
from flooding. In accordance with the NPPF w e will apply a sequential, risk  based 
approach to the location of development to avoid flood risk to people and property 118 
 where possible, and manage residual risk, taking into account the impacts of climate  
change.  
12.16 Our approach is to use a Sequential  Test to steer new development to areas with the 
lowest probability of flooding.  
12.17 Where development needs to be in locations where there is a risk of flooding and 
alternative sites are not available,  we will need to ensure that development is 
appropriately flood resilient and resistant , safe for all of its users for the developments 
lifetime, and will not increase flood risk overall.   
Policy Cc 2 – Flood Risk  
(1) The risk and impact of flooding will be m inimised through:  
(a) Directing new development to areas with the lowest probability of 
flooding ; and 
(b) Ensuring that all new development addresses the effective management of 
all sources of flood risk ; and 
(c) Ensuring that development does not increase the risk of  flooding 
elsewhere ; and  
(d) Ensuring wider environmental benefits of development in relation to flood 
risk. 
 
(2) A proposal will be supported where:  
(a) It is located in an area that is not at risk of flooding with reference to the 
Environment Agency flood risk maps  and the Council ’s Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment (SFRA), unless a Sequential Test, and if necessary an Exception 
Test, as set out in the National Planning Practice Guidance on flood risk, 
proves the development is acceptable;  and 
(b) Site-specific Flood Risk  Assessments should consider the issues of flooding 
from sewers, canal infrastructure failure , groundwater rising from former 
coal mining areas , and watercourses ; and 
(c) Suitable flood protection  / mitigation measures can be agreed as 
appropriate to the level  and nature of flood risk and satisfactorily 
implemented and maintained; and  
(d) There  will be no increase in the risk  of floo ding for properties elsewhere. 
For previously undeveloped sites the rate of runoff from the development 
sites should be no greater th an the existing (greenfield) rate of runoff from 
the site. For developments on previously developed (brownfield) sites the 
rate of runoff should not exceed the runoff of the site in its previously 
developed condition . 
 
 119 
 WATER - SUSTAINABLE DRAINAGE  SYSTEM S   
12.18 Sustainable Drainage Systems (S uDS) aim to mimic the natural drainage process whilst 
also removing pollutants from urban runoff at the source before entering a 
watercourse. There are a wide range of SuDS techniques  available , including green 
roof s, permeable paving swales, detention basins, ponds and wetlands. In addition to 
controlling run -off they also offer opportunities to enhance the biodiversity in an area , 
reduce flood risk and improve water quality.  
12.19 Different solutions will call for different types of SuDS, according to their effectiveness 
and efficiency depending upon the local geology – a solution in one place may not be 
suitable somewhere else. Due to the variation of permeability across the district we 
propose to prepare an SPD to  give greater detail on the delivery of S uDS within 
different areas within the district.  
12.20 Leicestershire County Council is now the Lead Local Flood Authority and is the lead 
organisation for providing advice and guidance on surface water runoff and ru n off 
rates.  
12.21 It is the intention to p repare an SPD to support the policy on the delivery of Su DS and 
other mitigation mechanisms.   
 
Policy Cc 3 – Sustainable Drainage Systems  
(1) When assessing development proposals where it is necessary to manage 
surface  water drainage, Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) should be 
incorporated into developments in accordance with national and local 
standards unless it can be clearly demonstrated;  
a) That SuDS are not technically, operationally or financially deliverable or  
viable and that surface water drainage issues from the development can 
be alternatively mitigated; or  
b) That the SuDS scheme  will itself adversely affect the environment  or 
safety.  
(2) Where appropriate, every effort should be made to link SuDS into wider 
initiative s to enhance green infrastructure, improve water quality and benefit 
wildlife or contribute to the provision of the ecosystem service.  
(3) Arrangements in accordance with national policy will need to be put in place 
for the management and maintenance of the SuDS over the whole period 
during which they are needed.  
 120 
 13 IMPLEMENTATION AND MONITORING  
13.1 The primary responsibility for  implementing the policies in this Local Plan largely rest s 
with the District Council as the Local Planning Authority.  The  Council will use the 
policies in the Local Plan , alongside  any national policies and guidance to determine 
any planning application submitted. In addition , it is proposed to review and update 
the existing suite of Supplementary Planning Documents (SPD) as  well as producing 
new ones where appropriate.  
 
13.2 There will be other people and organisations that will have a key part to play in the 
implementation of the Local Plan, including developers, landowners, public utilities 
(e.g. water, gas, electricity, and broadband ) and other public sector agencies such as 
the Environment Agency, Engl ish Heritage and Natural England and the respective 
highway authorities . The private sector will be mainly responsible for t he delivery of 
individual developments, whether for housing, employment, retail or other forms of 
development. The Council is committed to working in partnership with these various 
organisations to ensure that the aims and objectives of the Local Plan are delivered.  
 
13.3 A key aspect to ensure the imp lementation of the Local Plan is through regular and 
robust monitoring. The Council will regularly assess the performance of individual 
policies and overall progress in delivering the strategic objectives of the Local Plan. 
This will be done through the pr oduction of an Annual Monitoring  Report (AMR). 
Results of monitoring will be used to inform any change to policies or additional 
actions considered to be required.  
 
13.4 A Monitoring Framework has been prepared to outline how policies in the Local Plan 
will be  monitored  (see Appendix 6). The monitoring framework will provide the basis 
for the annual monitoring report. The majority of indicators will be monitored 
annually however where the District Council will need to rely on data from other 
organisations this will be monitored once the relevant data is made available. It is the 
intention to monitor the districts town and local centres on a bi –annual basis.  
Policy IM1 – Implementation and monitoring of the Local Plan  
 
(1) The Council will implement the polici es and proposals of the Local Plan by:  
 working with a range of organisations and individuals through various 
working arrangements;  
 the preparation of Supplementary Planning Documents as required to 
provide additional guidance in respect of specific policie s in the Local 
Plan;  
 utilising development management powers, including pre -application 
discussions and involving other organisations where appropriate;  
 considering how th e council can use its resources , including funding, 
to help implement and support th e provisions of the Local Plan and 121 
 seeking other monies for projects which support the Local Plan.  
 
(2) The Council will monitor the policies of this Local Plan annually (as at 31st 
March of each year).  An Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) will be published 
by 31  December of each year.  
 
(3) Where it is apparent that delivery rates are falling short of what was 
anticipated then the Council will take the necessary action to address any 
shortfall. Such actions may include (but are not limited to):  
 working with developers  and site promoters to review the 
requirements and phasing of infrastructure provision, where such re -
phasing would assist with viability; or  
 working with developers, site promoters and other interested parties 
to help unlock potential sources of fundin g for identified 
infrastructure ; or  
 considering the use of Compulsory Purchase Powers to help address 
known land acquisition issues; or  
 bringing forward additional sites where it can be demonstrated that 
such sites will assist with delivery to address short term needs ; or 
 engaging with statutory consultees . 
 
(4) Where additional housing sites need to be brought forward initial priority 
will be given to  those sites identified within the most recent Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) and having regard to the 
settlement hierarchy set out in Policy S2.  Sites not included in the SHLAA 
will only be supported where there are no sites within the SHLAA which are 
capable of contributing to supply in the next 5 year period and which accord 
with the settl ement hierarchy.  
 
NEIGHBOURHOOD PLANS  
 
13.5 Neighbourhood planning was introduced by the Localism Act 2011. Through producing 
a Neighbourhood Plan communities can take the lead on developing planning policies . 
However, any plans and policies must be in general conformity with the str ategic 
policies contained in th e adopted Local  Plan  in place at the time a Neighbourhood Plan 
is prepared . The policies in this Local Plan are the strategic policies that 
Neighbourhood Plans will be required to be in conformit y with.  
13.6 Neighbourhood Plans attain the same legal status as the Local Plan once it has been 
agreed at a referendum and is made by North West Leicestershire District Council. 
Applications for planning permission must then be determined in accordance wi th the 
development plan , including the neighbourhood plan, unless  material considerations 
indicate otherwise.  122 
 13.7 There are currently two designated neighbourhood areas  within the district:  
 Ashby de la Zouch  
 Ellistown  
13.8 North West Leicestershire Distri ct Council will work with these communities and other 
communities wishing to prepare Neighbourhood Plans to ensure timetables, 
aspirations and evidence are aligned.  123 
 APPENDIX 1  
GLOSSARY  
Affordable Housing  Social rented, affordable rented and intermediate  housing, 
provided to eligible households whose needs are not met 
by the market.  Eligibility is determined with regard to local 
incomes and local house prices.  Affordable housing should 
include provision to remain at an affordable price for 
future eligib le households or for the subsidy to be recycled 
for alternative affordable housing provision.  
 
Social rented ho using  is owned by local authorities and 
private registered providers (as defined in section 80 of the 
Housing and Regeneration Act 2008), for whi ch guideline 
target rents are determined through the national rent 
regime.  It may also be owned by other persons and 
provided under equivalent rental arrangements to the 
above. As agreed with the local authority or with the 
Homes and Communities Agency.  
 
Affordable rented housing is let by local authorities or 
private registered providers of social housing to 
households who are eligible for social rented housing.  
Affordable Rent is subject to rent controls that require a 
rent income of no more than 80% of  the local market rent 
(including service charges, where applicable).  
 
Intermediate housing is homes for sale and rent provided 
at a cost above social rent, but below market levels subject 
to the criteria in the Affordable Housing definition above.  
These can include shared equity (shared ownership and 
equity loans), other low cost homes for sale and 
intermediate rent, but no affordable housing.  
 
Homes that do not meet the above definition of affordable 
housing, such as “low cost market” housing, may not be  
considered as affordable housing for planning purposes.  
Air Quality Management Areas 
(AQMA)  Areas designated by local authorities because they are not 
likely to achieve national air quality object ives by the 
relevant deadlines.  
Ancient Woodland  An area  of woodland that has been wooded c onsistently 
since at least 1600 AD. 124 
 Annual Monitoring Rep ort 
(AMR)  A report that reviews the progress on plan preparation 
compared to the targets and milestones set out in the 
Local Development Scheme.  The AMR also revi ews the 
impact of policies contained in the Local Plan.  
Appropriate Assessment (AA)  Habitat Regulations Assessment is commonly referred to  as 
Appropriate Assessment (AA) . 
Area of Separation  An area of land that is not covered by the countryside 
policy, whose main purpose is preserving the separation 
between two or more settlements so as to preserve a 
settlement ’s identity.  
Article 4 Direction  A direction which withdraws automatic planning 
permission granted by the General Permitted Development 
Order.  
Biodiversity  ‘Biodiversity’ is a term commonly used to describe the 
variety of life on earth which encompasses the whole of 
the natural world and all living things which share the 
planet. It includes plants, animal s even invisible micro 
organisms and bacter ia which, together , interact in 
complex ways with the inanimate environment to create 
ecosystems.  
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP)  A Biodiversity Action Plan addresses threatened species 
and habitats and is designed to protect and restore 
biological systems . 
Building for Life  12 Building for Life  12 is the industry standard, endorsed by 
Government, for well -designed homes and 
neighbourhoods so that new development can be 
attractive, functional and be a sustainable place.  
Building Research Establishment 
Environmental Assessment 
Method (BREEAM)  BREEAM sets out the standard for best practice in 
sustainable building design, construction and operation 
and has become one of the most comprehensive and 
widely recognised measures of a building’s environmental 
perfor mance.  
Brownfield (Previously 
Developed Land)  See Previously Developed Land (PDL) . 
Coalville Urban Area  Coalville Urban Area comprises of Coalville, Donington -le-
Heath, Greenhill, Hugglescote, Snibston, Thringstone and 
Whitwick as well  as the Bardon emp loyment area.  
Conservation Areas  Areas of special architectural or historic interest. 
Conservation Area designations do not prevent change but 
it does help preserve and enhance the character and 
appearance of an area.  
Climate Change  The changes in the Ea rth's global or regional climate over 
time.  125 
 Coal Mining Development 
Referral Area  An area which contains a range of specific mining legacy 
risks to the surface and a Coal Mining Risk Assessment is 
required for non -householder planning applications. The 
Coal Authority will be consulted on all planning 
applications in these areas.  
Community and Cultural 
Facilities.  A building or space where community led facilities for 
communi ty benefit is the primary use. They can provide for 
the health and well -being, so cial education, spiritual, 
recreational, leisure and cultural needs of the community.   
For exa mple, public libraries, museums and  place s of 
worship.  
Community Infrastructure Levy  A levy allowing local authorities to raise funds from owners 
or developers o f land undertaking new building projects in 
their area.  
Countryside  Countryside is the largely undeveloped area beyond the 
defined limits of our towns and villages.  It is home to 
farms, isolated and small groups of homes, including our 
smallest villages,  and other rural enterprises.   
Development Management  The management or control of development proposals 
through the planning system.  
Development Plan  Comprises of Development Plan Documents (DPD) which 
form the legal basis for all future planning decis ions in the 
district.  
Development Plan Document 
(DPD)  Documents prepared by the local planning authority 
(including the Local Plan) setting out the main spatial 
planning strategy, policies and proposals for the area.  
These documents will be statutory doc uments and subject 
to an independent examination by an inspector.  DPDs 
must be consistent with and have regard to national 
planning policy.  
Duty to Cooperate  Introduced by the Localism Act 2011.  It places a legal duty 
on all local planning authorities to engage constructively, 
actively and on an ongoing basis with certain specified 
bodies to maximize the effectiveness of Local Plan 
preparation relating to strategic cross boundary issues.  126 
 Edge of Centre  For retail purposes, a location that is well conne cted and is 
up to 300 metres from  the primary shopping area.  For all 
other main town and local centre  uses, a location within 
300m of a town centre boundary.  For office development, 
this includes locations outside the town centre but within 
500 metres of  a public transport interchange.  In 
determining whether a site falls within the definition of 
edge of centre, account should be taken of local 
circumstances.  
Employment Land Availability 
Assessment (ELAA)  An assessment of employment land potential wit hin North 
West Leicestershire.  
Examinati on An independent  assessment of a Local Plan held by a 
Planning Inspector. The purpose of the Examination is to 
consider if the development plan is sound and is an 
opportunity for interested parties to put forward thei r 
views.  The majority of representations made at 
Examination will usually be ‘written representations’.  
However, in some instances a Planning Inspector may 
allow representations to be examined by way of oral 
hearings, for example round table discussions,  informal 
hearing sessions and formal hearing sessions.  
Floodplain  Generally low -lying areas adjacent to a watercourse, tidal 
lengths of a river, where water flows in times of flood or 
would flow but for the presence of flood defences.  
Flood Zones  All la nd is spilt into different flood zones to indicate the 
likelihood of flooding occurring. There is a low probability 
of flooding in Flood Zone 1 and a medium probability of 
flooding in Flood Zone 2.  There is a high probability that 
flooding will occur in l and designated as part of Flood Zone 
3a and Flood Zone 3b is the Functional Floodplain.  
Functional Economic Market 
Area (FEMA)  The geography of commercial property markets should be 
thought of in terms of the requirements of the market in 
terms of the loc ation of premises, and the spatial factors 
used in analy sing demand and supply  - often referred to as 
the fu nctional economic market area.  
Geodiversity  The range of rocks, minera ls, fossils, soils and landforms . 
Greenfield Land  Greenfield land is land t hat has never been built on or 
landforms where the remains of any structure have 
blended into the landscape overtime, Greenfield land also 
include s gardens. Greenfield land shouldn’t be confused 
with Green Belt which is a term used for  specifically 
designa ted land.  127 
 Green Infrastructure  The physical environment within and between our cities, 
towns and villages. It is a network of multi -functional green 
spaces, including formal parks, gardens, woodlands, green 
corridors, waterways, street trees and open coun tryside.  
This green space can be either urban or rural, and is 
capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and 
quality of life benefits for local communities.  
Gypsy and Traveller 
Accommodation Needs 
Assessment (GTAA)  An assessment of gypsy and tr aveller accommodation 
needs of the Gypsy and Traveller communities.  
Hamlets  Small groups of dwellings with no services or facilities.  
 
Heat Island  The heating effect of urban areas upon air and surface 
temperatures. During periods of hot weather, heat is lands 
increase the effects of heat stress and damage to 
infrastructure.  
Housing and Economic 
Development Needs Assessment 
(HEDNA)  The purpose of the HEDNA is to assess future development 
needs for housing (both market and affordable) and 
economic developm ent uses (which includes employment 
land and main town centre uses).  The HEDNA provides 
evidence concerning future development needs – for 
housing, employment land and retail floorspace. It does 
not make policy decisions regarding what levels of 
developme nt should be planned for.  
Housing Market Area (HMA)  A housing market area is a geographical area defined by 
household demand and preferences for all types of 
housing, reflecting the key functional linkages between 
places where people live and work. It mig ht be the case 
that housing markets overlap.  
 
The extent of the housing ma rket areas identified will vary  
and many , as in the case for Leicestershire , cut across 
various local planning authority boundaries.  
Intermediate Housing  Housing that is neither Mar ket Housing nor Social Rented, 
but is available at a rent/cost falling between the two.  
Intermediate housing could comprise shared ownership 
accommodation for example.  
Infrastructure  The basic requirements for the satisfactory development of 
an area and include roads, footpaths, sewers, schools, 
open space and other community facilities.  
Infrastructure Delivery Plan  The purpose of an Infrastructure Delivery Plan is to set out 
the infrastructure requirements to support planned new 
development in the dist rict. 128 
 Key Service Centre  Smaller than the principal town in terms of population and 
with a lesser range of services and facilities however they 
play an important role providing services and facilities to 
the surrounding area and are accessible by some pub lic 
transport.  
Leicester and Leicestershire 
Enterprise Partnership (LLEP)  The Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership 
(LLEP) was formed in 2011 by public, private and third 
sector partners to lead sustainable economic growth.  
Limits to Develo pment  Limits to Development provide clear, defensible 
boundaries around settlements within which development 
will normally be confined.  
 
Limits to Development distinguish between areas of 
development and development potential and areas of 
restraint, such as countryside.  
Listed Building  Statutory Listed Buildings are protected for their 
architectural and historic value as part of the nation’s 
heritage.  
Local Centre  Local centres include a range of small shops of a local 
nature, serving a small catchment.  Typically, local centres 
might include, amongst other shops, a small supermarket, 
a newsagent, a sub -post office and a pharmacy.  Other 
facilities could include hot food takeaway s and eating 
establishments.  
Local Development Document 
(LDD)  The collective  term covering Development Plan Documents 
and Supplementary Planning Documents.  
Local Development Scheme 
(LDS)  The Local Development Scheme is a document which sets 
out the local planning authority’s programme for the 
production of Local Development Docum ents.  
Local Nature Reserve (LNR)  Local Nature Reserves are places with wildlife or geological 
features of special interest locally.  They are designated by 
local authorities.  
Local Plan  The Local Plan sets out the future development of the 
area, drawn up  by the local planning authority in 
consultation with the community.   
Local Planning Authority (LPA)  The Local Planning Authority, in this case North West 
Leicestershire District Council, undertakes the town 
planning function at the local level (except mi nerals and 
waste planning which is undertaken at a County Council 
level).  
Local Service Centre  Settlements which provide some services and facilities 
primarily of a local nature meeting day -to-day needs and 
where a reasonable amount of new development wil l take 
place.  129 
 Local Transport Plan (LTP)  Local transport plans, divided into full local transport plans 
(LTP) and local implementation plans for transport (LIP) are 
an important part of transport planning in England.  They 
are prepared by strategic transp ort authorities – in our 
case Leicestershire County Council.  
Local Wildlife Sites  Local Wildlife Sites are defined areas identified and 
selected locally for their nature conservation value.  
Low -Carbon 
Energy/ Technologies  Energy derived  from sources that produc e fewer 
greenhouse gases than  traditional means of power 
generation. Includes zero carbon power generation 
sources as well as sources with lower -level emissions such 
as natural gas, and technologies that prevent carbon 
dioxide from being emitted into  the atmosphere, such as 
carbon capture and storage.  
Masterplan  A strategic plan setting out the overall frame work and key 
principles for the development of a site.  
National Character Areas  National Character Areas are defined by Natural England 
and the y are a natural subdivision of England based on a 
combination of landscape, biodiversity, geodiversity and 
economic activity.  They follow natural, rather than 
administrative, boundaries.  
National Nature Reserve  Many of the finest sites in England for wil dlife and geology 
are National Nature Reserves.  Almost all are accessible 
and provide opportunities for people to experience nature.  
National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF)  Sets out the government’s national planning requiremen ts, 
policies and objectiv es. It is a material consideration in the 
preparation of Local Plan documents and when considering 
planning applications.  
Neighbourhood Plan  A plan for the neighbourhood area which is prepared by an 
authorised community group.  The plan must be in genera l 
agreement with the overall plan for the local authority 
area and can include general planning policies and 
allocations for new development.  
Older people  People over retirement age, including the active, newly 
retired through to very frail elderly, whose  housing needs 
can encompass accessible, adaptable general needs 
housing for those looking to downsize from family housing 
and the full range of retirement and specialized housing for 
those with support or care needs.  
Open Space  Open space should be take n to mean all open space of 
public value which offer s important opportunities for sport 
and recreation and can also act as a visual amenity . 130 
 Out of Centre  A location which is not in or on the edge  of a town or local 
centre but not necessarily outside the urban area.  
Planning Condition  A condition imposed on a grant of planning permission, for 
example, restricting what you can do on the premises, or 
requiring you to get specific approval for aspects of the 
development, such as the materials to be used, bef ore you 
can proceed.  
Planning Practice Guidance  An online resource and tool that sets out the government’s 
planning guidance on a range of issues.  
Photovoltaic/ Photovoltaic C ells Conversion of solar radiation (the sun's rays) to electricity 
by the effect  of photons (tiny packets of light) on the 
electrons in a solar cell.  
The Planning Inspectorate  The Planning Inspectorate is an executive agency for the 
Department of Communities and Local Government.  It 
deals with planning appeals, national infrastructu re 
planning applications and examination of local plans.  
Policies Map  This illustrate s, on an Ordnance Survey Base Map, 
designations and proposals contained in the  Local Plan .  
Previously Developed Land  Also known as Brownfield Land.  Land which is or wa s 
occupied by a permanent structure, including the curtilage 
of the developed land (although it should not be assumed 
that the whole of the curtilage should be developed) and 
any associated fixed surface infrastructure.  This excludes: 
land that is or has been occupied by agricultural or forestry 
buildings: land that has been dev eloped for mineral 
extraction or  waste disposal by landfill purposes where 
provision for restoration has been made through 
development control procedures; land in built -up areas 
such as private residential gardens, parks, recreation 
grounds and allotments; and land that was previously -
developed but where the remains of the permanent 
structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the 
landscape in the process of time.  
Primary Employment Land  Sites identified, within the ‘Qualitative Assessment of 
Employment Sites’ undertaken by consultants in 2012, as 
being worthy of retention for employment use.  
Primary Frontage  Primary frontages are located within town and local 
centres are likely to include a high proportion of retail uses 
which may include food, drinks, clothing and household 
goods.  131 
 Primary Shopping Area  Defined area where retail development is concentrated 
(generally comprising the primary and those secondary 
frontage wh ich are adjoining and closely related to the 
primary shopping frontage).  
Principal Town  The principal  settlement in the district which provides an 
extensive r ange of services and facilities  and which is 
accessible by public transport from surrounding area s and 
to other large settlements in the district.  
Public Safety Zones  Areas of land at the end of runways at the busiest airports 
in the UK, within which certain planning restrictions apply.  
Regionally Important 
Geodiversity Sites  Sites selected for thei r geological or geomorphologic value 
and their interpretive use for earth science as well as 
cultural, educational, historical and aesthetic reasons.  
Renewable Energy  Renewable energy is energy flows that occur naturally and 
repeatedly in the environment,  for example from the wind, 
water flow, tides or the sun.  
Rural ‘Exception’ Sites  Land which is identified as countryside that would not 
normally be released for housing but where an exception is 
made for affordable housing.  These sites are usually 
manag ed by a housing association and can provide homes 
for existing residents or those with a family or employment 
connection to the local community.  
Secondary Frontage  Secondary frontages are located within town and local 
centres and provide greater opportuni ties than primary 
shopping frontages for a diversity of uses such as 
restaurants and businesses.  
Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI)  Sites designated by Natural England under the Wildlife and 
Countryside Act 1981.  SSSIs are the country’s very bes t 
wildlife and geological sites.  They include some of the 
most spectacular and beautiful habitats: wetlands teeming 
with wading birds, winding chalk rivers, flower -rich 
meadows, windswept shingle beaches and remote upland 
peat bogs.  
Small Village  Settlem ents with very limited services and where 
development will be restricted to the conversions of 
existing buildings or the redevelopment of previously 
developed land.  
Special Area of Conservation 
(SACs)  Areas given special protection under the European Unio n’s 
Habitats Directive, which is transposed into UK law by the 
Habitats and Conservation of Species Regulations 2010.  
They provide increased protection to a variety of wild 
animals, plants and habitats and are a vital part of global 
efforts to conserve th e world’s biodiversity.  132 
 Statement of Community 
Involvement (SCI)  Outlines the approach of the authority to involving the 
community in preparing the Local Plan and planning 
applications.  
Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA)  A process for assessing env ironmental implications of the 
plans and policies in the Local Plan to ensure that all 
decisions are made with the objective of securing 
sustainable development.  
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 
(SFRA)  A Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) provides 
information on the probability of flooding, such as that 
from rivers, groundwater sources and sewers.  It also takes 
into account the impacts of climate change.  
Strategic Housing Land 
Availability Assessment (SHLAA)  An assessment of housing supply potential w ithin North 
West Leicestershire required by government policy.  The 
SHLAA is updated on an annual basis.  
Strategic Rail Freight 
Interchanges (SRFI)  A Strategic Rail Freight Interchange (SRFI) is a large multi -
purpose rail freight interchange and distribut ion centre 
linked into both the rail and trunk road system.  It has rail -
connected warehousing and container handling facilities 
and may also include manufacturing and processing 
activities.  
Supplementary Planning 
Document (SPD)  Documents which add furthe r detail to the policies within 
the Local Plan. They can provide f urther guidance for 
development  or on particular issues such as design.  
Supplementary Planning Documents are capable of being 
material consideration in planning decisions but are not 
part o f the development plan.  
Sustainability Appraisal (SA)  Sustainability Appraisal involves an assessment of the 
social, economic and environmental implications of the 
plans and policies in the Local Plan to ensure that all 
decisions are made with the objecti ve of sustainable 
development in mind.  The SA incorporates the 
requirements of the SEA.  
Sustainability Appraisal Scoping 
Report  This is the first stage of the Sustainability Appraisal /  
Strategic Environmental Assessment.  It sets out the 
context and obj ectives, establishes the baseline data, key 
sustainability issues and sets the framework by which 
Development Plan Documents will be appraised.  
Sustainable Villages  Settlements which have a limited range of services and 
facilities and so are suitable for a limited amount of 
growth.  133 
 Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS)  
 Surface water drainage methods that take account of 
water quantity, water quality and amenity issues are 
collectively referred to as Sustainable Drainage Systems 
(SuDS).  
Town Centre Boundar y Town Centre boundaries are a  way in which we seek to 
control the types of uses that would be permitted in these 
specific areas.  
Town and Local Centre Uses  The main Town and Local Centre Uses are A1 Shops ; A2 
Financial and Professional Services ; A3 Resta urants and 
Cafes ; A4 Drinking Establishments ; A5 Hot Food 
Takeaways ; D2 Assembly and Leisure uses, arts, culture 
and tourism development (including theatres, museums, 
galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference 
facilities).  As defined by the Town an d Country Planning 
(Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended) . 
Town Centre  Defined area, including the primary shopping area and 
areas of predominantly leisure, busi ness and other main 
town centre  uses within or adjacent to the primary 
shopping area.  
Travel P lans A travel plan aims to promote sustainable travel choices 
(for example, cycling) as an alternative to single occupancy 
car journeys that may impact negatively on the 
environment, congestion and road safety. Travel plans can 
be required when granting pl anning permission for new 
developments.  
Use Classes Order  The Town and Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 
(as amended) puts uses of land and buildings into various 
categories known as ‘Use Classes’.  
Water Quality Management 
Plan (WQMP)  The primary  purpose of the Water Quality Management 
Plan (WQMP) is to reduce the levels of phosphate within 
the River Mease SAC, to enable the Conservation 
Objectives for the SAC to be met, and an adverse effect 
upon the SAC avoided.  
Windfall sites  Sites which have not be en specifically identified as 
available in the Local Plan process. They normally comprise 
previously -developed sites that have unexpectedly become 
available.  
Zero Carbon Development  A building or set of buildings with a net energy 
consumption of zer o over a typical year.  134 
 APPENDIX 2  
HOUSING TRAJECTORY AS AT 1 OCTOBER 2016  
 
 
    Projected completions  
SITE  COMPLETIONS 
(NET) 1 APRIL 
2011 - 30 
SEPTEMBER 2016  2016/
17 2017/
18 2018/
19 2019/
20 2020/
21 2021/
22 2022/
23 2023/
24 2024/
25 2025/
26 2026/
27 2027/
28 2028/29  2029/30  2030/31  TOTAL 
TO 2031  POST  
2031  
Ashby de la Zouch - all sites  
575 125 189 272 220 170 120 120 108 100 130 130 130 130 130 65 2,694  675 
Ashby de la Zouch - affordable housing  
  0 76 84 50 50 41 21 21 30 39 39 39 39 39 20 588 202 
Castle Donington - all sites  
313 18 0 20 50 70 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 80 35 1,214  0 
Castle Donington - affordable housing  
  10 0 0 6 8 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 3 117 0 
Coalville urban area - all sites  
577 271 319 314 326 301 306 250 189 180 180 180 130 130 130 65 3,725  1,830  
Coalville urban area - affordable housing  
  56 19 40 34 40 44 18 19 18 19 16 13 12 13 6 367 190 
Ibstock - all sites  496 50 12 30 30 30 30 22 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 673 0 
Ibstock - affordable housing    7 0 0 10 12 21 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 0 
Kegworth - all sites  
187 10 6 0 0 30 46 30 30 30 38 0 0 0 0 0 395 0 
Kegworth - affordable housing  
  0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 0 
Measham - all sites  124 20 10 0 30 30 40 40 50 50 50 50 50 50 10 0 598 0 
Measham - affordable housing    0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 0 
Rest of the district - all sites  
418 185 173 129 111 40 37 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 960 0 
Rest of the district - affordable housing  
  53 43 20 25 20 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 168 0 
District - all sites  2,690  679 709 765 767 671 659 542 457 440 478 440 390 390 350 165 10,592  2,505  
District - affordable housing    126 142 144 125 130 123 49 59 58 68 65 62 61 62 29 1,303  392 
Projected completions (annual)    679 709 765 767 671 659 542 457 440 478 440 390 390 350 165     
Projected Completions (cumulative)    3,369  4,078  4,843  5,610  6,281  6,940  7,482  7,939  8,379  8,857  9,297  9,687  10,077  10,427  10,592      
Annual requirement    481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481 481     
Cumulative requirement    2,886  3,367  3,848  4,329  4,810  5,291  5,772  6,253  6,734  7,215  7,696  8,177  8,658  9,139  9,620      
Monitor - number of dwellings above or below 
cumulative requirement    483 711 995 1,281  1,471  1,649  1,710  1,686  1,645  1,642  1,601  1,510  1,419  1,288  972     
Monitor - annual requirement taking account of 
past/projected completions    462 447 426 398 365 334 298 267 240 207 153 81 -22 -229 -807     
 135 
 APPENDIX 3  
AREA TO BE SUBJECT OF MASTERPLAN REQUIRED BY POLICIES H3 AND Ec2  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 136 
 APPENDIX 4  
MAP OF COALVILLE GRO WTH CORRIDOR AND EAS T MIDLANDS ENTERPRISE GATEWAY  
 
137 
 APPENDIX  5 
Off Street Parking Standards (excluding residential)  
6C’s Design Guide Table DG11: No rmal Maximum Parking Standards   
For developments below the threshold, the standards contained in the  Leicestershire County 
Council document Highway Requirements for Development (HRfD) will continue to be 
applied as the normal maximum standards.  
Use Normal  maximum parking standard based 
on one space for every square Metre (m2) of 
gross floorspace unless otherwise stated  Threshold for applying 
the standard (gross 
floorspace)  
Food retail  One space for every 14m2  1000m2  
Non food retail  One space for ev ery 20m2  1000m2  
B1 offices  Urban town centre or edge of centre; One 
space for every 60m2 
Rural town centre or edge of centre; One 
space for every 40m2 
Rest of r ural town; One space for every 
30m2 
Out of  any town; One space for every 30m2 2500m2  
B1 No n-office and B2 
General industry  Urban town centre or edge of centre; One 
space for every 130m2 
Rest of u rban town; One space for every 
80m2 
Rural town centre or edge of centre; One 
space for every 90m2 
Rest of rural town; One space for every 
65m2 
Out of  any town; One space for every 55m2 2500m2  
B8 Warehousing  Urban town centre or edge of centre; One 
space for every 300m2 
Rest of urban town; One space for every 
180m2 
Rural town centre/edge of centre; One 2500m2  138 
 space for every 200m2 
Rest of rural town; One spac e for every 
150m2 
Out of any town; One space for every 120m2 
Cinemas and conference 
facilities  One space for every five seats  1000m2  
D2 (other than cinemas, 
conference facilities and 
stadia)  One space for every 22m2  1000m2  
Higher and furth er 
education  One space for every two staff plus one space 
for every 15 stu dents  2500m2  
Stadia  One space for every 15 seats  1500 seats  
 139 
 MONITORING FRAMEWORK                   APPENDIX 6 
Policy  Objectives  Indicator  Target  
S1 – Future Housing 
and Econo mic 
Development Needs  2, 5 Number  of years housing supply .  
 
Number  of net dwellings completed over plan period.  
 
Number  of net dwellings completed in current 
monitoring year.  
 
Sustained high level of applications approved contrary to 
policy . 
 
Type and am ount of net employment floor space 
delivered from planning permissions in the current year 
and plan period.  
 
Amount of new retail floor space developed for the 
current monitoring year.  
 
 Amount of new retail floor space developed for the plan 
period.  
 
Numb er of dwellings under construction.  
 
 
 A minimum of 9620 dwellings to be built by 2031 
(equates to 481 dwellings per year).   
 
A five year supply of deliverable housing land can be 
demonstrated.  
 
66 hectares of employment land to be developed by 
2031.  
 
7,30 0sqm of comparison retail floor space to be 
developed by 2031.  140 
 S2 – Settlement 
Hierarchy  4 Number and percenta ge of net dwelling completions and 
permissions in the:  
 Principal Town ( Coalville Urban Area);  
 Key Service Centres;  
 Local Service Centres;  
 Sustain able Villages;  
 Small Villages  
for the monitoring year and plan period.  
 
Percentage of new and converted dwellings on previously 
developed land.  To direct the majority of new development to the 
most sustainable settlements within the district 
(Principal Tow n, Key Service Centre and Local Service 
Centre), in accordance with the Settlement Hierarchy.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S3 – Countryside  12 Number of applications approved contrary to policy 
within the monitoring and plan period.  
 
Number of applications supported at appe al when citing 
this policy within a reason for refusal . 100% of relevant planning applications determined in 
accordance with this policy.  
D1 – Design of N ew 
Development  3, 7, 9 Number of new  residential developments scoring a 
‘green or amber rating using the ‘Building for Life 
Assessment’.  
 
Number of non  - residential schemes that meet the 
District Council ’s place making principles.  
 
 
Adoption of a Design Supplementary Planning Document.  All new residential developments scoring green or 
amber using the Bui lding for Life Assessment or its 
successor.   
 
All new non -residential developments scoring 
positively against the district councils place making 
principles.  
 
To adopt a Design Supplementary Planning Document.  
D2 – Amenity  1, 3 Adoption of development gu idelines.  
 
Number of applications supported at appeal when citing 
this policy within a reason for refusal . To adopt development guidelines as part of the Design 
Supplementary Planning Document.  
 
100% of relevant planning applications determined in 141 
  accorda nce with this policy.  
D3 – 
Telecommunications  3, 10,  11, 
12 Number/proportion of applications granted that would 
not involve mast sharing or utilise existing 
telecommunications structures.   Majority of new development to be in the form of 
mast sharing o r other existing structures.   
H1 – Housing  Provision  
: Planning Permissions  2 Number of dwellings with planning permission  
 
 
 
Number of Dwellings Under Construction.  Meet the projected completions (for each approved 
development) as set out in the housing  trajectory as 
set out in policy S1.  
 
A five year supply of deliverable housing land can be 
demonstrated.   
H2 – Housing  
Provision: R esolutions  
 2 Number of dwellings  that are subject of an outstanding 
planning resolution  in the current monitoring perio d.  
 
 
 Meet the projected completions (for each approved 
development) as set out in the  housing trajectory. As 
set out  within policy S1.  
 
A five year supply of deliverable housing land can be 
demonstrated.   
H3 – Housing Provision: 
New A llocations  
 2 Numb er of net dwellings remaining on allocated sites for 
the monitoring period and plan period.  
 
Progress on delivery of infrastructure identified in policy 
H3. 
 Meet the projected completions as set out in the 
housing trajectory. As set out within policy S1.  
 
A five year supply of deliverable housing land can be 
demonstrated.   
 
Delivery of supporting infrastructure as set out with in 
policy H3.  
H4 – Affordable 
Housing  1, 2, 3 The number of net affordable homes completed in the 
monitoring year.  
 
The number o f net affordable homes completed within 
the plan period.  
 Deliver affordable housing dwellings in the district, in 
accordance with the specified minimum affordable 
housing contri bution for each of its settlements, as 
detailed  in Policy H4   
 
 142 
 The number of additional affordable homes provided, 
including bringing empty homes back into use, 
conversions and new builds.  
 
Number of people on the housing waiting list, in the 
monitoring period .  
 
Number of affordable homes granted planning 
permissions through:  
 
Greenfield Sites  
 
(Applies to sites of 11 or more or 1000sqm (gross) floor 
space)  
 
Coalville Urban Area, Ibstock – Minimum 20% affordable 
housing contribution  
 
Ashby de la Zouch, Castle Donington, Kegworth, 
Measham and all other settlements – Minimum 30% 
affordable housing contribution  
 
Previously Developed Land  
(Applies to sites of 30 or more or sites of 1ha or more)  
 
Ashby de la Zouch and Measham – Minimum 15% 
affordable housing contrib ution  
 
Coalville Urban Area, Ibstock, Castle Donington, 
Kegworth and all other settlements – Minimum 5% 
affordable housing contribution  143 
 H5 – Rural Exceptions 
Sites for Affordable 
Housing  2, 3 Number of Rural Exception sites completions within the 
current monitoring year and plan period.  
 
Number of schemes permitted that supp ort Policy H5 
over the plan and monitoring periods.  
 
Amount of market housing provided on Rural Exception 
Sites.  
 
The number of people on the housing register , by 
settlement.  Deliver rural exception sites  in appropriate locations in 
accordance with policy H5. 
 
Rural Exception Sites to comprise 100% affordable 
housing unless there is a satisfactory financial 
justification to provide an element of market housing.  
 
The number of people on the councils housing register 
reduces.  
H6 – House types and 
mix 2, 3 Completions by house type, size and tenure  within the 
current monitoring period and plan period.  
 
Number of dwellings with planning permission by house 
type, size and tenure.   
 
Number of bungalows, or other accommodation suitable 
for occupation by the elderl y, delivered on sites of 50 
dwellings or more.  
 
Number of dwellings, suitable for occupation or easily 
adaptable for people with disabilities, delivered on sites 
of 50 dwellings or more.  
 
Number of specific care facilities and special care units 
delivered over the monitoring and plan period.  
 The majority of all new housing developments to 
provide a mix of different types and tenures delivered 
consistent with the findings from the HEDNA .  
 
 
Type of 
Housing  Dwelling size  
1 bed  2 bed  3 bed  4 bed  
Market  0-10% 30-
40%  45-
55%  10-
20%  
Affordable  30-35%  35-
40%  25-
30%  5-10%  144 
 H7 – Provision for 
Gypsies and Travellers 
and Travelling 
Showpeople  2 Number of Gypsy and Traveller pitches provided  over the 
monitoring and plan period.  
 
Number of Show People plots provide d over the 
monitoring and plan period.  
 
Number of unauthorised developments in the monitoring 
year and plan period.  
 
Number of Gypsy and Traveller and Show People Transit 
sites delivered.  
 
A five year supply of deliverable sites.  
 
Adoption of a Gypsy and  Traveller Development Plan 
Document.  
 Delivery of the following provision: - 
 
Gypsy and Traveller pitches – 27 pitches by 2012 -2017, 
11 pitches by 2017 -2022, 14 pitches by 2022 -2027 and 
16 pitches by 2027 -2031.  
 
Travelling Showpeople plots – 3 plots by 201 7-2022, 3 
plots by 2022 -2027 and 3 plots by 2027 -2031.  
Transit Plots – 20 plots by 2021 -2017.  
 
Net increase in number of pitches and plots.  
 
A five year supply of Gypsy and Traveller and 
Travelling Showpeople sites based on an assessed 
need.  
 
To adopt a Gy psy and Traveller Development Plan 
Document.  
Ec1 – Employment  
Provision: P ermissions  5 Number of expired planning permissions in the current 
monitoring year.  
 
Outstanding supply of permitted employment sites.  
 
Type and amount of employment land with pla nning 
permission (Ha) (net).  
 
Amount and type of floorspace under construction for 
the monitoring period.  
 
Floorspace developed for employment use  by use class 
and size. Delivery of each of the Employment allocation s that 
have permission  in accordance with  local plan policy 
S1. 
 
Maintain a supply of employment land.  
 
 145 
 Ec2 – New Employment 
Sites   5 Amount of employment floor space remaining on 
allocated sites for the monitoring period and plan period.  
 
Amount of floor space provided on non-allocated  sites 
over the monitoring and plan period.  
 
Amount of employment land developed on unallocated 
sites (Ha).  
 Provision of 16 Hectares of employment  by 2031.  
 
 
Ec3 – Existing 
employment areas  5 Amount of primary employment land lost to other uses 
(Ha).  
 
Amount of  primary employment floorspace lost to other 
uses (Ha).  
 
Amount of primary employment land with planning 
permission for alternative use  (Ha).  
 
Amount of primary employment floorspace with planning 
permission for alternative use.  
 
Amount of employment land delivered on non-allocated  
sites, within the monitoring period and plan period.  
 
Number of  Vacant Units.  Prevent loss of existing Primary Employment Areas.  
 
 
Ec4 – East Midlands 
Airport  5 The number and type of permission granted contrary to 
policy.  
 
The number of people using public transport to access 
the airport.  
 Improvements made to public transport.  
 
 Air quality associated with East Midlands Airport 
improves using the base date of 2011.  
 
The number of noise complaints does not increase, 146 
 Number of jobs provided at the airport.  
 
Amount of cargo using the airport.  
 
Number of passengers using East Midlands Airport 
increases from 2011.  
 
Number of noise complaints made in relati on to the 
airport.  using the base date of 2011.  
 
Growth of passenger and fr eight services at East 
Midlands Airport from 2011.  
 
The East Midlands Airport Masterplan states the 
airport could achieve a passenger throughput of 10 
million passengers per year between 2030 and 2040.  
 
The East Midlands Airport Master plan states that the 
forecast  for future cargo tonnage is for some 618,000 
tonnes in 2035 and some 700,000 tonnes in 2040.  
Ec5 – East Midlands 
Airport:  Safeguarding   7 Number of applications within the safeguarding area 
approved contrary to advice.  
 
 No inappropriate form of development permitted 
contrary to airport operator’s advice.  
Ec6 – East Midlands  
Airport :  Public Safety 
Zones  7 Number of applications within Public Safety Zone.  
 
Number of applications approved contrary to policy.  No applications approved contrary to policy Ec6.  
Ec7 – Donington Park  5 Public transport links to Donington Park.  
 
Number of motor racing events held each year.  
 
Number of noise complaints made in relation to 
Donington Park.  
 
Amount of ancillary employment floor space developed.  Improved  public transport to Donington Park.  
 
Motor sports events continue at Doning ton Park 
racetrack . 
 
The number of noise complaints from does not 
increase, using the base date 2011.  
Ec8 – Town and Local 
Centres:  Hierarchy and 
Management of 
Development  6 Amou nt of comparison floor  space delivered  in Town and 
Local Centres, on the edge of a defined town and local 
centre and out of town and local centres.  
 7,300 sqm of net retail floor space for comparison 
goods  is delivered  to 2031 .  
 
Town Centre uses remain the focus for town centres.  147 
 Amount of co nvenience floor space delivered in Town 
and Local Centres.  
 
Amount of comparison or convenience  floor space with 
permission.  
 
Vacancy rates by town and local centres.  
 
Mix of uses at ground floor level by  town and local 
centres.  
 
Number of shop front improvement schemes within the 
monitoring year.  
 
Number of public realm improvements.  
 
Number of  car park tickets issued within Ashby de la 
Zouch and Coalville Town Centre s. 
  
Most new retail floor space for Town Centre Us es 
takes place in Coalville.  
 
The hierarchy of centres is maintained . 
 
The performance of our  Town and Local Centres 
improve against a range of ind icators including 
vacancy rates.  
 
New retail floor space created.  
 
 
Ec9 – Town and Local 
Centres:  Thresholds  for 
Impact Assessments  6 Number of applications above the threshold.  
 
Number of applications which include an impact 
assessment.  
 All applications above the threshold include an impact 
assessment.  
Ec10 – Town and Local 
Centre:  Primary 
Shopping Areas  - Non 
Shopping Uses  6 Permissions approved within town centre boundaries in 
monitoring and plan period by  use class.  
 
Permissions implemented within town centre boundaries 
by use class  in monitoring and plan period.  
 
Number of vacant units.  Shops are the pred ominant ground floor use within 
the defined Primary Shopping Areas of our Town and 
Local Centres.  
 
A reduction in vacant units in town centres based on 
the annual retail survey.  
 148 
 Ec11 – Town and Local 
Centres: Primary 
Shopping Areas  - Hot 
Food Takeaway 
Balance  6 Number of takeaway uses permitted within Primary 
Shopping Areas.  
 
Number of Takeaways in Ibstock local centre.  
 
Number of takeaways in Ashby at 67 -89 and 76 -108 
Market Street .  No additional clustering of take away use.  
 
No percentage increase in take away uses with the 
defined Frontage of Numbers 67 -89 and Numbers 76 -
108 Market Street, Ashby de la Zouch.  
 
No percentage increase of take  away uses within the 
defined local centre of Ibstock.  
Ec12 – Local Centres  6 Loss of retail units in the Local  Centres.  
 
 
Number of vacant Units  in the  Local Centres .  Maintain an appropriate balance of shop and other 
main town centres uses within our local centres.   
 
 A reduction in vacant units in Local Centres based on 
the annual retail surveys.  
 
Ec13 – Tour ism 
development  4, 5 Amount of f loorspace gained.  
 
Loss o f Tourism f loorspace.  
 
Location of new tourism facilities.  
 
New Tourism accommodation i.e. hotels and other 
overnight accommodation.   Increased amount of tourism floorpsace and facilities.  
 
No loss  of tourism floorspace or facilities.  
 
Opportunities to enhance existing facilities.  
 
Increase the amount of accommodation.  
IF1 – Development and 
Infrastructure  14 Amount and type of infrastructure delivered over the 
monitoring and plan period.  New infra structure is provided as part of new 
development.  
IF2 – Community and 
Cultural Facilities  14 New d evelopment resulting in the loss of community 
facilities . 
 
New development resulting in the loss of cultural 
facilities.  No net reduction of cultural facilities or community 
facilities.  
 
Provision of new community or cultural facilities 
increases.  149 
  
Net gain of cultural facilities or  floor space.  
 
 Net gain of community facilities  or floor space.   
Expansion and enhancement of community and 
cultural facilitie s. 
 
IF3 – Open Space, 
Sport and Recreation 
facilities  14 New d evelopment resulting in the loss of existing  areas  of 
sport and recreation space.  
 
Provision of new sport and recreation facilities.  
 
 
Local standards adopted.  New housing development incorpor ates provision of 
formal and / or informal open space.  
 
No loss of open space, sports or recreation facilities 
contrary to policy.  
 
To adopt local standards.  
IF4 – Transport 
Infrastructure and new 
development  4,14  Identified Infrastructure Improvements  delivered.   
 
The number of new services and facilities delivered by 
new development that is accessible by public transport.  
 
The number and length walkways delivered as part of 
new development.  
 
Number and length of cycle routes delivered in 
monitoring and plan period.  Delivery of new infrastructure as set out within policy 
IF4 as part of new development.  
IF5 – Leicester to 
Burton rail line   14 The reinstatement of the Leicester to Burton Line for 
public transport.  The Leicester to Burton Rail line is  protected from 
development.  
IF6 – Ashby Canal  14 The reinstatement of the Ashby Canal.  The Ashby Canal route is protected.  150 
 IF7 – Parking provision 
and new development  3 Number of spaces per type of dwelling and  by type of 
dwelling  .e.g. 4 bedroom dwell ing should provide 3 
parking spaces.  
 
Number of permissions which include parking provisions 
in accordance with policy IF7.  
 
Number of planning permissions approved to the 6C's 
standard.  
 
Number of car parking spaces provided on non -
residential schemes com pared to the maximum 
standards set out within the 6Cs design guidance or 
equivalent.   Ensure that development incorporates adequate 
parking provision.  
En1 – Nature 
Conservation  11 Creation of new wildlife sites.  
 
Number of Local wildlife sites.  
 
Number o f candidate wildlife sites.  
 
Number of SSSIs.  
 
Number of Local Nature Reserves.  
 
Condition of SSSIs.  
 
Adoption of supporting Supplementary Planning 
Document.  Condition of SSSIs improves.  
 
To adopt the supporting supplementary planning 
document.  
 
No net red uction in local wildlife sites from the 
beginning of the plan period.  
En2 – River  Mease 
Special Area of 
Conservation  11 Amount of Employment Land approved within the River 
Mease SAC catchment.  
 Water quality and volume target s are met . 
 
Condition of SAC improves.  151 
 Number of dwellings approved within the River Mease 
SAC cat chment.  
 
Condition of the SAC  
 
Water quality status  
 
Amount of money secured t hrough S106 agreements for 
DCS.   
Developer Contribution Schemes Implemented.  
 
 
 
 
 
En3 – The National 
Forest  11, 12, 14 Amount of funding received for National Forest Planting.  
 
Amount of land within the National Forest Planted within 
the monitoring period and plan period.  Increase amount of National Forest planting across the 
district.  
 
En4 – Charnwood 
Forest Regional Park  11, 12, 14 Number of approved applications for diversification.  
 
Creation of new biodiversity sites.  
 Charnwood Forest is recognised as a tourism and 
leisure destination.  
 
No net loss of biodiversity within the CFRP  
En5 – Areas of 
Separatio n 11 The number and type of applications submitted within 
AOS.  
 
The type and number of developments permitted or 
refused  within the Area of Separation.  No permissions granted in the Area of Separation  
which undermine the func tion of the Area of 
Separation.  
En6 – Land and Air 
Quality  11 Number of permissions  granted  in coal mining areas.  
 
Number of Permissions  granted within  Air Quality 
Management Areas.  
 
Number of properties within AQMA.  
 
Number permissions  impacting on   Air Quality 
Management Areas.   New developments permitted are subject to 
appropriate conditions where required.  
 
 
No new development impacts on the quality of 
existing Air Quality Management Areas or results  in 
the creation of new ones.  
 152 
  
 Number  of Permissions in Noise Zones.  
 
Number of Air  Quality Management Areas.  
He1 – Conservation 
and enhancement of 
North West 
Leicestershire's historic 
environment  10 Number  of applications appro ved that are contrary to 
policy.  
 
Number of applications approved contrary to the advice 
of English Herita ge. 
 
Number of Buildings on the Historic England at Risk 
Register.  
 
Number of Listed Buildings.  
 
Number of Conservation Areas and Conservation Area 
Appraisals.  
 
Number of Historic Parks and Gardens.  
 
Number of Scheduled Ancient Monuments.  
 
Adoption of a  local list.  No loss of heritage assets.  
 
No net increase in the number of Heritage Assets at 
Risk.  
 
Restoration of all heritage assets and monuments 
identified as at risk.  
 
No net increase in the number heritage assets on the 
local heritage at risk regis ter.  
 
Increase and adoption of Conservation Area 
Appraisals, Conservation Areas and Management 
Plans.  
 
To adopt a local list.  
 
He2 – Shopfront Design  3, 10  Number of applications that are approved contrary to 
policy He2.  
 
Adoption of SPD for Shop Fronts.   
 
Number of Shop Front Improvement Schemes that have 
been taken up on a heritage asset or within a 
Conservation Area.  Restoration of shop fronts.  
 
 
To adopt a Supplementary Planning Document for 
Shop Fronts.  153 
 Cc1 – Renewable 
Energy  8 Number and type of permissions  granted for renewable 
energy  in monitoring period.  
 
Type and amount  (MWe)  of renewable energy that is  
delivered  within the monitoring and plan period.  
 
Amount of MWe energy which has permission for the 
monitoring period.  The districts CO2 emissi ons reduce over the plan 
period.  
 
The amount of energy generated from renewable 
energy sources increases.  
 
 
 
Cc2 – Flood Risk  9 Number of planning permission granted contrary to 
Environment Agency objections on water quality and 
flood risk grounds.  
 
 No p ermissions granted contrary to Environment 
Agency and Local Flood Authority advice.  
 
No development permitted for vulnerable uses in 
areas that are likely to flood (zones 3a and 3b) or that 
would result in flooding downstream of vulnerable 
developments.  
Cc3 – Sustainable 
Drainage Systems  9 Number of sites incorporating SUDS.  
 
Type of SUDs delivered.  
 
Adoption of Sustainable Drainage System Supplementary 
Planning Document.  All major residential and commercial developments 
need to incorporate SUDs schemes .  
 
 
To adopt a Sustainable Drainage System 
Supplementary Planning Document.  
 154 
 APPENDIX 7 
SCHEDULE OF SAVED LOCAL PLAN POLICIES REPLACED BY POLICIES IN THIS LOCAL PLAN  
Saved Local Plan 
Policy  Title  Replacement Local Plan Policy  
Strategy  
S2  Limits To De velopment  Policy S3 – Countryside  
 
S3 Countryside  Policy S3 – Countryside  
 
Policy EN3  – The National Forest  
Environment  
E1  Sensitive Areas  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
E2 Landscaped amenity 
open space  Policy D1  – Design of New Development  
E3  Residential Amenities  Policy D2  – Amenity  
E4 Design  Policy D1  – Design of New Development  
E6 Comprehensive 
Development  Policy D1  – Design of New Developmen t 
E7 Landscaping  Policy D1  – Design of New Development  
E8 Crime Prevention  Policy D1  – Design of  New Development  
E9  Mobility  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
E17 Historic Byways  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
E20 Green Wedge  Policy S3  – Countryside  – applies to the 
western part of what was defined as Green 
Wedge  
 
Policy En5  – Areas of Separatio n – applies 
to the remainder of land that was defined 
as Green Wedge  
E21 Separation of 
Settlements  Policy S3  – Countryside  
E22 (a)  Areas of Particularly 
Attractive Countryside  Policy En4  – Charnwood Forest  
E22(b) & (c)  Areas of Particularly 
Attractive Countryside  No equivalent  replacement  policy.  
E24 Re-Use and Adaptation 
of Rural Buildings  Policy S3  – Countryside  
E26 Sites of County or 
District Ecological or 
Geological Interest  Policy En1  – Nature Conservation  
E30 Floodplains  Policy Cc2  – Flood Risk  
E36 Derelict Land  No equivalent  replacement  policy.  
E37 Derelict Sites  No equivalent  replacement  policy.  
National Forest  
F1 General Policy  Policy D1  – Design of New Development  
 
Policy Ec13  – Tourism Development  
 155 
 Policy IF1  – Development and 
Infrastru cture  
 
Policy EN3  – The National Forest  
 
F2  Tree planting  Policy EN3  – The National Forest  
F3 Landscaping and 
Planting  Policy EN3  – The National Forest  
F5 Forest Related 
Development  Policy EN3  – The National Forest  
Transport  
T2 Road improvements  Policy IF4  – Transport Infrastructure and 
New Development  
T3 Highway Standards  Policy IF4  – Transport Infrastructure and 
New Development  
T4 Road Related Services  No equivalent replacement policy.  
T5 Road Related Services at 
A50.  
/B6540 Junction  No equiva lent replacement policy.  
T8 Parking  Policy IF7  – Parking Provision and New 
Development  
T10 Public Transport  Policy IF1  – Development and 
Infrastructure  
 
Policy IF4  – Transport Infrastructure and 
New Development  
T13 Cycle Parking  Policy IF7  – Parking Pr ovision and New 
Development  
T14 Former Transport 
Routes  No equivalent replacement policy  
T15 Moira -Measham Trail  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
T16 Ashby Canal  Policy Ec1 3 – Tourism Development  
 
Policy IF6  – Ashby Canal  
 
T17 Ashby Canal  Policy IF6  – Ashby Canal  
T18 East Midlands Airport  Policy Ec4  – East Midlands Airport  
T19 East Midlands Airport – 
Public Safety Zones  Policy Ec6  – East Midlands Airport  Public 
Safety Zones  
T20 East Midlands – Airport 
Safeguarding  Policy Ec5  – East Midlands Airport:  
Safeguarding  
Housing  
H4 Housing Allocations   
H4(a)  Leicester Road, Ashby de 
la Zouch  In part replaced by Policy H1  – Housing 
provision: planning permissions  
H4(b)  East of Leicester Road, 
Ashby de la Zouch  In part replaced by Policy H1  – Housing 
provis ion: planning permissions  
H4(c)  Nottingham Road, Ashby 
de la Zouch  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  156 
 H4 (d)  Broom Leys Road, 
Coalville  Policy H3  – Housing provisions: new 
allocations  
H4(e)  Wentworth Road, 
Coalville  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  
H4(f)  East of Whitehill Road, 
Ellistown  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  
H4 (g)  Grange Road, 
Huggelscote  Policy H1  – Housing provision: planning 
permissions  
 
Policy H2  – Housing provision: resolutions  
H4(h)  Brooks Lane, Whitwick  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  
H4(i)  North of Park Lane, 
Castle Donington  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacem ent policy  
H4 (j)  Station Road, Castle 
Donington  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  
H4 (k)  High Street, Ibstock  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  
H4 (l)  South of High Street, 
Ibstock  Site has not been developed.  However 
there are outstanding issues regarding its 
deliverability.  N o equivalent replacement 
policy  
H4 (m)  Leicester Road, Ibstock  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  
H4 (n)  The Vicarage, Newbold  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement policy  
H4 (o)  Main Street, Oakthorpe  Policy H2  – Housing Provision: resolutions  
H4 (p)  East of Heather Road, 
Ravenstone  Site has been developed and there is no 
equivalent replacement  policy  
H4/1  Housing Land Release  Policy S3  – Settlement Hierarchy  
H6  Housing Density  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
H7 Housing Design  Policy D1  – Design of New Development  
H8 Affordable housing   Policy H4  – Affordable Housing  
H10 Agricultural an d Forestry 
Workers’ 
accommodation  Policy S3  – Countryside  
H11 Replacement Dwellings  Policy S3  – Countryside  
H12 Exceptional Affordable 
Housing Sites  Policy H5  – Rural exception sites for 
affordable housing  
H13 Mobile Homes  No equivalent  replacement  policy 
Employment  
J3 Employment Allocations  Policy Ec3  – Existing Employment Areas  
J3(a)  Land adjacent to 
Swainspark Industrial 
Estate, Ashby Woulds  Policy Ec3  – Existing Employment Areas  
J3(b)  Smisby Road, Ashby de 
la Zouch  Policy Ec3  – Existing Employm ent Areas  
J3 (c)  Extension to Hilltop 
Industrial estate, Bardon  Policy Ec3  – Existing Employment Areas  157 
 J3 (d)  South of Coalville 
Brickworks  Policy Ec3  – Existing Employment Areas  
J3 (e)  Former Ellistown Colliery  Policy Ec3  – Exiting Employment Areas  
J3 (f) South of Trent Lane, 
Castle Donington  Policy Ec3  – Existing Employment Areas  
J3 (g)  Extension to Warminster 
Estate, Burton road, 
Measham  Policy Ec3  – Existing Employment Areas  
J3 (h)  Former Walton Way 
Drift Mine, Burton Road, 
Oakthorpe  Policy S3  – Countryside  
J4 High quality 
employment site at 
Finger Farm  Policy Ec3  – Existing employment Area  
 
Policy Ec4  – East Midlands Airport  
J5 High Quality 
Employment Site at 
Flagstaff  Policy Ec3  – Existing E mployment Areas  
J8 ADT Car Auctions Site  No equiva lent replacement  policy  
J14 Expansion and Existing 
Firms  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
Central Areas and Retailing  
R1 Central Areas Shopping  Policy Ec8  – Town and Local Centres: 
Hierarchy and Management of 
Development  
R2 Belvoir Shopping Centre  No e quivalent  replacement  policy  
R4 Acceptable Uses in Town 
Centre Core Areas  Policy Ec10  – Town and Local Centres: 
Primary Shopping Areas – Non -Shopping 
Uses  
 
Policy Ec11  – Town and Local Centres: 
Primary Shopping Ar eas – Hot Food 
takeaway Balance  
 
R5 Finan cial and 
Professional Services in 
Core Areas  Policy Ec10  – Town and Local Centres: 
Primary Shopping Areas – Non -Shopping 
Uses  
 
R6 Windows Display 
Frontages in North 
Street and South Street, 
Ashby de la Zouch  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
R7 Other reta il uses  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
R8 Potential 
Redevelopment Areas  Policy Ec10  – Town and Local Centres: 
Primary Shopping Areas – Non -Shopping 
Uses  
 
 
R9 Pedestrian Facilities  No equivalent replacement policy  
R10 Bridge Road Link  No equivalent rep lacement policy  158 
 R11 Outer Area of Coalville 
Town Centre  No equivalent replacement policy  
R12 Town Centre Services  No equivalent replacement policy  
R13 Town Centre Services  No equivalent replacement policy  
R14 Town Centre Services  No equivalent replacem ent policy  
R15 Town Centre Services  No equivalent replacement policy  
R16 Use of Upper Floors  Policy Ec10  – Town and Local Centres: 
Primary Shopping Areas – Non -Shopping 
Uses  
 
Policy Ec12  – Local Centres  
 
R19 Acceptable Uses in Local 
Centres  Policy Ec12  – Local Centres  
 
R20 Individual Shops  No equivalent replacement policy  
R21 Village Shops  No equivalent replacement policy  
Leisure and Tourism  
L2 Informal Recreation 
Facilities  No equivalent replacement policy  
L3 Built Development of 
Recreational Sites  
Outside Limits to 
Development  Policy IF3  – Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation facilities  
L5 Tourist Accommodation  Policy Ec13  – Tourism Development  
L6 New Rural Recreation 
Facilities to Relieve 
Charnwood Forest  No equivalent replacement policy  
L7 Land  adjoining 
Hermitage Leisure 
Centres  Policy En5  – Areas of Separation  
L8 Snibston Colliery  No equivalent replacement policy  
L9 Land north of Snibston 
Heritage Museum  No equivalent replacement policy  
L10 Former Measham 
Railway Station  No equivalent repla cement policy  
L11 Moira Furnace  No equivalent replacement policy  
L12 Sawley Marina  No equivalent replacement policy  
L13  Swannington Incline  No equivalent replacement policy  
L20 Donington Park Race 
Circuit  Policy Ec7  – Donington Park  
L21 Children’s Pl ay Area  Policy IF3  – Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation Facilities  
L22 Formal Recreation 
Provision  Policy IF3  – Open Space, Sport and 
Recreation Facilities  
Minerals  
M2 Redevelopment 
Potential  No equivalent  replacement  policy  
 