West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationShaping the future together
Introduction........................................................................................3 
Spatial Context....................................................................................4
Current Spatial Strategy........................................................................6
Oxford – Cambridge Arc........................................................................6
Vision and Objectives............................................................................7
Plan Time Period.................................................................................21
Place-making and Sustainable Communities...........................................10
Natural and Built Environment..............................................................11
Housing.............................................................................................15
Economic Growth................................................................................18
Infrastructure.....................................................................................21
Process and Next Steps........................................................................27
Sustainability Appraisal........................................................................27
How To Comment................................................................................27Contents
2 West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationIntroduction
The local planning authorities in West  
Northamptonshire, i.e. Daventry District, 
Northampton Borough and South  
Northamptonshire Councils with support 
from Northamptonshire County Council, 
have agreed to prepare a new Strategic  
Plan for the area. 
The West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan 
(WNSP) will set out a spatial vision for the 
future of the area exte nded up to 2050.  
To address the key strategic priorities for 
the area the scope of the WNSP will include:
The spatial strategy  for the distribution  
of development – this will include  
consideration of a range of spatial  
options to deliver sustainable  
development.
Place-shaping / sustainable  
development – key principles to  
ensure quality development and  
sustainable places including the  
protection and enhancement of natural/
built and historic assets and achieving net  
biodiversity gain.
The housing requirement  – the  
number and type of new homes to be 
provided across West Northamptonshire 
and the proportion of the overall housing  
requirement that should be affordable. 
Economic growth – targets for the  
provision of jobs and employment land in 
West Northamptonshire and  
guidance on the strategic locations for 
new employment land to meet the jobs 
requirement. New policy guidance for 
town centres and retail development.
Strategic infrastructure  – the key  
primary infrastructure projects that are 
required to deliver the strategy such as 
strategic transport schemes, utility  
networks and community facilities.
Health - ensuring people can lead  
active lifestyles, including access to good 
quality open space, natural and semi  
natural greenspace and enjoy cleaner air.nLocal Government Review  
in Northamptonshire – following a review  
of local government in the county the  
Government has confirmed that two new  
unitary councils will be established in  
Northamptonshire on 1st April 2021. 
The West Northamptonshire unitary will cover 
Daventry District, Northampton and South  
Northamptonshire, and the North  
Northamptonshire unitary will cover Corby, 
East Northants, Kettering and Wellingborough.
The existing district and borough councils and 
Northamptonshire County Council will all be 
abolished. 
The latter stages of preparing the Strategic 
Plan including its adoption will therefore be 
the responsibility of the new West  
Northamptonshire unitary council.
The West Northamptonshire area is already 
covered by a joint plan. The West  
Northamptonshire Joint Core Strategy (JCS) 
was adopted in December 2014 and covers 
the period up to 2029. There are however a 
number of reasons why a new plan is  
required:
Reviews at least every five years: 
are now a legal requirement for all local 
plans. This means that policies should be 
reviewed at least once every five years 
and then updated as necessary.  
A number of the JCS policies will need to 
be updated, for example to reflect  
changes to national policy and changing 
local circumstances.
West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues Consultationn
n
n
n
nn
3Local Housing Need Assessment:   
The government’s revised National  
Planning Policy Framework introduced a 
standard national method to determine 
local housing need. With effect from 15th  
December 2019 (i.e. 5 years following 
adoption) the local housing need  
calculated using the national  
methodology will effectively supersede 
the JCS housing requirement.
Housing and Infrastructure  
Delivery: Whilst the rate of housing 
delivery has increased significantly in the 
years since the JCS was adopted it has 
not kept pace with housing trajectory 
set out in the plan. Likewise whilst there 
have been a number of key infrastructure 
projects which have  been delivered as 
envisaged by the JCS, such as the  
recently opened Daventry Development 
Link, other projects have not  
progressed as quickly as expected. 
Oxford-Cambridge Arc:  The West 
Northamptonshire area falls within the 
Oxford-Cambridge Arc. The government 
have designated the Arc as a key  
economic priority, affirmed its ambition 
for up to one million high-quality new 
homes across the Arc by 2050,  
committed to completing East West Rail 
and the Expressway, and committed to 
achieving growth in the Arc while  
improving the environment for future 
generations. The preparation of a new 
Strategic Plan provides a mechanism for 
our area to respond to the opportunities 
and challenges presented by the  
government’s proposals for the Arc.n
n
nThe WNSP would review and, where  
appropriate, replace strategic policies in the 
JCS. Whilst the new vision will look up to 
2050, the statutory plan-period will be from 
2019-2041. 
This is the first stage in preparing the WNSP. 
This Issues document is designed to  
stimulate debate at an early stage and it is 
important to emphasise that no decisions 
have yet been made on the scale of growth 
or where that growth should be located. 
We want to engage with stakeholders and 
communities across the area and work  
together to ensure that we prepare the best 
plan possible for a sustainable future. Please 
get involved and sign up to be kept informed 
at all the key stages in the process.
Spatial Context
West Northamptonshire is located within the 
southern part of central England. It covers 
a large geographical area and encompasses 
Northampton Borough, Daventry District and 
South Northamptonshire District in the  
County of Northamptonshire. 
From 1st April 2021 the area will be covered 
by the new unitary council for West  
Northamptonshire. The area includes four 
main towns: Northampton, Daventry,  
Towcester and Brackley and the extensive  
rural areas within South Northamptonshire 
and Daventry Districts incorporating over  
190 villages. 
There are strong connections between  
Daventry, South Northamptonshire and  
Northampton, reflected in significant  
household and travel to work movements  
between the settlements in these areas. 
To the north and east, there are strong  
travel links between Northampton and  
Wellingborough and to a lesser extent  
Kettering. There are also significant  
commuter flows into Milton Keynes from 
Northampton and South Northamptonshire.
West Northamptonshire has excellent  
connections to the rest of the country and 
to mainland Europe. The area benefits from 
key strategic transport infrastructure  
including linkages to the M1, M40, M6, the 
Haven Ports and the West Coast Mainline, 
Chiltern and Midland Mainline railways. 
The area is often described as being at the 
crossroads of the M1 north-south route and 
the A14/ M6 east-west route.
West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues Consultation
4West Northamptonshire is within the  
influence of Greater London and  
Birmingham, the country’s two largest  
cities. Travel times from Northampton to 
both London and Birmingham by train are 
only one hour.
For air travel most passenger journeys by  
residents and businesses in West  
Northamptonshire are made from major  
gateway airports at London and smaller  
regional airports at East Midlands, London 
Luton or Birmingham International. Whilst 
both East Midlands Airport and London 
Luton Airport are accessible by car within 
one hour’s journey time from Northampton 
there are limited rail connections to both  
destinations. 
For shopping, Northampton town centre  
together with its retail parks is the main  
attractor for the majority of West  
Northamptonshire residents and for some 
residents of areas beyond. However, there 
is a pull from Milton Keynes in the southern 
part of the West Northamptonshire area 
for town centre shopping and likewise from 
Banbury and Rugby for the western parts of 
the West Northamptonshire area.  
Northampton, as the County town, is  also the focus for major services and  
facilities for the surrounding towns including 
those beyond West Northamptonshire such as 
Wellingborough and Kettering.
West Northamptonshire has an overall  
population of 399,400 people (Office of  
National Statistics 2017 mid-year estimate). 
The population is growing and has increased 
by just over 9% or 33,000 since 2007, which 
is higher than the national average over the 
equivalent period. Whilst the land area is  
predominately rural, 56% of this population 
lives within the urban area of Northampton. 
The majority of residents from South  
Northamptonshire and Daventry districts live 
in the rural areas outside the market towns of 
Brackley, Daventry and Towcester.
Northampton has an above average young 
population (ages 0-15) and a below average 
older population (age 65 plus). The reverse is 
true for Daventry and South  
Northamptonshire. In all areas population  
projections indicate that the proportion of  
elderly people within the population will  
continue to rise.
West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues Consultation
5Current Spatial Strategy
Productivity -  ensuring we support  
businesses to maximise the Arc’s  
economic prosperity, including through the 
skills needed to enable communities to 
benefit from the jobs created;
Place-making – creating places valued 
by local communities, including through 
the delivery of sufficient, affordable and 
high-quality homes, to increase  
affordability and support growth in the Arc, 
as well as wider services including health 
and education; 
Connectivity – delivering the  
infrastructure communities need,  
including transport and digital  
connectivity, as well as utilities; n
n
n
West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationThe existing JCS sets out a spatial strategy 
for the area which outlines the hierarchy of  
places and how development is distributed 
between these places. This includes  
maximising the use of land and buildings 
within the urban areas as well as 
developing new sustainable urban  
extensions to the towns. 
The JCS identifies Northampton as the  
Principal Urban Area, Daventry as a Sub  
Regional Centre and Brackley and  
Towcester as Rural Service Centres. The 
spatial strategy has sought to concentrate 
development within the existing urban  
areas as far as possible and in a small 
number of large development areas,  
 known as sustainable urban extensions,  
adjoining urban areas. Limited development is  
supported in the rural area at a scale which is 
consistent with meeting local needs and  
supporting local services.
The current spatial distribution of the housing 
requirement in the JCS is given in Table 1  
below (the figures for the Northampton  
related Development Area have been included 
with Northampton Borough figures).
One of the key issues to consider is  
whether this strategy remains appropriate or 
whether alternative options for the distribution 
of development need to be considered.
Policy Area Requirement Proportion
Principal Urban Area;  
Northampton (inc NRDA)28,470 66.8%
Sub-Regional Centre; Daventry 
Town4,620 10.8%
Rural Service Centre; Brackley 
Town2,160 5.1%
Rural Service Centre; Towcester 
Town2,650 6.2%
Rural Area - Daventry 2,360 5.5%
Rural Area - South Northants 2,360 5.5%Table 1- Existing Housing Requirement in the adopted Joint Core Strategy
Oxford - Cambridge Arc
The Government has recently published a 
paper setting out their ambition for the Arc 
together with a joint declaration agreed 
by local authorities and local enterprise 
partnerships across the area which can be 
viewed on the gov.uk website. Government 
wishes to maximise the economic potential 
of the Arc. In order to achieve this it will be 
necessary to accommodate a substantial 
increase in the delivery of new homes and 
substantial investment in new  
infrastructure. 
In meeting the economic and housing  
ambitions for the Arc there is a clear  
commitment that this should not be at the 
expense of the quality of the environment.
The joint declaration sets out four thematic 
areas which reflect the government’s  
ambition for the Arc as follows:6West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationThe existing JCS includes the following vision for the area. This provides a starting point for 
the WNSP, but it is necessary to consider what changes are required and how the vision could 
be extended up to 2050.
The Joint Core Strategy Vision
In our vision of the future...
...the area will form an outstanding UK location of choice for diverse employment  
opportunities, high academic and vocational educational attainment, high quality housing for 
all and a superb quality of life for its communities. The area will blend the best of modern  
cultural urban living with an enhanced network of green spaces and high quality parks and  
gardens. The rural areas will include vital and tranquil villages within its rolling landscapes. 
The area’s proximity to London and connections to other parts of the UK and beyond will  
continue to be a great economic strength. The area will be a national example of low  
environmental impact development in response to climate change and high biodiversity and  
habitat protection.
With new development focused on the four towns of Northampton, Daventry, Towcester and 
Brackley regeneration initiatives and successful and expanded economies will flourish.   
Communities will be diverse and sustainable and social cohesion and integration will be 
strong. Services, facilities and infrastructure will support the communities adding to the  
quality of life, and supporting their residents and visitors.
Northampton  as the principal urban area will be a beacon of high quality urban  
design with an outstanding public realm. It will successfully blend its distinctive historic  
character with innovative new development both of which will enhance its riverside setting.  
It will be repositioned as the key economic driver at the cultural heart of Northamptonshire. 
It will enhance its role as the leading retail, entertainment, employment, health and learning 
centre, based upon a thriving mixed economy and the services it offers, with continuing pride 
in its theatres, museums and professional sports teams. Northampton will provide the focus 
and heart for its well integrated neighbourhood communities. Northampton will be linked with 
the reinvigorated towns of Daventry, Towcester and Brackley.
Daventry will be a vibrant historic market town with a population approaching 40,000. It will 
offer a thriving town centre which values its historic assets, with attractive retail and leisure 
opportunities, high quality public realm and a robust commercial core moving strongly  
towards a well developed office sector. Local economic strengths in engineering and  
sustainable construction will have been developed. It will provide an enhanced walking and 
cycling environment throughout the town and it will have strong connections with  
Northampton.
Towcester will have a successful historic town centre that is the focus of its rural catchment. 
The town will retain its visual and physical connections to the landscape through Easton 
Neston Park, nearby Watermeadows and Towcester Racecourse.  
It will provide a diverse economy based on high technology, tourism and leisure.Environment – ensuring we meet our  
ambitions for growth while leaving the  
environment in a better state for future 
generations. n
Government will be preparing, with local 
stakeholders, a spatial vision or strategy for 
the Arc as a whole. The WNSP would clearly 
need to take this into account. Later in this 
document responses are invited on how the 
Arc should be approached.
Vision and Objectives
7West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationBrackley will be the major service provider for the residents of the town and the surrounding 
countryside. It will provide knowledge based, research and high technology based jobs and 
leisure facilities as well as a distinctive and vibrant historic town centre which will offer both 
retail opportunities and community services and facilities.
Silverstone Circuit  will continue to be at the pinnacle of international motor sport venues.  
It will foster high technology motor sport business at the forefront of technology with a  
motor sport cluster located nearby.
Daventry International Rail Freight Terminal (DIRFT) will maintain its role as an  
internationally significant centre for rail connected strategic distribution. It will be exemplary 
in the field of sustainable logistics with links to the University of Northampton. It will be well 
connected by public and sustainable transport to the surrounding workforce.
Our rural areas  will support a network of vibrant rural communities. Villages will retain their 
local distinctiveness and character, providing affordable homes for local people set within a 
beautiful landscape. The countryside will support a diverse rural economy including leisure 
and tourism through its waterways, country houses, parks and woodlands.
1. Is this vision still appropriate for 
guiding development and growth 
in West Northamptonshire and 
can it be extended up to 2050?
2. Are changes to the vision needed  
having regard to spatial options 
and the emerging proposals for 
the Oxford-Cambridge Arc?
3. Are there any other changes you 
would like to see to the vision?Consultation Questions:
Objective 1 - Climate Change
To minimise demand for resources 
and mitigate and adapt to climate 
change, by:
Promoting sustainable design and  
construction in all new development;
Ensuring strategic development  
allocations are located and designed 
so as to be resilient to future climate 
change and risk of flooding;
Encouraging renewable energy  
production in appropriate locations; 
Ensuring new development promotes  
the use of sustainable travel modes.n
n
nnThe vision is supported by 16 Spatial  
Objectives as follows:Objective 2 - Infrastructure and  
Development
To protect and enhance existing local  
services and to ensure social, physical and 
green infrastructure is adequately provided 
to meet the needs of people and business in 
a timely and sustainable manner in response 
to regeneration and new development in 
West Northamptonshire.
Objective 3 - Connections
To reduce the need to travel, shorten travel 
distances and make sustainable travel a  
priority across West Northamptonshire by 
maximising the use of alternative travel 
modes. In so doing, combat congestion in our 
main towns and town centres, reduce carbon 
emissions and address social exclusion for 
those in both rural and urban areas who do 
not have access to a private car.Vision and Objectives
8West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationObjective 4 - Protecting and Building 
Urban Communities
To ensure new development in urban areas 
effectively supports and links new and  
existing communities physically and socially, 
to achieve social cohesion and address the  
areas of deprivation identified in parts of 
Northampton and Daventry.
Objective 5 - Supporting  
Northampton Town Centre
To support the regeneration of  
Northampton’s town centre by making it  
the focus of high quality retail, employment,  
leisure and cultural development at the  
heart of Northamptonshire and to support 
the delivery of the Northampton Central 
Area Action Plan.
Objective 6 - Supporting Daventry 
Town Centre
To support the regeneration of Daventry 
town centre through planned growth and 
infrastructure delivery.
Objective 7 - Supporting Towcester 
and Brackley’s Town Centres
To support Towcester and Brackley in their 
rural service centre roles to ensure their 
communities are self-sufficient sustainable 
places and the towns are the focus of  
services and facilities for surrounding  
villages.
Objective 8 - Economic Advantage
To strengthen and diversify West  
Northamptonshire’s economy by taking 
advantage of our internationally well-placed 
location, strategic transport network and 
proximity to London and Birmingham.Objective 9 - Specialist Business  
Development
To support and develop opportunities for  
specialist employment clusters and business 
development focused on a low carbon  
economy.
Objective 10 - Educational  
Attainment
To raise educational achievement and the 
skills base of our communities through  
supporting the development of West  
Northamptonshire’s learning infrastructure and 
strengthening the link between local  
businesses and local schools, Moulton and 
Northampton Colleges, the University of 
Northampton and Daventry and Silverstone 
University Technology Colleges.
Objective 11 - Housing
To provide a range of housing in sustainable  
locations to ensure all residents have access 
to a home that they can afford and that meets 
their needs. 
Housing development will be focused at the 
most sustainable location of Northampton,  
supported by Daventry and Towcester and 
Brackley in their roles as rural service centres 
with limited development in the rural areas  
to provide for local needs and support  
local services.
Objective 12 - Protecting and  
Supporting Rural Communities
To protect and support rural communities  
to ensure they thrive and remain vital.
Objective 13 - Rural Diversification 
and Employment
To support rural diversification and rural  
employment opportunities, in particular  
those related to agriculture, horticulture  
and forestry.
Objective 14 - Green Infrastructure
To protect natural species present in  
West Northamptonshire and enhance the  
existing strategic green infrastructure  
network, including biodiversity corridors,  
by incorporating and designing these into  
Sustainable Urban Extensions (SUEs) at  
Northampton, Daventry, Towcester and  
Brackley.
9West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationObjective 15 - High Quality Design
To achieve high quality design in both rural 
and urban areas that takes account of local 
character and heritage and provides a safe, 
healthy and attractive place for residents,  
visitors and businesses.
Objective 16 - Heritage
To conserve and where possible enhance, 
through carefully managed change, the  
heritage assets and their settings of West 
Northamptonshire, and to recognise their  
role in providing a sense of place and local  
distinctiveness.
It is recognised that some updating of these 
objectives is required, for example Objective 
5 refers to the Northampton Central Area  
Action Plan which will be replaced by the 
Northampton Local Plan Part 2. Likewise  
Objective 10 refers to Daventry University 
Technical College which is now closed.
Consultation Question:
4. Are the above spatial  
objectives still the most  
appropriate ones for guiding  
development and growth in West 
Northamptonshire?  
What changes or other objectives 
would you like to see?
What time period should the Plan 
cover?
The National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF) expects Local Plans to have a  
time-horizon of at least 15 years post  
adoption, whilst the Government’s  aspirations for the Arc are looking up to 
2050. Whilst 2050 is a suitable time horizon 
for a vision, those aspects of the plan which 
need to be evidence based such as  
housing and jobs numbers are better suited 
to a shorter time horizon of say up to 2041. 
An appropriate plan period would therefore 
by 2019-2041. There may however be  
benefits in taking a longer term strategic 
approach by extending the plan-period up to 
2050 in line with the aspirations for the Arc.
Consultation Question:
5. Is a plan-period of 2019-2041  
appropriate or should it be  
extended up to 2050 to match the 
Government’s aspirations for the 
Arc?
Place-making and Sustainable 
Communities 
To meet Local Housing Needs West  
Northamptonshire will need to plan for a  
minimum of around 49,000 homes between 
2019 and 2041. This figure would be about 
69,000 if the new plan ran until 2050. Some 
of this housing is already planned for in the  
existing JCS and emerging Local Plans.  
However the West Northamptonshire  
Strategic Plan will need to identify further  
strategic locations for development of  
housing as well as employment to 2041.   
The Plan will also set out a vision to 2050, 
which provides an opportunity to set out the 
principles to create thriving communities 
throughout West Northamptonshire in the 
long term. A key challenge for this Plan is to  
create places where existing and future  
residents want to live now and can do so  
sustainably into the future.
This Strategic Plan will help shape places 
where health and wellbeing is considered in 
every element of development and where  
inequalities in health and wellbeing are  
reduced. Apart from the obvious benefits to 
people’s well-being, this should also assist 
with reducing demands on the local NHS and 
social care services.
The Office of National Statistics collects data 
on people’s self-assessed levels of life  
satisfaction, worth, happiness and anxiety. 
In 2017/18 West Northamptonshire scored 
10West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationNew development will demonstrate a high 
standard and diversity of design which is 
appropriate to their location. These will be 
inclusive, enabling accessibility and  
independence, helping to reduce  
inequalities. 
Development should be fit for the  
future and incorporate resilience to  
climate change as well as allowing  
flexibility to adapt to new smart  
technology such as that emerging for  
independent living.overall slightly better when compared to the  
England average in terms of personal 
well-being and slightly lower when  
compared to the wider East Midlands sub 
region. In terms of health there are varying  
inequalities across West Northamptonshire.
The life expectancy across West  
Northamptonshire shows that residents in 
Northampton have a lower than average 
life expectancy, and Daventry and South 
Northamptonshire have either similar or 
better life expectancies when compared 
to England averages.
Across West Northamptonshire physical 
activity of adults is similar compared to 
adults in England. However, the rates of 
adult obesity are worse in Northampton 
compared to Daventry and South  
Northamptonshire who have similar rates 
of adult obesity compared with England 
as a whole.
The picture is similar for childhood 
obesity with year 6 children in  
Northampton having higher levels of  
obesity when compared with neighbouring 
districts and the rest of England.n
n
n
Key Principles for Place-Making 
and Sustainable Communities
Housing will be expected to be located in 
sustainable locations to encourage people 
to use active travel modes such as  
walking and cycling as a 1st choice  
wherever possible as well as have access 
to good public transport links to key  
destinations including employment, 
schools, retail and other services.
Transport and land use will be integrated 
in new developments to create legible, 
accessible and connected routes from the 
outset and/or improve existing links to 
encourage more journeys on foot, bike or 
public transport.
Development proposals will support 
strong, vibrant and healthy communities 
where people feel safe, healthy, socially 
connected and proud of where they live.
New development will respect and make 
use of the natural and historic character 
of West Northamptonshire and ensure 
that all residents and visitors can benefit 
from the advantages these  
characteristics offers.n
n
n
nn
n
Consultation Questions:
6. Do you feel that the key  
principles identified will create  
sustainable communities? 
7. Are there any other place making 
principles that need to be  
considered?
Natural and Built Environment
West Northamptonshire is an area of  
distinct landscape contrasts. The urban centre 
of Northampton in the east contrasts strongly 
with a large rural hinterland in the rest of the 
Plan area, which is punctuated by Daventry 
as a sub-regional centre, the smaller market 
towns of Towcester and Brackley and  
numerous picturesque villages. 
Outside the towns the rural landscapes are 
unified by recurring landscape elements and 
features including hedgerows, historic  
houses, designed parklands, woodland, water 
bodies, waterways and agricultural land.
11West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationBiodiversity  - Increasing pressures are 
being placed on natural habitats, occurring 
as a result of new development, the wider 
impacts of climate change and shared water 
resources and the introduction of  
non-native species. Across West  
Northamptonshire there are a range of sites 
which are designated for their biodiversity 
or geodiversity value. 
Some are recognised as being of impor -
tance at an international on national level, 
e.g. Special Protection Areas (SPA) and 
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), 
while others are valued as being of more 
local significance e.g. Local Geological Sites 
(LGeS) and protected road verges. 
Some designations receive  
statutory protection (under specific existing 
legislation) whilst other sites, particularly 
those designated at a local level, receive 
less protection e.g. Local Wildlife Sites, 
potential wildlife sites and pocket parks. 
Within the plan area there are a number of 
designations ranging from International to 
National, Regional and Local level.The area contains a significant range of  
natural and built assets including  
biodiversity habitats, sites, green  
infrastructure networks, archaeology and 
other heritage assets. Many of these are 
important at an international or national level 
and are protected through legislation or  
formal designation, whilst others are more 
locally important and need protecting 
through local plans.
This section of the document seeks to build 
an understanding of the broad natural and 
historic environment issues that affect the 
wider area.
Landscape character  - West  
Northamptonshire’s landscape is influenced 
by the unique combination of natural and 
man-made features found in the area, for 
example the underlying geology, biodiversity, 
agricultural landscapes, buildings, structures 
and transport connections. A Landscape 
Character Assessment which was undertaken 
in 2008 for the county and informed the JCS 
is still relevant. More detailed work has been 
done to support the emerging Part 2 Local 
Plans which will also provide useful evidence 
for the WNSP.  
The urban landscape of Northampton  
derives from its geography and historic  
development, resulting in a predominantly 
urban area containing a strong network of 
green and blue infrastructure, historic parks, 
amenity green space and natural and semi 
natural landscapes including nature reserves, 
river and canal corridors.
As predominantly rural districts, Daventry 
and South Northamptonshire both contained 
a longstanding Special Landscape Area (SLA) 
designation and in order to support a  
continuation of the designation in their Part 
2 Plans, detailed studies were undertaken in both districts. The proposed areas of SLA 
represent “valued landscapes” as set out in 
the NPPF and are areas that demonstrate 
particularly special qualities that lift them 
out of the ordinary. Providing the SLAs are  
accepted by the inspectors of the  
respective examinations it is proposed to  
carry the designation through to the WNSP.
Parts of the existing SLAs are of particularly 
high landscape quality and may justify  
potential designation as an Area of  
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). Initial 
discussions are taking place with Natural 
England and adjoining local authorities to 
see if AONB designation would be feasible.
12West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationClimate change resilience – The planning 
system has a key role to play in supporting 
the transition to a low carbon future and in 
mitigating the impacts of climate change. 
The WNSP can help to shape places which 
support reductions in greenhouse gas  
emissions, minimise vulnerability and  
improve resilience, encourage the reuse of 
existing resources and support renewable 
and low carbon energy. Climate change 
resilience is likely to be a key cross-cutting 
theme that runs through the Plan’s strategy 
and policies. 
Flood risk and the water cycle - Flood 
risk and water quality are significant  
concerns for West Northamptonshire. The 
area’s rivers and their tributaries as well 
as the canal network and reservoirs are 
prominent features of the landscape and 
important to wider biodiversity and leisure 
networks. Yet due to these water bodies 
and historic patterns of development there 
are a number of areas which are at risk of 
flooding. In addition to fluvial flooding there 
is also an increased risk of surface water 
flooding following periods of heavy rainfall, 
more intense storms and/ or where  
wastewater drainage is ineffective. The 
impact of development on water quality and 
the need to maintain adequate supplies of 
water are likely to become increasingly  
significant issues.
The existing JCS and the emerging Part 2 
Local Plans have been informed by  
extensive evidence including Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessments and the Water Cycle 
Strategy. It is expected that this evidence 
will need to be updated to inform the WNSP.Biodiversity offsetting and net gain  – 
The NPPF indicates that planning policies 
should minimise impacts on and provide 
net gains for biodiversity. Biodiversity 
offsetting is a system used predominantly 
by planning authorities and developers to 
fully compensate for biodiversity impacts  
associated with economic development, 
through the planning process. In some  
circumstances, biodiversity offsets are  
designed to result in an overall  
biodiversity gain. Offsetting is generally 
considered the final stage in a mitigation 
hierarchy, whereby predicted biodiversity 
impacts must first be avoided, minimised 
and reversed by developers, before any 
remaining impacts are offset. The  
mitigation hierarchy serves to meet the 
environmental policy principle of “No Net 
Loss” of biodiversity alongside  
development.
Biodiversity net gain is an approach which 
aims to leave the natural environment in a 
measurably better state than beforehand; 
for instance a species poor grassland or  
agricultural land is replaced by a  
species-rich specific type of grassland/
meadow and protective hedges that  
functions at the same time as part of a 
local GI system at the same site.
Green infrastructure-  
Green Infrastructure (GI) is a network  
comprising the broadest range of  
multi-functional green spaces, their  
connections and other environmental  
features including but not limited to parks, 
private green spaces, woodlands, wetlands, 
open and running water, wastelands and  
disturbed grounds, rivers and canals and 
their banks, roads and rail corridors, public 
rights of way, allotments, cemeteries and 
churchyards . GI is an asset that enables the 
environment to support and maintain  
ecological processes whilst sustaining land, 
air and water resources and is important 
within and beyond urban areas. 
The JCS defines the sub-regional and  
local green infrastructure corridors in West 
Northamptonshire. The sub-regional green 
infrastructure corridors are the corridors that 
provide the link between the major areas of 
population within Northamptonshire and  
beyond into neighbouring counties. The 
function of these corridors is to connect  
areas of natural heritage, green space,  
biodiversity or other environmental interest. Local green infrastructure corridors provide 
links between the sub-regional corridors. 
It is expected that the WNSP will need to 
review the extent and function of these GI 
corridors.
13West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationHistoric environment -The historic  
environment of the plan area is one of its 
most valued assets and there is a positive 
relationship between heritage, health and 
wellbeing, civic pride and community  
cohesion. Heritage also delivers significant 
economic benefits as a driver for tourism 
and many of the historic houses and  
parklands in the plan area are significant 
tourist destinations. The canal network  
comprising the Grand Union and Oxford 
Canals, is both a heritage asset and major 
leisure attraction in the area. Heritage  
assets include buildings and structures, 
parks and gardens, battlefields and  
archaeological remains.  significance will be considered in planning  
decisions. 
Each of the Part 2 Plans contain policies that 
deal with both designated and  
non-designated assets, therefore the WNSP 
needs to focus on strategic heritage issues.
Heritage assets can be designated or 
non-designated. Designated assets are  
designated under statute and some, such 
as listed buildings, conservation areas and 
scheduled monuments, benefit from  
statutory protection and require specific  
statutory duties to be exercised or tests to 
be applied when assessing the impact of a 
development on them. They may also be 
subject to a separate heritage consent  
regime. Other designated assets such as 
registered battlefields and historic parks and 
gardens do not have statutory protection 
although they are a material planning  
consideration. Across West  
Northamptonshire there are more than 100 
conservation areas, in excess of 1800 listed 
buildings and around 100 scheduled  
monuments.
Many other assets make the area distinctive 
but because they are not designated, they 
are at risk of change or loss.  
Non-designated heritage assets are  
identified by the local planning authority 
and all three authorities are in the process 
of compiling a ‘local list’ of non-designated 
assets, which means that despite not having 
the same level of protection, their  Key Principles for the Natural and 
Built Environment
Landscape character and valued  
landscapes should be fully considered in 
assessing proposals for growth to ensure 
that the character and quality of  
landscapes is protected and where  
possible enhanced.
Development should maintain or enhance 
existing designated sites and assets which 
support biodiversity with the objective of 
delivering overall net gains for  
biodiversity.
Green Infrastructure Networks should be 
conserved, managed and enhanced.  
Development proposals should seek to  
incorporate existing GI corridors and 
where possible create new corridors. 
Climate change resilience will be a 
cross-cutting theme that is ‘built in’ to the 
plan’s policies and proposals.
New development will be located and 
designed to minimise the risk of flooding, 
protect water quality and maximise water 
efficiency. 
The historic environment and heritage 
assets should be preserved, and where 
possible enhanced in recognition of their 
role in providing a sense of place and  
local distinctiveness.n
n
n
n
n
n
Consultation Questions:
8. Have we identified the right key 
principles to conserve and enhance 
the built and natural environment?
9. Are there any built and natural 
environment issues that we have 
missed?
14West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationEnsuring the right number and type of 
houses are delivered across West  
Northamptonshire are clearly important  
issues for the West Northamptonshire  
Strategic Plan to address. 
How much Housing Do We Need To Plan 
For? - To establish how much housing we 
need to plan for a number of components 
need to be looked at, specifically future local 
housing need, any uplift for contingencies, a 
further uplift to deliver the aspirations of the 
Arc and the need to provide for any unmet 
need from Neighbouring authorities, and 
also factoring in any existing supply. 
These are discussed in turn below.
Local Housing Need   
In terms of the overall scale of housing 
growth that the plan needs to provide for, 
the 2019 NPPF identifies that to determine 
the minimum number of homes needed, 
strategic policies should be informed by a 
local housing needs assessment, conducted 
using the standard method in national  
planning guidance-unless exceptional  
circumstances justify an alternative  
approach. The table below shows the Local 
Housing Needs (LHN) figures for each LPA 
in West Northamptonshire (using the 2014 
based household projections) and shows an 
annualised requirement of 2,201 dwellings. 
This is lower than the current JCS  
requirement which, if calculated on an 
annualised basis, is 2,324 dwellings. It is 
intended that the LHN figure would replace 
the JCS trajectory figures from the base Housing
date of this plan – i.e. they would be  
introduced from 2019.
The methodology suggests that LHN is  
suitable for projections over a ten year  
period, however this plan will look to 2041, 
a 22 year period from the base date of April 
2019. One issue is to explore if there is any 
reason why the household formation rate 
would vary to any extent beyond the first 
ten years and what review mechanisms the 
plan might need to include to respond to 
any changes.
As the table shows, the LHN figure  
to 2041 is 48,862 dwellings across West  
Northamptonshire.
Uplift For contingencies 
The LHN figure provides a minimum  
starting point in determining the number of 
homes needed in an area. It is important to  
consider whether an uplift should be applied 
to the LHN to provide additional flexibility 
and contingency to account for any delivery  
issues that may arise. Two potential 
contingency options are set out below;
LHN + 10% - 53700 dwellings 
LHN + 20% - 58600 dwellings
In considering the level of uplift, regard has 
to be had to the detriment that could be 
caused by high levels of contingencies e.g. 
the need for significant additional  
infrastructure, market saturation etc.
Table 2- Local Housing Need for Plan Period
JCS Housing 
Requirement 
(Annualised)Local Housing Need
per AnnumLocal Housing Need
over plan period
2019-2041
Northampton  
(inc NRDA)1582 1333 29326
Daventry 388 372 8184
South
Northamptonshire351 516 11352
West
Northamptonshire2321 2221 48862
15West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationOxford-Cambridge Arc
Government has clear ambitions to promote 
growth across the Oxford-Cambridge Arc. 
Practice Guidance suggests that it would be 
appropriate to plan for housing in excess of 
the LHN figure where growth strategies for 
the area exist that are likely to be  
deliverable, for example where funding is 
in place to promote and facilitate additional 
growth. Government’s ambitions for the Arc 
include up to one million high quality new 
homes by 2050. Achievement of this  
ambition would require a step change in 
housing delivery at levels substantially in 
excess of LHN. The West Northamptonshire 
partner authorities are in discussions with  
Government about the potential support 
that could be available, for example  
infrastructure funding, to facilitate increased 
levels of growth to match their aspirations 
for the Arc. A potential Arc-related growth 
scenario would be to plan for LHN +10% for 
2019-29 and then apply a further uplift of 
40% to LHN from 2029 to 41. This results in 
a requirement for 61700 dwellings.
Taking into account the existing supply
To establish what provision the plan needs 
to make it is important to look at existing  
housing supply. A housing background  
paper  has been produced that sets out the 
position for each local authority in more  
detail in respect of the existing supply  
however given that this period will run from 
2019 to 2041 there is clearly a significant level of provision already anticipated to come 
forward in the existing JCS, specifically the 
allocated SUE’s and also additional site  
allocations within the emerging Part 2 Local 
Plans. Across West Northamptonshire as at 1st 
April 2019 existing supply amounts to about 
38500 dwellings.
This supply has been applied to the different 
scenarios discussed above and summarised in 
Table 3 below.
In determining the most appropriate level of 
housing it will be important to factor in the 
outcomes of further work regarding specific 
housing needs (including affordable  
housing) and the relationship with the  
economy of the area, mindful of the need to 
try and balance housing and job growth.
Importantly the 5 year housing land supply 
would be monitored against the LHN figures, 
either on a plan wide basis or policy area  
basis. Any uplift would be for contingencies 
only, and would not be included in the  
calculation.    
In addition the NPPF indicates that any needs 
that cannot be met within neighbouring areas 
should be taken into account in establishing 
the amount of housing to be planned for. 
The West Northamptonshire councils will work 
with adjoining authorities to establish if any 
unmet need should be provided for in this plan 
although this has not been indicated through 
the local plans that have either progressed or 
are currently progressing through the process.
Table 3 - New Housing Provision
Scenario Approximate  
Requirement to 
2041Supply to 2041 Residual  
Requirement to 
2041
Local Housing Need 48900 dwellings 38500 10400
Local Housing Need
+ 10%53700 dwellings 38500 15200
Local Housing Need
+ 20%58600 dwellings 38500 20100
Arc-related
Growth61700 dwellings 38500 23200
16West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationHow to diversify the Market?
A number of the Sustainable Urban  
Extensions allocated in the JCS have not 
progressed as quickly as expected. The 
issue of delivery, particularly on larger sites, 
is not an issue solely affecting West  
Northamptonshire but is a nationwide  
issue. This has been recognised in the 
Letwin review (October 2018) which can be 
viewed on the gov.uk website and identifies 
a series of possible measures to seek to  
improve build-out rates, including  
diversifying the housing offer on strategic 
sites through different tenures and house 
types including ensuring sufficient plots for 
self-build/custom- build housing. This will be 
an important issue for this plan to address.
Consultation Questions:
10. Is the 1st April 2019 an  
appropriate base date for the  
housing requirement?
11. Having regard to the scenarios 
presented above what level of  
housing growth should the plan be 
seeking to accommodate? If you 
support a level of housing that differs 
from LHN please explain how you 
think that would be justified?
12. Would the Government’s  
ambitions for the Oxford-Cambridge 
Arc justify a level of housing growth 
significantly in excess of LHN?
Consultation Question:
13. What measures could the plan 
include to diversify the offer on  
strategic sites, or otherwise increase 
the rate of housing delivery?What type of housing Do We Need to 
Plan for? 
Further to establishing overall housing  
requirements the 2019 NPPF indicates that 
the size, type and tenure of housing  
needed for different groups in the  
community should be assessed and  
reflected in planning policies and this work 
will be undertaken to inform the production 
of this plan. This work has been undertaken 
for the part 2 local plans  and will need to 
be updated particularly to inform the  
following;
The level of affordable housing that needs 
to be provided for, including what  
threshold should be applied.
What specific needs for specialist  
accommodation are there mindful of the 
age profile of the area and that existing 
evidence showing that the increase in 
people aged 65+ represents 50% of the 
overall population growth.n
n
Evidence undertaken across West  
Northamptonshire against the existing 
housing requirement indicated a need for an 
increased proportion of smaller properties 
(2 and 3 beds).
Consultation Question:
14. Are there any particular types 
of specialist housing that you feel 
should be increased in supply, do you 
have any evidence to support this?  
How do we ensure the houses are of 
good quality and fit for purpose?
To ensure that West Northamptonshire  
continues to be an attractive place to live 
the quality of housing is important. The 
government acknowledged this through 
introducing the following optional national 
standards;
Accessibility and wheelchair housing 
standards
Water efficiency standards
Internal space standardsn
n
n
17West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationThe Part 2 local plans are respectively  
seeking to apply the optional national  
standards to varying levels and therefore 
it is not considered that this is an issue 
for this plan to address. However it will be 
important to ensure the plan secures high 
quality design across the area and any  
evidence undertaken looking at specific 
housing needs will need to consider how 
these standards should be apply moving 
forward.
Consultation Question:
15. Are there any other housing  
issues the plan needs to address that 
have not been identified?
Economic Growth
West Northamptonshire is well placed in 
terms of infrastructure due to its links with 
a number of major strategic routes including 
the A43, A34, A5, A14, M40 and M1. It also 
benefits from a number of existing high  
profile employers and tourist facilities. The 
area has particular strengths in logistics 
centred at the motorway junctions on the 
M1, food and drink and the visitor economy.
West Northamptonshire falls within the 
SEMLEP local enterprise area. SEMLEP are 
preparing a Local Industrial Strategy, which 
looks at the wider ambitions of the Arc, 
clusters, logistics hubs of excellence and  
innovative transport technologies. The 
WNSP will need to take account of the 
emerging proposals in the Local Industrial 
Strategy.
West Northamptonshire’s economy has 
grown in recent years with a large number 
of jobs being delivered, although the  
provision of employment floorspace has 
generally been lower than anticipated in the 
JCS. Between 2008 and 2017 approximately 
19,000 net additional jobs have been  
created. This jobs growth has occurred 
across a wide variety of sectors. It is  
considered that the Strategy needs to  
encourage growth in a planned way which 
meets the needs of our residents, adds  
value to the area and supports the key 
sectors of High Performance Technology, 
Logistics, Food and Drink and the Visitor 
Economy.The WNSP will need to balance the number 
of jobs in relation to housing and  
infrastructure provision, as well as  
regenerating the area, attracting high 
skilled jobs and supporting existing retail 
centres. Evidence on economic  
development needs is being commissioned, 
and this work will provide an objective  
assessment of the employment land/  
floorspace needs over the plan period. It 
will also consider the number of jobs that 
need to be created to support the  
anticipated growth in population.
It is considered that any allocations should 
be located in sustainable and accessible  
locations where land permits it, or at  
existing well serviced facilities. 
Strategic Rail Freight Interchanges: 
Central Government are currently  
considering two major development  
proposals in South Northamptonshire, for 
major rail freight infrastructure proposals, 
known as Rail Central and Northampton 
Gateway. The sites are located to the west 
of the M1 close to junctions 15 and 15A. 
Collectively these proposals could deliver in 
excess of 1.2 million sqm of warehousing 
and ancillary floorspace and could  
generate around 15,000 directly employed 
jobs. Should one or both of these  
applications go ahead, they could have a 
significant impact on the labour force, the 
capacity of road and rail infrastructure and 
the demand for housing. 
The Plan may have to respond to these  
impacts once the outcome of the  
application process is known although the 
sites will be of a scale that would inevitably 
draw in some workforce from outside of 
West Northamptonshire.
18West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationA range of spatial options will be  
considered e.g. focussing development on 
existing transport hubs, such as rail  
connections, planned growth areas and  
corridors, or focussing on existing urban 
areas.
In addition to new employment areas the 
plan may also consider the role of existing 
employment areas, where still appropriate, 
controlling use class changes within these 
areas. In the urban areas there may be  
opportunities for more efficient use of land 
as well as expansion of existing  
employment hubs may be considered  
necessary. The plan may consider focusing 
allocations on existing use classes, or may 
focus more generally recognising the need 
to provide flexibility within the classes.
The plan area has a number of existing 
strategic employment sites such as the 
Daventry International Rail Freight Terminal, 
Silverstone Circuit and the Northampton 
Waterside Enterprise Zone. The importance 
of sites such as these in supporting the  
economic success of the area should be  
recognised in the plan.
The Government’s ambitions for the  
‘Oxford-Cambridge Arc’ in 2019, include 
maximising the economic potential of the 
area to become an economic asset of  
international standing. A key issue for the 
WNSP is whether the plan should promote 
more economic growth than required to 
meet local need as a response to the  
opportunities presented by the Arc. 
The visitor economy plays an  
increasingly important role in the area. 
There are a range of tourism facilities, such 
as Silverstone Race Track, the extensive 
canal network, county parks, historic  
houses, abbeys and museums. The plan will 
aim to support expansion and provision of 
such facilities where appropriate.Rural Economy- The plan area covers over 
190 villages and a large number of rural and 
small scale business, in terms of the rural 
economy. While part 2 Local Plans will cover 
more detailed policies on local employment, 
the WNSP should support diversification of 
rural businesses and the rural economy to 
help them to continue to thrive across West 
Northamptonshire.
Consultation Questions:
16. Have we identified the right  
issues in respect of economic growth 
or are there important issues that we 
have missed?
17. Should the plan promote  
higher levels of economic growth in 
response to the Government’s  
aspirations for the  
Oxford-Cambridge Arc?
Retail - West Northamptonshire consists of 
a number of town centres including  
Northampton, Daventry, Towcester and 
Brackley as well as a number of  
smaller rural shopping villages and centres. 
It is considered that the plan should aim to 
regenerate retail centres and attract jobs to 
sustainable locations, while being adaptable 
and pragmatic to changes in the market and 
progressing trends.
The  future of the ‘High Street’ continues to 
be a key strand of Government policy and 
the plan needs to acknowledging the  
changing role of town centres and the retail 
economy, by allowing a more flexible and 
pragmatic approach, supporting a diverse 
range of uses. 
While retail is still a major focus for town 
centres, it is recognised that other uses can 
complement this offer. It is therefore  
important to plan for a mix and offer that 
meets the needs of the area, supports 
businesses and conserves and enhances the 
historic character.
Monitoring of the retail policies in the  
existing JCS indicates that the level of new 
retail floorspace which has been provided in 
our town centres is lower than anticipated. 
Indeed there have been net losses of  
floorspace in both Northampton and  
Daventry in recent years. This WNSP may 
therefore need to take a different and more 
flexible approach in terms of the role of 
19West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues Consultationtown centres and the uses they should  
support.
The evidence base for the WNSP will look at 
retail floorspace as well as the jobs targets, 
considering the changes to the market and 
wider travelling patterns. This work will 
feed into future documents.  
The previous Joint Core Strategy included a 
sequential approach, which ensured that in 
Northampton retail development was  
focused on the primary shopping area,  
outside of Northampton town centre,  
preference is centred on well-connected 
town centre sites first, then to local  
centres. Should the WNSP strategy take 
this same approach?
Northampton:  There have been a  
number of recent developments which  
support the vitality of the central area  
years including the relocation of the  
University of Northampton to its new  
Waterside Campus, the development of a 
new railway station building and the  
University of Northampton’s Innovation 
Centre. Northampton Borough has recently 
carried out a retail assessment as part of 
their Part 2 plan work which recommends 
revised retail floorspace targets and  
recommends a more flexible approach to 
planning to support cultural activities and 
leisure alongside retail.
Northampton Town Centre is geographically 
the largest retail centre and is considered 
as a regional shopping centre. However 
footfall in the town centre has fallen in  
recent times and vacancy rates are higher 
than the national average. The Borough 
Council have established the Northampton 
Forward partnership with businesses and  
stakeholders which aims to revitalise the 
town centre. Funding is being sought from 
the government’s Future High Street Fund 
and a consultation on the proposals for the 
town centre commenced in May. The WNSP will need to consider how the employment 
offer, retail and accessibility into the town 
centre can be improved.  
Daventry: Daventry town is the other large 
town centre in West Northamptonshire and 
offers a variety of retail chains and  
independent shops. It is currently defined 
as a sub-regional town centre in the  
WNJCS. 
The WNSP will consider how Daventry town 
centre be protected and enhanced through 
safeguarding the main shopping areas, 
whilst also providing flexibility to consider 
appropriate diversification of the current 
offer and the ability to respond to market 
trends.
South Northamptonshire: The two main 
retail offers in South Northamptonshire 
district are Towcester and Brackley towns, 
which are identified as Rural Service  
Centres in the current JCS. 
The area also includes a number of small 
rural shopping villages and garden  
centre developments. Promoting retail  
within these smaller towns, while  
continuing to improve infrastructure,  
access and parking remain key challenges 
for these areas. The WNSP will consider 
what measures can be taken to improve 
the performance of these service centres.
20West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationFor Northampton these include:
Transport - West Northamptonshire is well 
connected to strategic transport  
infrastructure. The M1 motorway which  
provides a key strategic north-south  
corridor directly to the west of  
Northampton. Other important routes  
include the A45 and A43. The A45 is the 
main southerly access from Northampton 
to the M1 and also connects a number of 
Northamptonshire’s main towns, the A45 
is one of the busiest roads in the county. 
The A43 connects Northampton and other 
Northamptonshire towns to Oxford and a 
variety of other destinations. 
Northampton is also connected to the West 
Coast Main Line rail network, which runs 
from London Euston to the West  
Midlands. Long Buckby, in Daventry  
District, has a station on the Northampton 
loop of the West Coast Main Line. Kings 
Sutton, in South Northamptonshire, has 
a station on the Cherwell Valley Line. A 
significant level of rail freight also passes 
through the county, with the location of the 
Daventry International Rail Freight Terminal 
(DIRFT), located to the North of Daventry.
The growth that is planned in the existing 
JCS is supported by an Infrastructure  
Delivery Plan (IDP). The IDP includes a 
number of key primary infrastructure  
projects have been identified to support the 
long term growth of the area.
Consultation Questions:
18 Overall what do you consider our 
approach should be for retail and  
town centres?
19. How can we make our town  
centres more successful in the future?
InfrastructureThe Northampton Growth Management 
Scheme (NGMS), which relates to a  
series of junction improvements on the 
A45 from the M1 junction 15 in the west 
to the Great Billing Interchange in the 
east. 
The Northampton North-West Relief 
Road, (see map on page 21) the first 
phase to the east of the A428 is  
expected to be delivered as part of the 
Kings Heath SUE and the highway  
authority will deliver the second phase 
which links to the A5199. 
Sandy Lane Relief Road to the west 
Northampton, which is expected will be 
delivered as part of the Norwood Farm/ 
Upton Lodge SUEs.n
n
n
For South Northamptonshire the  
Towcester Relief Road will support the  
development of the Towcester South SUE 
and forms part of the developer’s plan.  
Provision of this road is required  
infrastructure to allow the development to 
go ahead and will also provide relief to the 
A5 through Towcester town centre bringing 
with it the potential to improve the  
environment and air quality.
For Daventry the Daventry Development 
Link (DDL), recently opened, provides a  
single carriageway bypass for Weedon, 
Flore and Upper Heyford on the A45  
between Daventry and Junction 16 of  
the M1.
21West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues Consultation
Northampton North-West Relief Road and Northern Orbital mapNew Strategic Transport  
Infrastructure – The assessment of 
growth options for West Northamptonshire 
will necessitate the consideration of  
opportunities to provide new strategic 
infrastructure connections. Two potential 
projects are set out below:
Northampton Northern Orbital –  The 
County Council have proposed a new road 
will link the A5199 and Northampton North 
West Relief Road between Kingsthorpe and 
Chapel Brampton with the A43 north of 
Moulton. The new road will also connect 
with the Moulton Park industrial estate. A 
final preferred route has not been chosen 
yet and delivery of the scheme is reliant on 
funding sources being secured. The  
Northern Orbital is not included in the  
existing JCS and the implementation of 
and funding for the route will in part  
depend on where development is located 
in the future.
North – South Rail - The re-opening the 
Market Harborough to Northampton line 
would provide the potential for a new  
national corridor. If pursued, this would 
link the Midland Main Line northwards – thereby including such places as Leicester,  
Loughborough, Nottingham, Derby and  
Sheffield – and the West Coast Main Line 
southwards – thereby including such  
places as Milton Keynes, Watford and  
London. Creating a new set of efficient  
economic and social connections should have 
significant positive impacts nationally and 
for West Northamptonshire. The north-south 
rail scheme would complement proposals for 
East-West Rail which are a key element of 
the vision for the Oxford-Cambridge Arc. The 
route of the former railway is used as a 14 
mile walking and cycling route known as the 
Brampton Valley Way. Compensatory  
provision would need to be considered if the 
rail scheme were to be implemented. 
Consultation Questions:
20. Should the plan consider the 
potential to deliver the Northampton 
Northern Orbital and North-South 
Rail as described above?
21. Are there other strategic  
transport infrastructure options 
which should be considered?
22West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationIn order to achieve wider sustainability 
goals, and to meet the future travel needs 
of the area, it is recognised that a change 
in travel behaviour is required. 
Unsurprisingly given the rural nature of the 
area and the reliance on regional service 
centres, evidence from the 2011 Census 
shows that residents and workers within 
Daventry, South Northamptonshire and 
Northampton tend to commute further and 
have a higher car dependency than the  
national average.  As a result of the high 
car dependency, public transport usage in 
terms of travel to work is below the  
national averages with rail significantly 
less. Walking and cycling to work are also 
both lower than the national averages.
Two key projects to support the change in 
travel behaviour included the replacement 
of the Northampton Greyfriars Bus Station 
with a new bus interchange and a new  
railway station for Northampton. The new 
bus interchange was completed in 2013 
and the new Castle Railway Station was 
opened in January 2015.
Daventry District Council has aspirations to 
improve the bus station facilities at  
Daventry to serve the existing and growing 
population. Details of whether this will be relocation or restructure of the existing site 
will be the subject of further investigation. 
The proportion of cycling in  
Northamptonshire has historically been low 
and there is relatively little cycle culture, 
unlike in cities such as Cambridge, Oxford, 
York and Bristol. The cycle mode share for 
journeys to work in Northamptonshire is 
around 2%, compared to a figure of 8% in 
Bristol and 28% in Cambridge.   
The compact nature of the towns and in 
most cases relatively flat topography,  
presents significant potential to increase  
cycling trips within the major towns 
through addressing key missing links and 
junction treatment. In addition, there are 
opportunities, if sufficient funding became 
available, to develop inter-urban links 
between the main towns and from smaller 
outlying settlements. 
Cycling and walking have the potential to 
help reduce health costs and wider  
economic losses associated with sedentary 
lifestyles by increasing physical activity, 
i/e/ prevention rather than cure. Helping to 
increase the number of walking trips  
rather than using the motor vehicle  
increases fitness levels and aids the  
environment by reducing congestion.  Potential North-South Rail Route
23West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationTraffic in our urban centre and areas near 
busy roads are affecting concentrations of 
air pollution that can have a significant  
impact on the health of the general  
population, with those having underlying 
health conditions being most at risk. There 
are two pollutants of greatest concern:  
nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and particulate  
matter (PM), which have an adverse effect 
on health and are mainly a problem  
because of vehicle exhaust emissions, with 
diesel exhaust emissions contributing most 
to the air pollution problem. There are  
currently seven Air Quality Management  
Areas within Northampton, one in  
Towcester. 
Department for Transport (DfT) figures show 
that over 100,000 plug-in vehicles were  
registered in the UK by mid-2017 as  
people are seeing the benefits of lower  
running costs and environmental benefits. 
Plug-in vehicles have zero exhaust  
emission capabilities and represent a  
significant opportunity for improving air 
quality. Opportunities to support the switch 
to electric vehicles will be considered  
including the provision of charging  
infrastructure.
In order to create change it is important 
that key organisations, including the local 
councils and other public sectors  
organisations who promote health and  
environmental improvements, lead by  
example. Public sector organisations  
operate fleets of vehicles and are significant 
employers in the area, generating thousands 
of business miles each year. These  
represent significant opportunities for 
influencing change, both within the public 
sector, but also beyond, including employees 
and the many private and voluntary sector 
organisations who engage with the public 
sector on a daily basis.In addition to transport, there are several 
other types of infrastructure that are  
critical for growth, including: energy and 
utilities provision; social infrastructure  
(including schools, GP surgeries, leisure 
and community facilities) and mobile and 
digital infrastructure.
Business and housing growth cannot take 
place in isolation from the provision of  
energy and social infrastructure.  
Improvements in digital infrastructure open 
up opportunities for growth. The County 
Council and key partners have embarked 
on enabling a superfast broadband  
Northamptonshire initiative that aims to  
provide everyone in the county with access 
to improved services.
Government set a national target of 95% 
superfast broadband coverage to be 
achieved by 31st December 2017. The  
target relates to numbers of premises  
rather than geographical coverage. This  
national target was met. However,  
Northamptonshire has gone even better 
with coverage approaching 97%. It is also 
in the top ten areas in the UK for ultrafast 
broadband with 60% of premises able to 
access even faster speeds. This means that 
Northamptonshire is now one of the best 
counties in the UK for fast broadband. 
In June 2018 the County Council agreed 
new targets for the Superfast  
Northamptonshire project. These  
targets are for at least 99% of premises  
in the county to be able to access superfast 
broadband and 65% ultrafast - both to be 
achieved by 31st March 2021. 
This will ensure that Northamptonshire is 
one of the best places (urban and rural) in 
the country for fast and reliable broadband 
connectivity. This will transform the way 
public services are delivered, help people 
to help themselves and reduce social  
exclusion, support enterprise and  
innovation, improve skills and educational 
attainment, and reduce carbon emissions.
With energy, a key challenge is to ensure a 
closer alignment between the forward plans 
of utilities companies and local authorities, 
with the former having generally having 
shorter planning horizons than the latter. 
Infrastructure providers will be engaged in 
the preparation of the plan for the outset 
to ensure that infrastructure is delivered in 
the right place and at the right time.
24West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationWestern Power Distribution (WPD) covers 
the growth areas of Northampton,  
Daventry, Towcester and Brackley.  
Recently energy supply demand has  
reduced from that anticipated. This is due 
to the recent economic down-turn and the 
general shift from manufacturing, requiring 
a high energy demand, to warehousing and  
service industries which have a lower  
energy usage. In addition sustainable  
energy generation through wind power, 
photo voltaic units (PVUs) and biomass 
generation has supported the general 
supply.
In relation to energy Northampton will  
require works in the medium term to  
increase its supply. This will be at cost to 
the provider and phased in to support  
demand. There are no power supply issues 
for Daventry which presently has spare 
capacity for growth and for Towcester the 
catalyst to electricity supply upgrade is the 
Towcester South SUE.
Water Infrastructure. For planned growth 
(such as SUEs) local reinforcements will be 
required and are provided for through the 
normal requisition process whereby the  
developer pays Anglian Water Service 
(AWS) to provide the necessary pipes and 
connections. The requisition process is 
triggered by development, and is therefore 
entirely dependent on the timing of the  
individual developments. There is  
therefore no risk of these connections not 
being provided when growth goes ahead.
As a key part of the delivery of the Joint 
Core Strategy 2014 the capacity for the 
waste water treatment infrastructure to 
serve the growth identified is a requirement 
for development to occur. The  
Northampton Drainage Action Plan (DAP) 
modelling shows there is capacity within 
the major trunk sewer to serve the planned 
SUEs. 
Health infrastructure - In the region, 
there are several examples of housing  
developments where a GP surgery site has 
been available for a number of years but  
no surgery has been delivered. This has  
significant negative impacts upon both the 
new and existing communities affected, as 
well as undermining support for  
additional residential development. As with 
utilities, the planning horizons for housing 
and health need to be better aligned.Improvements to, or provision of, new 
healthcare facilities can sometimes be  
funded through capital programmes,  
however this funding is limited.  
Developer contributions will be expected to 
support healthcare facilities in response to 
the needs of a development. The Healthcare 
Infrastructure Schedule indicates that there 
is good provision across the urban areas 
where housing growth is anticipated.
Key Principles
  Bus Infrastructure: Improvements to 
waiting facilities, provision of real-time 
information, bus timetable information, 
secure cycle parking, rural bus hubs and 
Park and Ride.
Bus Services: High quality end-to-end 
service linking Northampton with major 
towns e.g. Bicester and Oxford.
Inter-urban public transport  
improvements linking the major towns 
within West Northamptonshire to the  
surrounding areas.
Promote the uptake of ultra-low emission 
vehicles (ULEV) in line with the  
Northampton Electric Vehicle Plan.
Promote modal shift away from cars to 
sustainable transport modes, including 
public transport, walking and cycling.
Encourage development at the most  
accessible locations.
Promote travel planning - to encourage 
more people to choose sustainable  
transport modes by providing high  
quality information about the choices 
that are available for each journey.
Having access to superfast broadband 
across Northamptonshire. 
To reduce the need to travel, shorten 
travel distances and make sustainable 
travel a priority across West  
Northamptonshire by maximising the use 
of alternative travel modes. 
Combat congestion in the main towns 
and town centres, reduce carbon  
emissions.
Address social exclusion for those in both 
rural and urban areas who do not have 
access to a private car. n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
n
25West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationTo support the regeneration of town  
centres through planned growth and  
infrastructure delivery.
Reduced Environmental Impact:  
Improve air quality and reduced noisen
n
Key Objectives
1. Deliver the infrastructure needed to 
achieve the level of growth outline in the 
West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan. 
2. Improve transport links across the 
region, promote modal shift away from 
cars to sustainable transport modes, 
including public transport, walking and 
cycling. To improve health and  
wellbeing and combat environmental  
impact of motor vehicles.
3. Improve digital infrastructure to  
support commercial growth and  
investment within the region. 
4. Ensure new development in urban 
areas effectively supports and links new 
and existing communities physically and 
socially, to achieve social cohesion and 
address the areas of deprivation.
Consultation Questions:
22. Do you think that the key  
principles and objectives for  
infrastructure identified above  
are appropriate?
23. Are there any other principles 
and objectives you would like to  
see added?
Next Steps
The next stage in the plan preparation will 
be to develop range of potential spatial 
options to meet the level of growth that we 
are planning for across West  
Northamptonshire. We are aiming to  
carry out a consultation on Spatial Options 
in early 2020. The type of options we will be 
considering include:
Urban intensification –  
redevelopment and re-use of brownfield 
sites in our existing urban areas.  
Consideration of well-designed higher 
density development close to transport 
hubs.n
n
n
n
n
Consultation Question:
24.  At this stage are there any 
other spatial options that should be 
considered?
The development and consideration of 
spatial options will need to take account of 
a range of influences such as the plans of 
neighbouring Councils and the outcome of 
the proposals for the Strategic Rail Freight 
Interchanges which are being considered 
through the National Infrastructure  
Planning process. 
To help inform the development of spatial 
options we are undertaking a call for sites. 
At this stage we are primarily interested in 
sites which are strategic in scale. 
If you have any suggestions for strategic 
locations for new development please  
submit these through our ‘call for sites’,  
details of which are available on the  
website:  
www.westnorthantsplan.inconsult.ukUrban extension – further  
sustainable urban extensions to our  
main urban areas.
New settlements – the potential for  
freestanding new settlements in the form 
of garden towns and/or villages.
Corridor based growth – the potential 
to focus growth alongside infrastructure  
improvements along key transport  
corridors either existing or proposed.
Employment focus – the potential to 
focus residential development alongside 
existing or proposed strategic  
employment areas to reduce commuting 
and provide the opportunity for people to 
live and work in the same location.
Dispersed options – such as the  
sustainable expansion of smaller  
settlements where these are well linked 
to existing or proposed infrastructure. 
nProcess and Next Steps
26West Northamptonshire Strategic Plan  
Issues ConsultationHow To Comment
Comments on the WNSP Issues can be 
made from Monday 5th August to Friday 
11th October 2019.  Your views are  
important and will help shape the next stage 
of the plan.
You can make comments in a number of 
different ways, although the best way is 
likely to be online. Our consultation website 
has an interactive version of this document 
which you can use to submit your  
comments at  
www.westnorthantsplan.inconsult.uk
If you would prefer to send us your written 
comments you can download a comment 
form from the website and return it by email 
or post to the following addresses:
By email:
westnorthantsjpu@northampton.gov.uk
By post: 
West Northamptonshire Joint  
Planning Unit
The Guildhall
St Giles Square
Northampton
NN1 1DE 
All the comments received will be  
carefully considered and used to inform the 
next stage of the West Northamptonshire 
Strategic Plan. Details of the comments 
received will be publicly available, but no 
personal information will be published. If 
you are not currently on our consultation 
database and would like to be kept  
informed then please email:  
westnorthantsjpu@northampton.gov.ukSustainability Appraisal
The WNSP will be informed by a  
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) which will  
consider ways in which the plan can  
contribute to improvements in  
environmental, social and economic  
conditions. The SA will also identify and 
mitigate any potential adverse effects that 
the plan may have.
An initial SA Scoping Report has been  
prepared and is available for comment 
alongside this Issues documents. Details of 
the SA and how to comment on it are  
available on our website at
www.westnorthantsplan.inconsult.uk
27