www.north-norfolk.gov.uk/localplanNORTH NORFO LK 
L
OCAL PLAN
PROPOSED SUBMISSION VERSION
Publication Stage | Regulation 19 | January 2022North Norfolk District Council 
Planning Policy Team 
01263 516318 
planningpolicy@north-norfolk.gov.uk  
Planning Policy,  North Norfolk District Council, Holt Road, Cromer, NR27 9EN 
www.north-norfolk.gov.uk/localplan  
All documents can be made available in  
Braille, audio, large print or in other languages.  
Please contact 01263 516318 to discuss your requirements. 
Important Information 
Documen t Availability 
Pleas e note that many of the studies and repor ts referred to throughou t this docum ent can be viewed or 
downloaded at: www.north-norfolk.gov.uk/documentlibrary . If a document produced by th e Council is not 
available please contact us with your request. 
All Council produced documents referred to can be viewed at North Norfolk District Council offices in 
Crom er during normal office hours. 
Ordnance Survey Terms & Conditions 
You are granted a non-exclusiv e, royalty free, revocable licenc e solely to view the Licensed Da ta for non-
commercial purposes for the period during which North Norfo lk Distric t Coun cil mak es it available.  
You are no t permitted to copy, sub-li cense, distribute, sell o r otherwise make available th e Licensed D ata to 
third parties in any form. Third party righ ts to enforce the term s of this licence shall be reserved to OS. 7 About the Consultation
Introduction
1 1 Introduction
1 1.1 The Local Plan Process
2 1.2 Consultation Statement
2 1.3 Sustainability Appraisal (SA)
2 1.4 Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA)
3 1.5 The Duty to Cooperate
5 1.6 Viability Considerations
5 1.7 Supporting Evidence & Background Papers
7 2 Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives
7 2.1 Spatial Portrait of North Norfolk
15 2.2 Key Challenges
19 2.3 Spatial Vision
20 2.4 Strategic Aims & Objectives
Strategic Policies
23 3 Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth
26 3.1 Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth
27 3.2 Renewable & Low Carbon Energy
32 3.3 Sustainable Construction, Energy Efficiency & Carbon Reduction
34 3.4 Water Efficiency
35 3.5 Coastal Change Management
38 3.6 Coastal Change Adaptation
39 3.7 Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage
45 3.8 Electric Vehicle Charging
47 3.9 Sustainable Transport
49 3.10 Biodiversity Net Gain
52 3.11 Green Infrastructure
55 3.12 Trees, Hedgerows & Woodland
57 3.13 Protecting Environmental QualityProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Contents4 Spatial Strategy 61
61 4.1 Spatial Strategy
67 4.2 Development in the Countryside
68 4.3 Community-Led Development
71 5 Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities
71 5.1 Health & Wellbeing
72 5.2 Provision & Retention of Open Spaces
75 5.3 Provision & Retention of Local Facilities
77 5.4 Infrastructure Provision, Developer Contributions & Viability
82 5.5 Fibre to the Premises (FTTP)
83 5.6 Telecommunications Infrastructure
84 5.7 Parking Provision
85 5.8 Safeguarding Land for Sustainable Transport
87 6 Environment
87 6.1 Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty & The Broads
91 6.2 Protection & Enhancement of Landscape & Settlement Character
94 6.3 Heritage & Undeveloped Coast
96 6.4 Biodiversity & Geodiversity
996.5 Impacts on Internationally Designated Sites: Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation
Strategy
100 6.6 Protection of Amenity
102 6.7 Protecting & Enhancing the Historic Environment
105 6.8 High Quality Design
111 7 Housing
111 7.1 Delivering Sufficient Homes
114 7.2 Delivering the Right Mix of Homes
120 7.3 Affordable Homes in the Countryside
121 7.4 Essential Rural Worker Accommodation
122 7.5 Gypsy, Traveller & Travelling Showpeople's Accommodation
1237.6 Replacement Dwellings, Extensions, Domestic Outbuildings & Annexed Accommodation
124 7.7 Re-use of Rural Buildings in the Countryside
126 7.8 Accessible & Adaptable Homes
129 7.9 Minimum Space StandardsProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Contents8 Economy 131
131 8.1 Employment Land
133 8.2 Employment Areas, Enterprise Zones & Former Airbases
134 8.3 Employment Development Outside of Employment Areas
136 8.4 Retail & Town Centre Development
139 8.5 Signage & Shopfronts
140 8.6 New Tourist Accommodation, Static Caravans & Holiday Lodges, & Extensions
142 8.7 Touring Caravan & Camping Sites
143 8.8 New Tourist Attractions & Extensions
144 8.9 Retaining an Adequate Supply & Mix of Tourist Accommodation
Places & Sites
147 9 Places & Sites
147 9.1 Introduction
148 9.2 Site Allocations
153 10 Cromer
157 10.1 Residential: Land at Cromer High Station, Norwich Road (C07/2)
159 10.2 Residential: Former Golf Practice Ground, Overstrand Road (C16)
162 10.3 Mixed-Use: Land West of Pine Tree Farm (C22/2)
165 11 Fakenham
169 11.1 Residential: Land North of Rudham Stile Lane (F01/B)
172 11.2 Residential: Land Adjacent to Petrol Filling Station, Wells Road (F02)
174 11.3 Residential: Land at Junction of A148 and B1146 (F03)
176 11.4 Residential: Land South of Barons Close (F10)
179 12 Holt
183 12.1 Residential: Land North of Valley Lane (H17)
185 12.2 Residential: Land at Heath Farm (H20)
188 12.3 Employment: Land at Heath Farm (H27/1)
191 13 Hoveton
194 13.1 Residential: Land East of Tunstead Road (HV01/B)
197 14 North Walsham
200 14.1 Mixed-Use: Land at Norwich Road & Nursery Drive (NW01/B)Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Contents14.2 Employment: Land East of Bradfield Road (NW52) 202
204 14.3 Mixed-Use: Land West of North Walsham (NW62/A)
209 15 Sheringham
213 15.1 Residential: Land Adjoining Seaview Crescent (SH04)
216 15.2 Residential: Former Allotments, Weybourne Road, Adjacent to The Reef (SH07)
219 15.3 Residential: Land South of Butts Lane (SH18/1B)
223 16 Stalham
226 16.1 Residential: Land Adjacent Ingham Road (ST19/A)
228 16.2 Mixed-Use: Land North of Y armouth Road, East of Broadbeach Gardens (ST23/2)
231 17 Wells-next-the-Sea
234 17.1 Residential: Land South of Ashburton Close (W01/1)
236 17.2 Residential: Land Adjacent Holkham Road (W07/1)
239 18 Blakeney
241 18.1 Residential: Land East of Langham Road (BLA04/A)
243 19 Briston
245 19.1 Residential: Land East of Astley Primary School (BRI01)
247 19.2 Residential: Land West of Astley Primary School (BRI02)
249 20 Ludham
252 20.1 Residential: Land South Of School Road (LUD01/A)
254 20.2 Residential: Land At Eastern End Of Grange Road (LUD06/A)
257 21 Mundesley
259 21.1 Residential: Land off Cromer Road & Church Lane (MUN03/B)
261 22 Tattersett
261 22.1 Employment: Tattersett Business Park (E7)
Monitoring
263 23 Housing Trajectory
269 24 Monitoring Framework
Appendices
275 Appendix 1: Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage
279 Appendix 2: Open SpaceProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
ContentsAppendix 3:Technical Space Standards 283
285 Appendix 4: Growth Levels in Small Growth Villages
287 Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management Area
Glossary
293 GlossaryProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
ContentsProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
ContentsAbout the Consultation
This document is the Proposed Submission Version  of the North Norfolk Local Plan (Publication
Stage). The Council has published the Local Plan for comment in relation to it’ s soundness and
compliance with a number of legal tests. The consultation commences Monday 17 January  and
closes Monday 28 February 2022 .
Viewing the Documents
We have also published a Sustainability Appraisal, Consultation Statement, and a library of Evidence
documents which ha
ve been used to inform preparation of the Plan.Y ou may wish to refer to these
documents when making representations on the Local Plan. The Plan, and all supporting documents
can be found in the Document Library  at www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr ary
The Plan is accompanied by an interactive Policies Map  which illustrates the areas where proposed
Local Plan policies apply: www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/policiesmap
Information Points
Paper copies of the Local Plan and the main supporting documents are available to view on request at
the following locations during normal opening hours:
Libraries: Cromer, Fakenham, Holt, North Walsham, Sheringham, Stalham,
Wells-next-the-Sea, Wroxham and Norwich (The Forum).
Council Offices: Cromer, Fakenham.
At these locations you may also access and view the Policies Map using a shared computer.
Please note that the availability of documents is dependent on evolving government guidance and
measures to limit the spread of Covid-19. Please check if the venue is open before making your journey,
or if an appointment is required.
Submitting Comments
Comments should be submitted on the Local Plan  at https://consult.nor th-norf olk.go v.uk by no later
than Monday 28 February 2022. All comments must be made on the specified response form. We are
unable to accept any representations which are received outside of the advertised consultation period.
Y our representations will be considered by an independently appointed Planning Inspector who will
examine the Plan to determine if it is sound, legally compliant, and suitable for adoption.
Contact Us
If you have difficulty submitting a representation, have particular accessibility requirements, or wish to
speak to us on any other matter, please contact us:
planningpolicy@north-norfolk.gov.uk
01263 513811
Planning Policy, NNDC, Council Offices, Holt Road, Cromer, Norfolk, NR27 9EN
Other ways to contact us can be found at: www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/contact-us
If you wish to visit the Council offices to view documents we recommend making an appointment via
the above 'contact us' page in order to avoid possible long wait times.
Further information is available at www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/localplanconsultationProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
About the ConsultationProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
About the Consultation1 Introduction
1.0.1 The purpose of the North Norfolk Local Plan is to set out the long term vision and strategy for
how towns, villages and the countryside of North Norfolk will develop and evolve up to 2036.
The Local Plan sets the planning framework with land use policies and development
proposals which provide the foundation to guide, support, and deliver sustainable and climate
resilient development in North Norfolk through planning decisions.
1.0.2 Planning law requires that applications for planning permission should be determined in
accordance with the Development Plan, unless material considerations indicate otherwise.The
Development Plan for North Norfolk includes this Local Plan, any adopted Neighbourhood
Plans, the Minerals and Waste Local Plan prepared by Norfolk County Council, and the Broads
Local Plan for that part of the District which lies within the Norfolk Broads. The local
circumstances reflected in policies in these Plans, along with supporting Supplementary
Planning Documents (SPDs) , the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) , the
associated Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) , together with any relevant material planning
considerations, will be used by the Council to determine whether or not planning applications
should be granted permission.
1.1 The Local Plan Process
1.1.1 Plan preparation follows a number of stages set out in regulations, is led by the Local Planning
Authority, and produced with collaboration and input from local communities, developers,
landowners and other interested parties. Plans should be justified by proportionate evidence,
be informed through public engagement and the production of specific appraisals, such as a
Sustainability Appraisal and Habitat Regulations Assessment and must be in general conformity
with national planning policies. The process involves examination by an independent inspector
whose role is to assess whether the Plan has been prepared in line with the relevant legal
requirements and whether it is “sound”. The National Planning Policy Framework sets out four
elements of soundness that Local Plans are considered against when they are examined. Local
Plans must be:
Positively prepared 
Justified 
Effective
Consistent with national policy.
The Planning Cycle
1.1.2 The following graphic depicts the key stages undertaken in developing this Local Plan:1 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Introduction 1The Planning Cycle
What stage are we at?
1.1.3 This document is the consultation version of the Plan proposed to be submitted for independent
examination (Stage 8).
1.2 Consultation Statement
1.2.1 The process of consultation and how feedback has been taken into account is outlined in the
Consultation Statements which accompany this Plan.
1.3 Sustainability Appraisal (SA)
1.3.1 All Local Plan documents must be assessed using a Sustainability Appraisal (SA) to ensure
that they are contributing towards the delivery of sustainable development. Sustainability
Appraisal is a systematic approach, which allows each of the policy options and development
site proposals to be considered against a range of sustainability objectives and specific criteria.
The Appraisal has been developed alongside the production of the Plan, has been consulted
on at each stage, and incorporates the requirements of Strategic Environmental Assessment
(SEA). This iteration of the Plan has been informed by, and is accompanied by, a final
Sustainability Appraisal.
1.4 Habitat Regulations Assessment (HRA)
1.4.1 North Norfolk District lies in an area of considerable importance for nature conservation with aProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan2
1Introductionnumber of European sites located within and just outside its boundary, some of which are
offshore. The range of sites, habitats and designations is complex with some areas having
more than one designation and include but are not limited to: The North Norfolk Coast Special
Area of Conservation (SAC), Special Protection Area (SPA), The Wash and North Norfolk Coast
SAC, Norfolk Valley Fens SAC, Overstrand Cliffs SAC, River Wensum SAC, and North Norfolk
Coast Ramsar site.
1.4.2 All Plan documents, as a legal test, must be subject to a Habitats Regulations Assessment
(HRA)(1).The Assessment is a step by step process, which considers the implications of a Plan
or project for European sites(2). It assesses the impacts of individual policies and proposals (in
isolation) and the potential cumulative (in-combination) effects, enabling the assessment to
inform the development of the Plan. After completing an assessment, a competent authority
should only approve a project or give effect to a plan where it can be ascertained that there will
not be an adverse effect on the integrity of a European site(s). In order to reach this conclusion
the Appropriate Assessment section of the HRA may have made recommendations or
modifications which need to be incorporated into the Plan.This plan includes policies to address
any direct and in combination impacts of development proposals.
1.4.3 The Plan has been subject to an interim HRA and this version is informed by, and is accompanied
by a final Habitat Regulation Assessment.
1.5 The Duty to Cooperate
1.5.1 Many land use planning issues are not constrained to Local Authority administrative boundaries
and the Local Plan takes into account the implications of planning policies of neighbouring
authorities and relevant strategic cross boundary issues. North Norfolk District Council has
worked with neighbouring councils and non-governmental organisations/statutory bodies at all
stages of preparation of the Local Plan, both individually and where necessary through the
Norfolk Strategic Planning Forum (NSPF) . The Localism Act and Local Plan Regulations
(2012) set out those bodies to which the duty applies and the National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF) describes the issues that should be considered.
1.5.2 Through the NSPF a number of cross boundary issues have been identified and addressed
and the partner authorities have jointly commissioned and prepared relevant joint evidence
documents to inform the preparation of Local Plan policies and joint approaches. Significant
cross boundary issues include:
The supply and distribution of new homes and jobs;
Environmental protection and enhancement of the landscape, habitat networks and
management of visitor impacts on designated European sites;
Infrastructure considerations, such as health provision and telecommunications 
Robust appraisal of the extent and nature of flood risk from all sources, now and in the
future, taking into account the effects of climate change;
Making more efficient use of resources, such as water and power
1.5.3 Members of the NSPF have signed a separate Framework document and Statement of Common
Ground outlining a number of shared objectives, strategic priorities, and specific Agreements
to improve outcomes for Norfolk which has informed the preparation of this Local Plan(3). The
1 The Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended), commonly referred to as the Habitats Regulations.
2 These sites include Special Protection Areas (SPAs), Special Areas of Conservation (SACs), European Marine Sites, and Ramsar
sites, (wetland sites which provide waterfowl habitat designated to be of international importance under the Ramsar Convention) and
a range of candidate sites.
3 www .norfolk.go v.uk/nsf3 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Introduction 1partners have agreed that the North Norfolk Local Plan need not contribute towards addressing
the development needs of other areas as these are to be met in full in the partners respective
Local Plans.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan4
1Introduction1.6 Viability Considerations
1.6.1 The viability of development and its ability to fund necessary supporting infrastructure is a
central part of the planning system. The Local Plan is supported by an appropriate and
proportionate Viability Assessment which demonstrates that the cumulative policy requirements
of the Plan can be funded from development across North Norfolk.
1.6.2 Government advice clearly states that the “price paid for land is not a relevant justification for
failing to accord with relevant policies in the Plan”(4)and the Council expects that the purchase
price of land must fully reflect the cumulative costs of complying in full with adopted policies.
The onus is on site promoters and developers to ensure that the price paid for land does not
negatively affect the delivery of this Local Plan's objectives and compromise the delivery of
sustainable and climate resilient development in line with policies in this Plan. Proposals that
are fully policy compliant and propose to deliver the full policy ask, including affordable housing
requirements at the relevant level set out in the Plan, will be taken to be viable, and as such
there is no need to submit a site specific viability assessment. Those that seek a departure
from policy on viability grounds will need to substantiate the position through the submission
of fully transparent Viability Assessments.
1.7 Supporting Evidence & Background Papers
1.7.1 This Plan is informed by detailed evidence studies and supported by a number background
papers which explain the policy approaches taken in more detail. Supporting evidence and
background documents are available through the Local Plan Document Library  hosted on
the Councils’  website(5).
4 PPG, Section on Viability, Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 10-002-20190509 revision 9.5.19
5 www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr ary5 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Introduction 1Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan6
1Introduction2 Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives
2.0.1 The overarching vision of the Local Plan in North Norfolk is to contribute to the achievement of
climate resilient sustainable development. In line with the National Planning Policy Framework
(NPPF), sustainable development can be summarised as meeting the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. Achieving
sustainable development through planning requires the balancing of three interdependent and
overarching objectives:
a. An economic objective - ensuring that sufficient land of the right type is available in the
right location to build a strong, responsive economy which is supported by the right
infrastructure;
b. A social objective - ensuring the sufficient number, type and quality of homes and jobs are
provided to meet identified needs in inclusive, healthy communities;
c. An environmental objective - ensuring mitigation and adaptation to climate change,
protecting the natural and built environment, enhancing biodiversity, and supporting the
move to a low carbon economy.
2.0.2 These broad, high level objectives, along with the 17 Global Goals for Sustainable Development
(which the Government, through the United Nations, have agreed to pursue through the
Transforming our World 2030 Agenda(6)), are reflected throughout the Plan.
2.0.3 The policies in this Local Plan guide development proposals and decisions, taking account of
these objectives and local circumstances and reflect the character, needs and opportunities of
the area. The approach supports the delivery of sustainable and climate resilient development
in a positive way, so that opportunities to secure net gains across each objective can be taken.
2.1 Spatial Portrait of North Norfolk
2.1.1 The North Norfolk District is a large rural area of some 87,040 hectares (excluding the Broads
Authority Area) with approximately 43 miles of coastline situated on the northern periphery of
the East of England region. The nearby urban area and major economic, social and cultural
centre of Norwich (Norwich Urban Area population of 213,166(7)) is situated some 22 miles to
the south of Cromer and exerts a significant influence over parts of the District. The towns of
Kings Lynn situated 20 miles to the west of Fakenham and Great Y armouth situated 16 miles
to the south-east of Stalham are the other principal neighbouring settlements, but their impact
on the District is far more limited.
2.1.2 In 2016, at the start of the 20 year period covered by this Plan, North Norfolk had a reported
resident population of 103,587 and was predicted to have a population of 112,078 by 2036(8).
The population is projected to age so that by the end of the plan period around 40% of the
Districts population will be over 65 years old with a diminishing proportion of the total population
remaining economically active.
2.1.3 The main settlements in the District are its seven towns:  Cromer, Fakenham, Holt, North
Walsham, Sheringham, Stalham and Wells-next-the-Sea, along with Hoveton and a further two
large villages; Briston / Melton Constable, and Mundesley. These settlements are distributed
more or less evenly across the District, and accommodate around half of the population. The
6 NPPF , 2021 paragraph 7.
7 Greater Norwich Local Plan website 2021
8 ONS, 20167 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 2other half live in the large number of smaller villages, hamlets and scattered dwellings which
are dispersed throughout a large rural area. Overall the District is one of the most rural in lowland
England.
2.1.4 Norfolk County Council classify the road network through a Route Hierarchy which encourages
drivers to use the most appropriate route according to their destination and the type of vehicle
being used, and assists in enabling the targeting of resources (e.g.for highways maintenance).
The District is served by three 'Principle Roads'; the A148, which runs east west through
Fakenham, Holt and Cromer, the A1065, which connects Fakenham through Swaffham to
Suffolk and Cambridgeshire, and the A140, which runs from Cromer towards Norwich. These
roads function as the main arterial routes of the District. A number of 'Most Principle' and 'Main
Distributor Roads' connect the remaining larger settlements. Smaller villages and hamlets are
connected through a series of lower order roads which are classified as Local Access, Special
Access, HGV and Tourist Access.
2.1.5 The west of the District remains very rural and despite recent developments retains a sense
of relative remoteness, particularly along the coast. Its character is defined by the mainly
undeveloped and un-spoilt coastline with its expansive areas of reed bed and grazing marshes,
the wooded Cromer ridge, and the wide expanses of principally arable agricultural land
interspersed with small characterful villages. Much of this western area is designated as an
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, there are numerous designated Conservation Areas, and
it is internationally important for its wildlife habitats. This part of the District is poorly served by
public transport. House prices are notably higher than other parts of North Norfolk and in the
coastal areas a higher percentage of the homes are in use as second homes than elsewhere
in the District.
2.1.6 In the west, the main centre is Fakenham (2011 Census population 7,617), an historic market
town on the upper reaches of the River Wensum, which has an attractive central market place
and square, medieval church, and weekly market. The racecourse to the south of the town lies
in the wildlife rich Wensum Valley. Fakenham acts as a local centre for employment, retailing,
health, higher education and other services meeting the needs of the residents of the town and
a relatively large rural hinterland.
2.1.7 Wells-next-the-Sea (2011 Census population 2,165) with its working harbour, salt-marshes and
wide beaches, is an attractive town and important tourist destination. The town also acts as a
local service centre. The recent addition of a small supermarket and petrol filling station has
strengthened this role, but its remote location, in addition to the high price of housing, has
created problems in terms of providing affordable housing for local people, including essential
key workers. The town is a very popular tourist and visitor destination and for an increasingly
lengthy period of the year can suffer from traffic congestion and lack of sufficient parking. The
entire town and the surrounding landscape are within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty.
2.1.8 The central part of the District  is served by Cromer, Holt and Sheringham and has a strong
tourist and retirement character. These three towns are physically closely related and are
considered functionally linked in relation to access to services and employment. Both Cromer
and Sheringham benefit from main line rail stations providing services to Norwich and beyond.
2.1.9 Cromer (2011 Census population 7,683) is an attractive Victorian resort town, dominated by
its medieval church tower and pier. Cromer's popularity as a holiday resort began in the Georgian
era, and expanded greatly as a result of the coming of the railway in 1877. As well as its tourist
role, it acts as a local centre for retail, local government and health services and hosts the
District's main hospital and District Council Offices.
2.1.10  Holt (2011 Census population 3,810) is a small Georgian town with a good range of specialistProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan8
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectivesgift shops, galleries and a country park to the south. It is home to Gresham’ s independent
school which owns and manages a large proportion of buildings and land and as a significant
employer, brings significant income into Holt.
2.1.11 Sheringham (2011 Census population 7,367) is an attractive resort town nestling between the
sea and the Cromer ridge.The Victorian town developed from a small fishing village as a result
of the railway arriving in 1887 and quickly attracted a number of fine hotels and a golf course.
As well as its continuing tourist role, it acts as a local centre for retail, leisure and other services.
2.1.12 The east of the District  forms part of the Norwich travel to work area, with pockets of social
deprivation and the coastal area suffers from potential blight associated with the risks of coastal
erosion and tidal flooding.
2.1.13 North Walsham (2011 Census population 12,634) is the largest settlement in the District. It is
an historic market town with a large number of Listed Buildings and was once rich from the
medieval wealth of the wool trade. The town provides a wide range of public services (health,
education, and leisure facilities), retail facilities, employment opportunities, as well as locally,
good levels of accessibility and public transport services (train and bus services). The town
benefits from a sixth form college, which is affiliated with Norwich City College. The town sits
in an attractive rural landscape and is relatively unconstrained in terms of landscape and
ecological designations relative to other parts of the District which lie within the Norfolk Coast
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and The Broads Executive Area.
2.1.14 While North Walsham historically had a strong level of self-containment in terms of local
businesses and employment opportunities, over the past twenty years, a number of the towns
largest employers have scaled back their workforce or closed.  Increasing numbers of local
people travel out of the town for work. This has meant that the town has become increasingly
dormitory in its function and this, together with changing consumer trends more generally, has
had an impact on the strength and vibrancy of the historic town centre, compounded by a
withdrawal of a number of high street banks and retailers from the town. The town centre,
therefore, needs support to adapt and North Norfolk District Council, on behalf of a local
partnership, has recently secured support from Historic England to deliver a £3million Heritage
Action Zone scheme to improve the town centre environment in order to meet future needs and
those of a more service economy.
2.1.15 A short distance from North Walsham there are two important strategic employment sites – the
Bacton Energy Hub and Scottow Enterprise Park (former RAF Coltishall airbase), which have
significant growth potential in the future to accommodate new businesses and employment –
particularly in new and emerging energy sectors (hydrogen production, carbon capture and
local electricity generation), which present enormous potential to make a major contribution to
local and national Net-Zero ambitions.
2.1.16 Hoveton (2011 Census population 1,759) and Wroxham sit astride the River Bure and together
are the main ‘gateway’  to the Norfolk Broads. Although Hoveton is a village, rather than a town,
its size, particularly taken with Wroxham (in Broadland District), means that it acts as a local
retail and service centre.
2.1.17 Stalham (population 3,276) is a small market town lying on the northern edge of the Norfolk
Broads and has the largest boat hire business on the Broads. It is a tight linear settlement on
the Y armouth to Cromer Road with access to the Weavers Way long-distance path. The town
and surrounding area has high levels of commuting into the Norwich and Great Y armouth areas,
due to the limited employment opportunities available locally.
2.1.18 North Norfolk’ s peripheral location is reflected in the fact that it has no trunk roads or motorways.
Only the A140 (Cromer to Norwich), the A148 (Cromer to King’ s Lynn - via Holt and Fakenham
but also serving Sheringham) and the A1065 (Fakenham to Mildenhall) are regarded as part9 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 2of the national ‘primary route network’. Other important routes are the A1067 (Fakenham to
Norwich), the A149 (Cromer to Great Y armouth – via North Walsham and Stalham) and the
A1151 (linking the A149 at Smallburgh to Norwich via Hoveton). The only public rail service is
the ‘Bittern Line’, operated by Greater Anglia, linking Sheringham, Cromer, North Walsham
and Hoveton with Norwich.The 'Poppy Line' provides a tourist attraction rail link from Sheringham
to Holt. There is also the Bure Valley Railway in Broadland which provides a tourist / leisure
link between Aylsham and Hoveton / Wroxham. Most of North Norfolk’ s villages are served
only by very limited public bus services. The 'Coasthopper' bus service runs from Hunstanton
to Cromer and Mundesley, providing a popular regular service for locals and visitors along the
coast. Related to the modest level of public transport services across the area is the finding
from the 2011 Census that 84% of households in North Norfolk owned at least one car or van
and 37% owned two or more vehicles. In the 2011 census, 23,634 of residents out of 40,087
travelled to work by car or van, which equates to 59% of those working. The Norwich Northern
Distributor Road (NDR), formally known as the Broadland Northway, has improved access to
and from the east of the District and provides a more direct link to the A11.
2.1.19 The District has approximately 43 miles of North Sea coastline between Holkham in the west
and Horsey in the south-east. The vast majority of this is very attractive and parts of the coast
and surrounding rural landscapes are nationally recognised in the designation of the Norfolk
Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and the North Norfolk Heritage and
Undeveloped Coasts. The east of the District surrounds and provides a gateway to the Norfolk
Broads, a unique area of internationally recognised wetlands. North Norfolk is also important
for its biodiversity and areas of nature conservation interest and a number of significant areas
are designated as European sites. In particular, the North Norfolk Coast stretching from
Weybourne in the east, westwards along to the boundary with the Borough Council of Kings
Lynn and West Norfolk in the west, is of international importance for wildlife habitats.
2.1.20 Whilst the coastal area plays a major role in creating North Norfolk’ s distinctive environment
and is important to the economy through tourism, it also presents two significant challenges.
The first emanates from the fact that North Norfolk’ s cliffed coastline between Kelling Hard
(near Weybourne) and Cart Gap (near Happisburgh), which is made of soft glacial deposits,
has been eroding since the last Ice Age. The second concerns the low-lying coastline either
side of the cliffs, which is at risk from tidal flooding.
2.1.21 Along with the Norfolk Coast AONB, the Broad’ s Area, 40 Sites of Special Scientific Interest
(SSSI), 255 County Wildlife Sites (CWS), 2 County Geodiversity Sites (CGS) and 42 candidate
County Geodiversity Sites (cCGS) the District has 13 internationally designated sites, designated
under the Ramsar convention or the European Habitats and Birds Directives whose  designation,
protection and restoration  is transposed  into the Conservation of Habitats and Species
Regulations 2017, as amended (commonly referred to as the Habitat Regulations), and often
referred to as European sites (Es) and/or Natura 2000 (N2K sites), and which represents a
functioning network of the Es as a whole. Each site contributes to an ecological network of
protected areas, and includes the North Norfolk Coast Special Area of Conservation SAC/Special
Protection Area SPA/Ramsar site, Winterton-Horsey Dunes SAC, Norfolk Valley Fens SAC,
Overstrand Cliffs SAC, River Wensum SAC, The Wash and North Norfolk Coast SAC, Great
Y armouth North Denes SPA, Breydon Water SPA/Ramsar site, Broadland SPA/Ramsar site,
The Broads SAC, Greater Wash SPA. Collectively these sites all contribute to the unique quality
of the Districts landscape. Most Ramsar sites are also a SPA or SAC, but, importantly, the
Ramsar features and boundary lines may vary from those for which the site is designated as
a SPA or SAC.
2.1.22 The risk of flooding in North Norfolk is not widespread and comes predominantly from a
combination of tidal and fluvial sources. Tidal and coastal flooding are the most significant, as
the District is bounded to the north and east by the North Sea and many of its watercourses
are tidally influenced, with rivers such as the Glaven, Stiffkey and Bure being affected by tidalProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 10
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectiveslocking at high tides. Flooding can also occur due to fluvial risks associated with rivers.
Collectively a number of growth settlements are at risk from localised fluvial flooding including
parts of Fakenham, Wells-next –the- Sea, Hoveton, Mundesley, Horning, Sea Palling and Potter
Heigham. Sources of flooding are not, however, just fluvial and tidal. Flood risk is also due to
surface water runoff and groundwater sources, due to rock strata and springs, culverts,  and
potentially, the overloading of drainage and sewer infrastructure. Heavy rain and areas of low
lying land and poorly maintained culverts can exacerbate flood events. Climate change, is
predicted to result in sea level rise, increased coastal erosion and result in more increased
short-duration, high intensity rainfall which will have the potential to compound flood events
and risk.
2.1.23 The varied landscape and geology of North Norfolk has led to the development of local
architectural styles and traditions such as flint, pantiles and thatch roofs, which are still prevalent
today. The quality and distinctive character of the built environment derived from these
architectural styles and traditions is particularly apparent in the areas’  town centres, small
villages and older farm buildings; and has been recognised in the large number of Listed
Buildings (2265) and Conservation Area designations (81).
2.1.24 As well as underpinning a strong and diverse tourism industry, North Norfolk’ s attractive and
distinctive coastal and rural environments have proved popular retirement locations. The 2011
Census showed that 58% of the population were over 45, compared to 43% in the Eastern
Region as a whole and 41% nationally. From the 2018-based sub-national population projections,
it is projected that by 2036, the 45+ age group will have increased to 65% in North Norfolk; in
comparison to 50% in the Eastern Region and 47% nationally. By 2036 it is projected that nearly
40% of the population of North Norfolk will be over 65 years of age.
2.1.25 The population of the District is aging and retirement has been a major cause of the net inward
migration which has fuelled population growth in the area over the last thirty years or so (in
spite of the fact that deaths have exceeded births in the area during this period). This
attractiveness to retired “incomers”  is an economic resource that supports a range of local
services, businesses and rural communities, but also raises challenges for housing, health care
and provision of services.
2.1.26 There are 55,416 dwellings across North Norfolk (Council tax records 2020). Approximately
8.1% are not recorded as a principle residence and are registered as second homes for Council
Tax purposes (2020). The percentage varies across the District with higher concentrations in
the coastal communities on the North Norfolk Coast where  in some of the more rural and
remote villages this rises to 38% (Salthouse). Some coastal communities also have a high
concentration of holiday accommodation, such as caravan parks and chalets, which contribute
significantly to the local community and tourism industry of the District.
2.1.27 Median house prices at £250,000 across the district have more than doubled in the past 20
years and new houses remain less affordable across the District, with house prices on average
9.07 times that of median wages (ONS 2020)(9). This is a slight improvement on 2019 where
the ratio was 9.87 but is still higher than the 8.68 at the start of the Plan period in 2016. As a
result, access to the private home ownership market is constrained and a high demand for
affordable rented properties persists.
2.1.28 Although overall the area appears affluent, there are pockets of social deprivation. Unemployment
within the area is low, as are rates of economic activity due to the high numbers of retired
residents. Rates of pay in North Norfolk have increased in 2020, from £19,055 in 2019, to
9 Housing Affordability in England and Wales, 25/03/21, https://tin yurl.com/smbftumx11 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 2£22,644, (Lower quartile gross annual workplace-based earnings) and is now in line with that
of the Eastern region. 23% of all households are classed as low income households, broadly
similar to the East of England average of 22%(10).
2.1.29 70% of residential dwellings are owner occupied across the District, 18% private rented and
12% social rented.14% of all households are identified as being in fuel poverty, which is higher
than the East of England average of 8% and the England average of 10% (2015 figures).
2.1.30 Only 0.6% of the Districts private sector housing stock achieves an energy performance rating
banding of category A or B, 16% category C, 35% category D, 24% category E, 17% category
F and 6% category G. In total 76.2% of North Norfolk’ s private sector properties can be classed
in bandings C-E, in comparison to 93.5% of those across England.The number of private rented
dwellings in North Norfolk with an energy performance rating of band of E, F and G is estimated
to be 43%, which is significantly above the 24.4% average for England. Overall the performance
of the housing stock in North Norfolk compared to the English Housing Survey (EHS) 2015
average is generally worse, with North Norfolk performing notably worse for all hazards and
excess cold(11).
2.1.31 The economy of North Norfolk remains fairly narrowly based with a relatively high dependence
upon employment in the agriculture, retail, public services and tourism sectors. The local
economy is particularly characterised by the fact that the majority of employees (84%) work in
small businesses. Whilst there has been a change in the business base of the manufacturing
sector with business closures / rationalisations in the food processing and engineering sectors
in recent years, there has been a growth in employment in the manufacture of plastic and timber
products and marine engineering / boat-building, which continue to perform strongly.
2.1.32 Today, significant numbers of employees in the District are engaged in the provision of education,
health and social care, public administration, retailing and tourism. In recent years the tourism
sector has enjoyed growth through investment in quality accommodation and attractions, and
a move to year-round operations capturing short breaks and specialist markets, in addition to
the traditional summer holiday.
2.1.33 Whilst most of North Norfolk’ s towns have small industrial estates, the main concentration of
manufacturing employment is in Fakenham and North Walsham. Cromer, Mundesley,
Sheringham and Wells-next-the-Sea are traditional destination resorts, and Hoveton acts as
an important centre for Broads-based tourism.
2.1.34 The District is one of the most rural in lowland England with the larger settlements distributed
more or less evenly across the district and accommodating around half the population, the other
half live in dispersed villages and hamlets throughout the rural area.  North Norfolk’ s greenhouse
gas emissions are dominated by the transport sector with road, (18.7%) and rail transport (5.7%)
combined accounting  for approximately 24.4% of CO2 emissions in the District (the most
prominent greenhouse gas). This is closely followed by emissions from the residential sector
which account for 23.1%(12).
10 Table 7, Housing stock condition modelling (BRE, 2020)
11 Estimates from Table 7, Figures 8 & 9, Housing stock condition modelling (BRE, 2020)
12 Source - https://scattercities .comProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 12
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives23.12%
17.74%0.65%5.70%0.19%18.66%1.56%1.49%12.60%1.85%5.25%Subsector inventory summary for North Norfolk with Total
Percentage of CO 2e
Residential buildings
Electricity-only generation
Land use
Livestock
Industrial process
Wastewater treatment and discharge
Solid waste disposal
Rail
Aviation
Off-road
On-road
Fugitive emissions
Agriculture
Industrial buildings & facilities
Institutional buildings & facilities
Commercial buildings & facilities
Waterborne navigation (0%)
Biological treatment (0%)
Incineration and open burning (0%)
Industrial product use
Other AFOLU (0%)
CHP generation (0%)
Heat/cold generation (0%)
Local renewable generationFigure 1 Sector Emissions 2018 (%)
050,000100,000150,000200,000250,000Total Tonnes CO2eSubsector inventory summary for North Norfolk
Figure 2 Sector Emissions 2018 (Tonnes)
2.1.35 In comparison, nationally in 2019, the transport sector is estimated to be responsible for 27%
of greenhouse gas emissions, almost entirely through carbon CO2 emissions with the main
source being petrol and diesel road transport generated in particular from passenger cars, 21%
from energy supply, 17% from business and 15% from the residential sector(13).
13 2019 UK Greenhouse Gas Emissions, Final figures 2.2.2021 National statistics, Dept Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy
https://tin yurl.com/smbftumx13 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 2Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Local / Tourist Access RoadSettlement Hierarchy
Small Growth Town Broads Authority Executive AreaPrimary / Most Principal RoadConstraints
Large Growth Town
Small Growth VillageMain Distributor Road
National Railway RouteFigure 3 - North Norfolk  Key Diagram
Long Distance PathMovement Network
Large Growth Village
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.Special Access RoadFAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAM
STALHAMWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEASHERINGHAM
HOLT
HOVETONMundesleyBlakeney
LudhamBriston & Melton
Constable
Sea PallingAldborough
BadersfieldSculthorpeRoughton
Corpusty & SaxthorpeOverstrand
High Kelling
TrunchSouthrepps
BactonLangham
Little Walsingham
HorningLittle Snoring
CatfieldSutton
Potter HeighamWalcottBinhamWeybourne
East & West
Runton Happisburgh
Figure 3 North Norfolk Key DiagramProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 14
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives2.2 Key Challenges
2.2.1 The key challenge of the Local Plan is to enable growth to provide the required housing and
jobs and supporting infrastructure whilst also conserving and enhancing the landscape and
natural environment. This must be achieved in the context of moving towards net zero and
increasing our resilience to climate change.
2.2.2 Resilience to climate change and extreme weather is improved by greater adaptation and
mitigation. Improved energy efficiency, local scale energy generation, reducing the need to
travel through place making and improved sustainable travel options can all help to reduce the
Districts Carbon footprint, while open space provision, sustainable drainage and biodiversity
enhancements all help mitigate the effects of climate change.
Managing & Adapting to Climate Change
2.2.3 It is widely accepted that increasing emissions of greenhouse gases from human activity has
contributed substantially to the climate change experienced across the globe in the past 100
years. It is expected that our climate will continue to change and, consequently, North Norfolk
along with the rest of the East of England Region may experience hotter and drier summers,
milder and wetter winters, increased flooding and more extreme climate events. In addition
some areas will suffer increasing risk of coastal flooding and erosion due to rising sea levels.
2.2.4 North Norfolk’ s coast is in places low-lying and in others it is characterised by cliffs comprising
soft silts, clays, sand and gravel and other material that is susceptible to erosion, which means
that many coastal communities continue to be affected by coastal erosion. Climate change
creates both opportunities and threats. For example, warmer summers may lead to water
shortages but also an increased demand for leisure and tourism-related facilities, as well as
new challenges for agricultural production and community cohesion.Wetter winters will increase
pressure on drainage systems. Climate change, sea level rise and coastal erosion will also
have impacts on biodiversity and coastal geology and measures need to be taken to enable
wildlife to adapt to future changes in habitat and food chains.
2.2.5 Distribution of development will need to be in accessible locations and be designed in ways
that lessen the carbon emissions from private transport and also, designed and built to the
highest energy standards, so as to reduce future carbon emissions. In April 2019, recognising
that there was a need for urgent progress towards making future development more sustainable,
the Council declared a climate emergency and set out its Environmental Charter and action
plan over the summer of 2021.
2.2.6 Significant emphasis is placed on planning to address climate change in the National Planning
Policy Framework through effective Strategic Plan making and Local Plans should play a central
role through the inclusion of policies on climate change mitigation and adaptation. Planning
however, cannot resolve the challenges of climate change on its own, but what it can do is set
an effective strategic framework to help deliver sustainable development and help address the
challenges that climate change brings, complementing measures outside of the planning sphere.
Addressing climate change is a shared responsibility which must be pursued in mutually
supportive ways. Delivery through planning requires partnership work, political buy in and
effective, coherent and consistent approaches through investment strategies, as well as
legislation and regulatory change. As such in order to address climate change the challenge
is not just through planning, but one that requires a step change in behaviour and modal shift
in practices at all levels.
2.2.7 In order to stay within the parameters of the Paris Agreement, i.e “hold the increase in global
average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursue efforts to limit15 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 2the temperature increase to 1.5°C” , a reduction in CO2 emissions as the principle driver of
global warming, is critical. It is predicted that without intervention North Norfolk will exceed its
carbon budget in this respect within 7 years from 2020(14). For North Norfolk to make its fair
contribution to delivering on the Paris Agreement’ s commitments it is projected that CO2 use
across the District will need to achieve average mitigation rates of CO2 from energy of around
-13.4% per year ( Setting Climate Commitments for North Norfolk, Tyndall Centre, May 2021).
2.2.8 The challenge for the Local Plan is to devise ways to ensure that the carbon footprint of new
development is reduced and steer new developments in a way that adapts to, and mitigates
against, the inevitable changes to the climate.
Providing Enough Homes of the Right Type in the Right Places for a Growing
Population
2.2.9 Throughout the last two decades, there has been strong demand for new homes in the District.
This has mainly arisen as a consequence of inward migration particularly by those seeking to
retire to the area. In 2002 the median house price in the District was £105,000 with a property
to earnings ratio of 6.2. By 2020 this had increased to £250,000 and a ratio of 9.7, meaning
that many lower income  households  needed almost ten times their income to purchase a
starter home in much of the District and in the coastal areas in the west of the area this multiplier
is much higher. In some areas, particularly in the smaller villages there is a concern that young
people are unable to afford to buy a home, leading to a population imbalance skewed towards
those retired and elderly people, and an inability to attract younger key workers. There is a
concern that some services such as rural primary schools will become increasingly less viable.
2.2.10 Between 2016 and 2036 the population of North Norfolk is forecast to grow by around 11,000
people (103,587 - 114,850 - 2016 National Projections). This represents an 11% increase and
to accommodate this increase in population, address the changing needs of those who already
live here, and to make a meaningful contribution towards providing an increased supply of
affordable homes, it is projected that at least 9,600 new homes will need to be provided. As
well as growing, the population will continue to age and by the end of the plan period in 2036
around 40% of the population will be over 65 years of age and a smaller proportion will be
economically active.
2.2.11 Around 8% of the homes in the District are used as second homes, and 1% of homes in the
District are currently recorded as long term vacant - a reduction from 3% in 2018. In some
communities particularly in the west of the District the proportion of second and holiday homes
is between 20% and 40%, partly due to the large numbers of purpose built holiday homes and
chalet parks in some areas.
2.2.12 Meeting the housing requirement, not only in terms of numbers, but also in terms of types
(affordable and elderly person’ s accommodation), represents a significant challenge.
Strengthening the Local Economy
2.2.13 The economy of North Norfolk is dominated by tourism and the service sector and has seen a
decline in jobs in manufacturing and agricultural employment in recent years. It is mainly a
low-wage economy dominated by small businesses. Parts of the District are strongly influenced
by the close proximity of Norwich with its wider range of jobs and strong retail offer and the
14 Setting Climate Commitments for North Norfolk Quantifying the implications of the United Nations Paris Agreement for North Norfolk:
Tyndall Centre for Climate Change 2021Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 16
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectivesclosure of defence establishments at Coltishall, Neatishead, Sculthorpe and West Raynham
has also drawn jobs away from the area, with limited subsequent investment. The recent
completion of the Norwich Northern Distributor Road (NDR) may open new opportunities for
business growth by improving access to local markets and the wider economy.
2.2.14 Given its peripheral location and extensive coastline, the economic prosperity of North Norfolk
is irrevocably linked to the success of its tourism sector (although E-commerce may present
opportunities to overcome problems of peripherally). A recent tourism study of North Norfolk
noted that the area has one of the most distinctive and diverse tourism offers in the East of
England, with the main appeal being its ‘unique environmental assets’  of coastline and beaches,
the Broads and inland areas of countryside, which ‘therefore represent the core foundation for
the future development of tourism within North Norfolk ’. Tourism is vital to North Norfolk’ s
economy; in 2017, accounting for 28.4% of all employment, 8,827,700 trips were made to the
District (day and staying), accounting for a total tourism value of £505,109,250. This increased
in 2019, when 9,919,200 trips were made to the District (day and staying), accounting for a
total tourism value of £528,931,378.Tourism currently accounts for 30% of all employment(15).
2.2.15 The provision of a higher number of jobs, of better quality and value, reducing the need to travel
elsewhere for employment, addressing the consequences of a shrinking workforce, and providing
for the growing needs in health and social care are all significant challenges.
Protecting the Natural & Built Heritage of the District
Areas at risk from coastal erosion and flooding
2.2.16 The full length of North Norfolk’ s coastline is either at risk from tidal flooding or subject to cliff
erosion. In addition, much of the inland area at the south-eastern end of North Norfolk, around
the Rivers Ant, Bure and Thurne and their associated broads, and including all or parts of a
number of villages such as Hoveton, Hickling and Ludham, are at risk from either fluvial (river)
or tidal flooding.
2.2.17 Two Shoreline Management Plans, SMP5 'Hunstanton to Kelling Hard' and SMP6 'Kelling Hard
to Lowestoft Ness'(16)set out coastal management for the North Norfolk coastline up to 2105.
These identify areas within which coastal erosion is likely to occur over the next 100 years and
also areas currently at risk from tidal flooding that could suffer permanent inundation as a result
of policies of managed retreat of the shoreline. They identify that several properties and
community facilities, as well as parts of the A149, are at risk from coastal erosion over the
longer term.
Protecting character
2.2.18 North Norfolk’ s landscape has a significant economic, social and community value, contributing
to a sense of identity, well-being, enjoyment and inspiration and being a major contributor to a
strong tourism industry. The low-lying coast, the coastal cliff sections and the inland landforms
are some of the finest of their kind in the British Isles.
2.2.19 The landscape of North Norfolk has been strongly influenced by the sea and is composed of,
and enriched by, the combination of distinctive geological and geomorphological features.
These features have resulted in valuable characteristics including nationally important wildlife
habitats as well as features of cultural significance such as archaeological deposits, field
patterns, building materials and settlement forms.The link between people and place is ingrained
15 Economic Impact of Tourism North Norfolk 2019, Destination Research
16 https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/tasks/coastal-management/vie w-shoreline-management-plans17 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 2into the landscape of North Norfolk. This interaction, over millennia, between people living in
and using the area, overlain with the geology and landforms, has resulted in the unique qualities
and natural beauty we see today.
2.2.20 There are large areas of designated international and national landscapes including the North
Norfolk Coast Special Area of Protection & Special Protection Area SPA, The Wash and North
Norfolk Coast SAC, Norfolk Valley Fens SAC, Overstrand Cliffs SAC, River Wensum, SAC and
North Norfolk Coast Ramsar Site. A significant part of the District is designated as an Area of
Outstanding National Beauty, AONB. The District also includes parts of the Norfolk Broad’ s,
(which sits outside the Local Plan), many Sites of Special Scientific interest (SSSI), Country
Wildlife Sites (CWS) and designated Open Spaces within settlements. The District contains a
number of nationally significant designed landscapes, these are designated as Registered
Historic Parks and Gardens, which include Voewood (II*), Holkham (I) and Sheringham Hall
(II*).
2.2.21 As well as its picturesque coastline, rural landscape and big skies, North Norfolk is known for
its rich historic environment. The District's built heritage is an intrinsic part of its character and
stands as testament to how the area has been shaped and evolved over time. This rich historic
environment manifests itself in many forms and this is reflected in the number and variety of
designations seen across the District. There are 86 Scheduled Monuments, 2,265 Listed
Buildings, 33 Registered Parks and Gardens, 81 Conservation Areas, and over 200 buildings
subject to Local Listings.
Health & Wellbeing
2.2.22 It is important to ensure that leisure, retail and service facilities are provided locally in order to
reduce car travel and to allow access for all. This is a difficult challenge in the face of the rural
nature and dispersed population, centralisation of services and competition from the
concentrations of retail in fewer, larger centres. However, town centres are at the heart of the
Government’ s vision for developing and supporting successful, thriving, safer and inclusive
communities and are seen to underpin the Spatial Strategy for the District.
2.2.23 North Norfolk’ s retail centres offer an important role in meeting the day-to-day shopping and
service requirements of their local resident populations, local businesses and the broader needs
of day-trippers and tourists. Whilst the visitor and tourist market helps to underpin the vitality
and viability of a number of the District's towns it also creates significant fluctuations in catchment
populations and spend throughout the year. The increasing centralisation of service provision,
lack of public transport and the dispersed nature of a large part of the population increases the
reliance on the car in order to facilitate access to services and facilities.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 18
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives2.3 Spatial Vision
2.3.1 The following Vision  for North Norfolk and the associated Objectives  provide the foundation
for the policies which follow.They are based on an understanding of the nature of North Norfolk
and the key development issues which the area faces over the plan period as outlined in the
previous sections.They reflect the provisions of current National Planning Policy to ensure that
all development needs are addressed in a sustainable way and will contribute towards the
overarching vision for the County as a whole as agreed by each of the Norfolk Authorities as
part of the Duty to Co-operate.
Vision for North Norfolk
In 2036, residents and visitors to North Norfolk will enjoy a high quality of life. The District will have
retained its distinct identity as a unique and attractive coastal and rural tourist destination and will
have a diverse and thriving economy, with vibrant and appealing towns and villages which act as
employment and service centres for their surrounding rural areas. Residents will have increased
access to good quality affordable homes, a wider range of local higher skilled and better paid jobs,
and good quality services and facilities close to where they live.
The towns of North Walsham, Fakenham and Cromer will have been the focus for a significant
proportion of the required development. A mix of resource efficient and secure residential
development will have been delivered to meet local needs including affordable housing, homes for
the elderly and those with specialist accommodation needs. The necessary infrastructure and
community facilities/services will be in place to support this growth. In the wider countryside,
appropriate small-scale development will have been delivered where this meets local needs and
supports the long-term sustainability of a settlement.
The quality of the natural and built environment, the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, the Norfolk
and Suffolk Broads and their setting will have been protected and enhanced. The overall diversity
and quality of North Norfolk’ s countryside and natural environment will have been maintained and
the District's many Conservation Areas and Listed Buildings will have been conserved or enhanced.
There will be better access to the countryside and green spaces for local communities. New
development will have been provided and designed to minimise resource and energy use, minimise
the risks arising from flooding and coastal erosion, protect nature and improve biodiversity, and
delivered in ways that adapts to and mitigates the inevitable changes to the climate.19 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 22.4 Strategic Aims & Objectives
2.4.1 To achieve the Vision for North Norfolk this Plan contains the following aims and
related Objectives:
1. Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Development, by:
Minimising the demand for resources, enhancing the natural environment and mitigating
the impacts arising from climate change.
Facilitating the creation and maintenance of inclusive and environmentally sustainable
communities, making the best and most efficient use of already developed land, buildings
and natural resources, reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing low carbon
homes.
Focusing larger scale development into areas where services will be available, where
facilities can be supported and where new development encourages use of a choice of
sustainable travel modes.
Managing and adapting to the impacts of coastal erosion and flooding by restricting
development in areas where it would expose people and property to risks and facilitating
the replacement of buildings at risk.
Minimising water use, protecting water quality and minimising the impacts of air, land,
light, and water pollution.
2. Protecting Character, by:
Protecting, conserving and enhancing the natural environment and valuing green
infrastructure for the many functions it performs.
Contributing to the positive management of change in the historic environment, protecting,
enhancing and maintaining the unique qualities and character of the District, the wider
landscape and its designated and un-designated heritage assets.
Ensuring high quality design that respects its context.
Minimising impacts on and providing net gains for biodiversity, including the enhancement
of Green Infrastructure and ecological corridors.
3. Meeting Accommodation Needs, by:
Delivering the quantity of homes necessary to meet the assessed needs of the District.
Providing a variety of house types, sizes and tenures including affordable homes, homes
suitable for the elderly, those wishing to build their own homes and those with disabilities
or who require specialist forms of accommodation.
Encouraging high quality, sustainable, and climate change resilient design which makes
the best use of improvements in technology.
4. Enabling Economic Growth, by:
Promoting and supporting economic growth, diversifying and broadening the economic
base of the District, enabling inward investment and supporting the growth of existing
businesses.
Promoting the vitality and viability of the District's town centres.
Promoting improved broadband connectivity.
Maximising the economic, environmental and social benefits of tourism
5. Delivering Healthy Communities, by:
Encouraging the creation of a network of accessible formal and informal green spaces.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 20
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & ObjectivesProtecting and enhancing community facilities, existing infrastructure, services, and public
transport.
Locating development so as to improve access to key services by public transport and
facilitate increased walking and cycling.
Improving the accessibility and resource efficiency of new homes21 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives 2Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 22
2Spatial Portrait, Vision, Aims & Objectives3 Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth
3.0.1 Climate change is a significant challenge and its effects are seen globally and locally.
The UK government has set in law the requirement to bring greenhouse gas emissions
to net zero by 2050(17)and the Council has gone further, declaring a Climate Change
Emergency in 2019, with the aim of putting environmental considerations at the heart of
its service delivery.Through its Environmental Charter in 2021 the Council has
subsequently pledged to reduce its own emissions to net zero by 2030 and in doing so
is seeking to assist in changing attitudes, perceptions and investment decisions across
the District. Addressing climate change is an integral part of sustainable development
and development guided by the strategic policies in the Local Plan will play a key role
in helping to achieve reductions in greenhouse gas emissions at a local level through
land use policies.
3.0.2 Local authorities have a responsibility to help to secure progress on meeting the UK’ s emissions
reduction targets both through direct influence and by bringing others together and encouraging
coordinated local action. Local Plans can play a central role in helping to facilitate this key
national environmental objective. Effective strategic plan-making can help deliver climate change
resilient sustainable growth and help address the challenges that climate change brings,
complementing measures outside of the planning sphere and ensuring climate change
considerations are central in proposals.
3.0.3 A fundamental principle of the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) is to ensure strategic
plans include proactive planning measures to address climate change through resilience,
mitigation and adaptation and which support the transition to a low carbon economy. This can
be achieved through encouraging reductions in energy use, adoption of low carbon
technology, promoting low carbon modes of travel, directing growth to the most sustainable
locations, through design, and via the use of renewable resources and energy.  Planning’ s role
is one of facilitation through mitigation, adaptation and resilience. It forms part of the hierarchy
set out in the NPPF to avoid, reduce and as a last resort, compensate for any adverse impacts
from development.The approach is holistic and not limited to one single strategy or policy.This
Local Plan addresses climate change through a number of policies, which when taken as a
whole, seek to shape the economic, environmental and social landscape for the better by
minimising the vulnerability of new development to the potential impacts of climate change, 
ensuring that it avoids risk areas wherever possible, and is resilient to future risks.
3.0.4 Mitigating  climate change through land use planning is about addressing the causes of climate
change and can be achieved in a number of ways:
Locating development as near to existing key services and facilities as possible;
Delivering decentralised energy supplies and promoting its use in existing buildings;
Supporting the delivery of low carbon and renewable energy;
Ensuring new development is as energy efficient as possible;
3.0.5 Adapting to climate change is about addressing the consequences of climate change and can
be achieved through a number of ways including:
Delivering on site sustainable drainage systems;
Reducing water consumption;
Adopting precautionary approaches to areas liable to flooding and at risk from coastal
change;
17 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/ne ws/uk-becomes-first-major-econom y-to-pass-net-z ero-emissions-la w23 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3Ensuring that the design of buildings helps them remain cool in summer and warm in
winter;
Ensuring biodiversity enhancements.
Key Messages
3.0.6 Action on climate change is embedded throughout this Local Plan and is an integral part of
many policies. Collectively the Local Plan sets a framework on how climate change could and
should be considered, in order to achieve national and local targets and climate resilient
sustainable development. It is recognised that each planning application has its particular
circumstances, where decisions and actions will need to reflect not just local considerations,
but also wider material considerations. Addressing climate change is a shared responsibility
and the challenge is not just to develop to minimum targets, but to seek a step change across
the district in development considerations and encourage modal shifts in practices. Consequently,
as individuals we need to take responsibility and also make changes to the way we live and
encourage change so that collectively, we can move towards a more sustainable future and
where possible, go beyond local and national targets.
3.0.7 The climate change agenda is evolving and throughout the lifetime of this Local Plan it is
expected that there will be further national updates and announcements on policy direction and
requirements. Specifically, there is emerging legislation that once enacted will bring further
updates and changes to  national planning policies, Building Regulations, building standards
and infrastructure provision. Further legislative changes are also expected from central
Government in the short and medium term relating to building standards, environment and
agriculture.
3.0.8 Figure 4 illustrates how climate change is being addressed through the Local Plan :Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 24
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable GrowthContribute positively 
to community health 
and well-being through improved accessibility,  multi-functional green infrastructure and open space provision•Policy CC11: Green Infrastructure
•Policy CC12: Trees, Hedgerows & Woodland
•Policy SS3: Community-Led Development
•Policy HC1: Health & Wellbeing
•Policy HC2: Provision & Retention of Open Spaces
•Policy HOU2: Delivering the Right Mix of Homes
•Policy HOU9: Minimum Space Standards
Avoid and reduce 
the risk of flooding, deliver sustainable drainage systems and mitigate and adapt to coastal change •Policy CC5: Coastal Change Management
•Policy CC6: Coastal Change Adaptation
•Policy CC7: Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage
Deliver low carbon 
and renewable energy opportunities, protect the quality of the environment and reduce the use  of natural resources •Policy CC2: Renewable & Low Carbon Energy
•Policy CC4: Water Efficiency
•Policy CC8: Electric Vehicle Charging
•Policy CC13: Protecting Environmental Quality
Achieve a high 
standard of environmental sustainability that provides energy efficient, adaptable and accessible development  •Policy CC3: Sustainable Construction, Energy Efficiency &
Carbon Reduction
•Policy ENV8: High Quality Design
•Policy HOU7: Re-use of Rural Buildings in the Countryside
•Policy HOU8: Accessible & Adaptable Homes
Conserve and 
enhance the quality of the natural and built environments•Policy CC10: Biodiversity Net Gain
•Policy CC11: Green Infrastructure
•Policy CC12: Trees, Hedgerows & Woodland
•Policy CC13: Protecting Environmental Quality
•Policy ENV1: Norfolk Coast AONB & The Broads
•Policy ENV2: Protection & Enhancement of Landscape & Settlement Character
•Policy ENV3: Heritage & Undeveloped Coast
•Policy ENV4: Biodiversity & Geodiversity
•Policy ENV5: Impacts on International & European Sites: Recreational Impact
Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy
•Policy ENV6: Protection of Amenity
•Policy ENV7: Protecting & Enhancing the Historic Environment
•Policy ENV8: High Quality Design
•Policy E5: Signage & Shopfronts•Policy CC8: Electric Vehicle Charging
•Policy CC9: Sustainable Transport
•Policy SS1: Spatial Strategy
•Policy HC3: Provision & Retention of Local Facilities
•Policy HC8: Safeguarding Land for Sustainable Transport
•Policy HOU1: Delivering Sufficient Homes
•Policy E1: Employment Land
•Policy E4: Retail & Town Centre Development
•Policy E6: New Tourist Accommodation, Static Caravans, 
Holiday
 Lodges & Extensions to Existing Sites
•Policy E7: T
ouring Caravan & Camping Sites Focus the majority 
of development in 
areas that sustain services and facilities that reduces the need to travel and offers a mix of sustainable travel modesLocal Plan Climate 
Change Principles
(Policy CC1)Most Relevant Local Plan PoliciesFigure 4 How Climate Change is Addressed by the Local Plan25 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3Climate Change Principles
3.0.9 The overarching vision of the Local Plan in North Norfolk is to contribute to the achievement of
climate resilient sustainable development. Development will be expected to make a positive
contribution towards the social, economic and environmental sustainability of North Norfolk and
its communities.These three roles are mutually dependent and cannot be undertaken in isolation.
In achieving sustainable development, economic, social and environmental gains will be sought
jointly, wherever possible.
3.0.10 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires that there should be a presumption
in favour of Sustainable Development on which all Plans should be based. This should be
implemented through clear policies, which guide how the presumption will be applied locally.
The policies in this section seek to guide development to achieve sustainable solutions and
taken as a whole, with the remaining polices of the Development Plan, constitutes the Council’ s
view on  what sustainable development means in practice. When determining applications for
planning permission, the Council will seek to approve applications, which deliver sustainable
growth in accordance with the provisions of this Plan.
3.1 Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth
3.1.1 The purpose of this policy is to set out the key guiding principles that development proposals
should address in order to ensure that new development positively contributes to mitigating
and adapting to climate change and delivers climate resilient sustainable growth to address
the challenges most relevant for North Norfolk.
Policy CC 1
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth
1. Development will be delivered with the highest regard to sustainable development and climate
change principles and contribute in line with the scale and type of development to achieve
the following principles:
a. Mitigating and improving resilience to the effects of climate change;
b. Making the fullest contribution towards minimising greenhouse gas emissions and
maximising low carbon infrastructure;
c. Focusing larger scale development into areas where services will be available, where
facilities can be supported, and where new development facilitates a step change towards 
choices in sustainable modes of transport through careful design and balanced mix of
uses that supports walking and cycling as well as public transport and encourages a
choice of sustainable travel modes;
d. Contributing positively to community health and well-being through improved accessibility,
multi-functional green infrastructure & open space provision, careful, high quality
sustainable design and enhancing local distinctiveness;
e. Avoiding areas at risk of flooding and coastal erosion and seeking to reduce flood risk
elsewhere;
f. Facilitating the creation and maintenance of inclusive and environmentally sustainable
communities, making the best and most efficient use of already developed land, buildings
and natural resources;
g. Promoting the efficient use of land and resources, minimising water use, protecting water
quality and minimising the impacts of air, land, light, and water pollution;Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 26
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growthh. Conserves and enhances natural & historic environments and the landscape character
of the District;
i. Contributes positively and enhances the natural environment ensuring habitat creation
and net gain in biodiversity.
2. Planning applications that accord with the policies in the Plan (and, where relevant, with
policies in Neighbourhood Plans) will be approved without delay, unless material considerations
indicate otherwise.
3. Where there are no relevant policies or where the policies which are most important to the
determination of the application are out of date at the time of making the decision, the Council
will grant permission, unless:
a. The application of policies in the National Planning Policy Framework that protect areas
or assets of particular importance provides a clear reason for refusing permission; or,
b. Any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh
the benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy
Framework taken as a whole.
3.2 Renewable & Low Carbon Energy
The purpose of this policy is to help increase the use and supply of renewable and low carbon energy.
3.2.1 In June 2019, the government committed to a legally binding target requiring the country to be
net zero carbon by 2050. The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires that Local
Plans develop a positive strategy to promote energy generation from renewable and low carbon
sources. The NPPF encourages Local Plans to maximise renewable and low carbon energy
development, whilst ensuring that adverse impacts are addressed satisfactorily and also, to
consider identifying suitable areas for development and support community-led initiatives for
renewable and low carbon energy.
3.2.2 The Framework states that when determining planning applications for renewable and low
carbon development, local planning authorities should approve the application if its impacts
are (or can be made) acceptable.
3.2.3 North Norfolk declared a Climate Emergency in April 2019 and with the implementation of a
Green Agenda and the production of an Environmental Charter, renewable energy alternatives
and low carbon development are at the forefront of future plans for North Norfolk.
3.2.4 Whilst the Council is keen to support renewable energy developments, such developments can
have adverse impacts on the natural and built environment, as well as residential amenity.
These potential adverse impacts need to be carefully managed.
3.2.5 The North Norfolk Landscape Sensitivity Assessment SPD (LSA) (adopted January 2021)(18)
provides evidence and context for policies within the Plan and has been used to inform the
Renewable and Low Carbon Energy policy and to assist in the identification of potentially
suitable areas for all types of renewable energy development. The LSA uses the adopted
Landscape Character Assessment 2021 SPD (LCA) as the basis for identifying the overall
sensitivity to different renewable energy developments for each Landscape Character Type
(LCT) the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and airfields, indicating areas that are
likely to be more or less sensitive in the landscape, ranging from high to low sensitivity.
18 www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/lcsa27 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 33.2.6 In order to provide greater certainty in providing opportunities for renewable energy development,
whilst protecting sensitive landscape character types within the district, the policy directs
proposals for all types of renewable energy development to be located within areas of the
District that do not exceed ‘Moderate-High’  within the LSA sensitivity classification. Careful
consideration will also be needed in areas close to high sensitivity landscapes, such as the
AONB, Heritage Coast and Undeveloped Coast and the cumulative impacts of an increasing
number of renewable developments within an area.
3.2.7 In addition to this spatial aspect, all proposals will be assessed against a comprehensive set
of criteria, which include requirements around the restoration of a site if a renewable energy
development is subsequently removed.
Onshore Wind Energy
3.2.8 The PPG states that proposals for wind energy development should not be considered
acceptable unless it is located in an area identified as suitable for wind energy development in
a Local or Neighbourhood Plan and following consultation, it can be demonstrated that the
planning impacts identified by the affected local community have been fully addressed.
3.2.9 Wind energy development proposals will be supported in principle where it can be demonstrated
that the landscape sensitivity for the proposed scale of turbine does not exceed ‘Moderate -
High’. This sensitivity classification maintains opportunities for wind energy development of up
to 60m hub/100m tip height across the least sensitive parts of the District.This approach would
also allow for large scale wind energy proposals (80m hub, 130m tip wind turbines) at four of
the district’ s airfields; West Raynham, Sculthorpe, Little Snoring and Coltishall. All proposals
should complement the particular characteristics of the surrounding landscape and the LCA
will assist in assessing the impact of individual proposals.
Offshore Wind Energy
3.2.10 In November 2020, the government published 'The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial
Revolution'(19), which sets out the ten areas that are being promoted in order to achieve the
net zero carbon target by 2050. Point 1 relates to the aim of quadrupling offshore wind capacity
and by 2030, the aim is to produce 40GW of offshore wind, including 1GW of innovative floating
offshore wind in the windiest parts of our seas. As such, there is considerable potential for
offshore wind power to contribute to renewable energy production and while offshore proposals
are not subject to local authority planning consent, permission is required for the associated
on-land infrastructure, including cable routes. To date, North Norfolk has positively embraced
offshore wind developments in the North Sea. However, there is concern about the potential
increasing number of cable corridors and grid related infrastructures, including substations and
cable relay stations, being proposed by offshore wind developments, due to the potential loss
of landscape features and habitats and their cumulative adverse impacts. Consequently, the
Council is encouraging and supportive, at a National level, of the development of an Offshore
Ring Main, to minimise the construction impacts on the coastal region in the short term and to
rationalise grid connections for greater efficiency in the long term.
Solar Photovoltaic Farms
3.2.11 Field-sized solar farms provide an opportunity for greater energy production as well as potential
enhancement to biodiversity, but it is important that they are carefully planned and screened
to ensure any amenity and visual impacts are minimised. The PPG encourages the effective
use of land by focussing large scale solar farms on previously developed and non-agricultural
land, provided that it is not of high environmental value.
19 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/the-ten-point-plan-f or-a-g reen-industr ial-re volutionProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 28
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth3.2.12 The Council is supportive of the use of low carbon technologies within all new development
and encourages the incorporation of integrated solar panels on new homes to help meet the
energy efficiency construction aims set out in Policy CC3 Sustainable Construction, Energy
Efficiency & Carbon Reduction.
Industrial type development 
3.2.13 Anaerobic Digestion (AD) plants can be classified into two general categories: those that process
predominantly agricultural feedstock (such as manures, slurries, crops and crop residues); and
those that use predominantly municipal, commercial and industrial waste streams as feedstock.
The biogas produced can either be burned on-site to generate heat and/or power (Combined
Heat & Power - CHP); or upgraded to biomethane for injection into the national gas grid.
3.2.14 Anaerobic Digestion proposals are regarded as waste treatment facilities, where feedstock is
classified as waste under relevant legislation and so relevant related national and county best
practice guidance and policies will apply. Anaerobic Digestion proposals raise a number of
planning issues including visual and landscape impacts arising from industrial scale plant /
buildings; location concerns, in terms of sustainability relative to the source of biomass and
where relevant, combined heat and power (CHP); electricity and/or gas grid connection),
potential odour impacts, air emissions, noise impacts, protection of the water environment and
traffic impacts.
3.2.15 Energy storage has multiple benefits including allowing a greater use of renewable technology
such as solar, wind and tidal to generate electricity (which may not always be generated at the
time it is most needed) and greater security of supply by providing a grid which is more resistant
to disruptions. A change to the Infrastructure Planning (Electricity Storage Facilities) Order
2020(20) allows battery storage to bypass the Nationally Significant Infrastructure Project (NSIP)
process, which came in to force on 2 December 2020. This means that storage projects above
50MW in England will now be assessed by local planning authorities.
Policy CC 2
Renewable & Low Carbon Energy
1. Renewable energy proposals, including from community-led initiatives, will be supported and
considered in the context of Sustainable Development and climate change, taking account of
the wider environmental, social and economic benefits of renewable energy gain and its
contribution towards energy supply.
2. Proposals for renewable energy technology including the landward infrastructure for offshore
renewable schemes or the integration of renewable technology on existing or proposed
structures with any associated infrastructure, will be supported where the site is located in an
area that does not exceed ‘moderate-high’  sensitivity within the Landscape Sensitivity
Assessment 2021 SPD and it is demonstrated that any individual or cumulative adverse
impacts would be satisfactorily mitigated in respect of all of the following:
a. the visual impacts on the surrounding landscape, townscape and landscape character;
b. the special qualities of all designated nationally important landscapes and heritage assets
including their settings;
c. the special qualities of nationally and internationally designated conservation sites and
their qualifying features, habitats and biodiversity;
d. residential and local amenity relating to (visual dominance, noise, fumes, odour, vibration,
glint and glare, shadow flicker traffic generation, broadcast interference;
20 https://www .legislation.go v.uk/uksi/2020/1218/made29 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3e. air traffic safety, radar, reflected light, radar and telecommunications; and,
f. there is appropriate details / mechanism in place to restore the land to its original use
and the removal of the technology at the end of its generating term.
3. The location of all planning proposals for wind turbines will be informed by Figure 5 - Wind
Energy Areas , which details the suitable areas for such development and, following
consultation, must demonstrate that the planning impacts identified by the affected local
community have been fully addressed.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 30
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable GrowthWind Energy Areas
Airbases: Small to Large Scale Wind Energy AreaSettlement Hierarchy
Small to Medium Scale Wind Energy Area
Small Growth Town
Large Growth Village
Small Growth VillageLarge Growth TownMovement Network
Airbases: Small Scale Wind Energy AreaMain Road RoutesFigure 5 - Wind Energy Area s
*Further information can be found in the North Norfolk Landscape
Sensitivity Assessment SPD 2021
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.FAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAM
STALHAM
HOVETONSHERINGHAM
HOLTWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEA
MundesleyBlakeney
LudhamBriston & Melton
Constable
Sea PallingAldborough
BadersfieldSculthorpeRoughton
Corpusty & SaxthorpeOverstrand
High Kelling
TrunchSouthrepps
BactonLangham
Little Walsingham
HorningLittle Snoring
CatfieldSutton
Potter HeighamWalcottBinhamWeybourne
East & West
Runton
Happisburgh
Figure 5 Wind Energy Areas31 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 33.3 Sustainable Construction, Energy Efficiency & Carbon Reduction
The purpose of this policy is to promote a proactive strategy to mitigate and adapt to climate change
through moving towards a low carbon future in building construction.
3.3.1 The Governments’  Clean Growth Strategy 2017 specifically highlights the role of Local Planning
Authorities through local leadership in moving to a productive low carbon economy. The NPPF
along with the Section 182 of the Planning Act 2008 and the Planning and Energy Act 2008
puts a positive emphasis and a legal duty on local authorities to include policies on climate
change mitigation and adaption in Development Plan Documents. The Climate Change Act
passed in 2008 committed the UK to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% by
2050 when compared to 1990 levels. In 2019 The Government introduced a legally binding
target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050(21), making the UK the first
major economy in the world to legislate a zero net emissions target.
3.3.2 The Governments publication of its response to the Future Homes Standard(22) reinforces its
intent on moving to a carbon zero ready environment and clearly sets out the direction of travel
for the development industry and the importance of minimum energy efficiency standards for
buildings to help achieve the net zero target.This approach is reinforced through the publication
of the Governments Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener in October 2021(23) and which sets
out a carbon reduction strategy and ambitions for the decarbonisation of the economy across
all sectors.
3.3.3 Local authorities are required to adopt proactive strategies to reduce consumption of fossil fuel,
mitigate climate changes and adapt to its effect. The design and construction of buildings can
directly affect the environment in terms of energy use and subsequent generation of greenhouse
gases, as well as consumption of natural resources. The policy measures to reduce the
consumption of energy and natural resources are aligned to the direction of travel of national
policy through the use of a progressive fabric first approaches alongside the use of low carbon
heating systems and low carbon technology.
3.3.4 The ambition of the approach is that energy efficient, low carbon homes and buildings will
become the norm in new build developments in North Norfolk over the lifetime of this Plan. By
making new homes and other buildings more energy efficient and embracing smart and low
carbon technologies, we can not only improve the energy efficiency of peoples’  homes, but we
can potentially boost economic growth, reduce carbon emissions, and be more cost effective
in long term management and day to day running costs of buildings, helping to reduce fuel
poverty and improving health.
3.3.5 The Council expects all new developments to apply the energy hierarchy by reducing the need
for energy, use energy efficiently, supply energy efficiently and use low and zero carbon
technologies and natural resources and, in doing so, go beyond the current minimum standards
required by the National Building Regulations. Developers are free to vary specifications to
meet the policy target(s) through fabric improvements, design, and through technology provided
the overall carbon reduction required by the Policy is achieved, or bettered. A Compliance
Statement  is required as a validation requirement setting out energy performance and the
level of reduction in carbon to be achieved. Proposals must achieve the policy minimum and
seek progressive betterment in energy performance and carbon reduction in relation to the
Target Emission Rate of the 2013 Edition of the 2010 Building Regulations (Part L) (amended
2016) for residential developments, and the BREEAM Very Good Standard for larger commercial
buildings with a floor area exceeding 250sqm. The 250sqm threshold is intended to avoid
imposing the requirement on small scale/modest structures.
21 www .gov.uk/go vernment/ne ws/uk-becomes-first-major-econom y-to-pass-net-z ero-emissions-la w
22 www.gov.uk/go vernment/consultations/the-future-homes-standard-changes-to-par t-l-and-par t-f-of-the-b uilding-regulations-f or-ne w-dw ellings
(January 2021)
23 www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/net-z ero-str ategy www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-strategyProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 32
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth3.3.6 The NPPF requires a positive approach to promoting energy efficiency and in doing so the
Policy approach lays the foundations for the Governments Future Homes Standards currently
anticipated to be introduced in a progressive way between 2022 and 2025. The Standard is
expected to set out measures and time scales to achieve further reductions in carbon beyond
the interim 31% envisaged of between 75-80% and lay the requirements for carbon zero ready
development in order to capitalise on the decarbonated power system by 2035(24). This would
typically mean that a new home built to the Future Homes Standard would have a heat pump,
a waste water heat recovery system, triple glazing and minimum insulation standards for walls,
floors and roofs that significantly limit any heat loss and result in significant improvements in
the fabric of buildings and thermal efficiency. The Government has indicated that it is intending
to consult on the full technical details and building regulation requirements in 2023 and introduce
these higher standards from 2025.
3.3.7 The initial policy reduction target (31%) will be met and then surpassed once building regulations
are strengthened and in place through the implementation of the Future Homes Standard. In
setting an incremental and progressive policy requirement for carbon reduction now, the
approach recognises that the drive to zero carbon ready, should start as soon as practical and
sets a backstop date of 2035 to ensure that all new homes meet a net zero minimum
performance standard and contribute to meeting the national 2050 net green house gas emission
target, where it is cost effective, practical and affordable. Such an approach aligns with the
Government's 2035 ambition set out in the October 2021 Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Strategy.
3.3.8 In promoting energy efficiency the policy is aiding the creation of the step change required in
construction techniques and energy efficiency of dwellings ahead of the governments intended
Future Homes Standard legislation and is in line with the wider Council ambition. It signals that
promoters and developers in North Norfolk need to invest in supply chains, up-skill, update
designs and incorporate mitigation and adaptation measures and technology in order to support
the delivery of the lowest levels of carbon emissions in order to start to reduce the future
proportion of emissions from the building sector and de-carbonise new buildings across North
Norfolk from the start of the Local Plan.
3.3.9 Compliance will be required through planning conditions including BREEAM certification for
non-residential proposals.
3.3.10 Technology and national policy is changing rapidly in this area and the approach will be
supported by Supplementary Planning Guidance and if required, a further implementation note.
Policy CC 3
Sustainable Construction, Energy Efficiency & Carbon Reduction
New development is required to achieve a progressively higher standard of environmental
sustainability.
1. New build residential development, including replacement dwellings, must achieve reductions
in CO2 emissions of a minimum 31% below the Target Emission Rate of the 2013 Edition
National Building Regulation, (amended 2016) (Part L) unless superseded by national policy
or legislation; This should be achieved through:
a. the implementation of the energy hierarchy; prioritising the use of design and energy
efficient measures followed by the provision of appropriate renewable and low carbon
energy technologies;
24 As set out in relation to power supply in the Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener Strategy33 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3b. incorporation of measures to maximise opportunities for solar gain through
building orientation, natural ventilation, use of green roofs, natural shading, and other
appropriate measures;
c. by 2035 all new dwellings and workplaces should be zero carbon ready.
2. All development proposals should be accompanied by a separate compliance statement
setting out:
a. the approach taken to address energy efficiency within the design and technical
specification of the proposed development;
b. comparative energy performance and carbon emission rates of the proposal in relation
to the benchmarked Target Emmissions Rate.
3. The above standards should be achieved as a minimum unless, it can be clearly demonstrated
that this is either not technically feasible or viable.
4. Proposals for non-residential development above 250sqm floor space are required to achieve
a minimum of BREEAM Very Good Standard or equivalent.
3.4 Water Efficiency
The purpose of this policy  is to reduce the use of water by requiring developments to meet the
higher optional water use standard of 110 litres/person/day, (lpppd), as set out in Building Regulations,
Part G2 2016. or any higher standard subsequently set nationally or locally.
3.4.1 North Norfolk, like many parts of Norfolk and wider East Anglia, experiences low levels of rainfall
and is defined by the Environment Agency as an area of water stress. At the same time the
District contains internationally important water based environmentally protected sites. Anglian
Water seeks the continuation of demand management and water efficiency techniques through
Local Plan policies requiring new homes to meet or exceed the tighter water efficiency standard
of 110 litres per person per day as described the current Building Regulations.
3.4.2 In an area of serious water stress, incorporating water demand management into development
from the start promotes water efficiency and resilience, along with the protection of water quality
and protection of areas of environmental importance within and adjacent to North Norfolk.
3.4.3 For non-residential development and in line with local and national drive for good progressive
water management sustainable water use and operation of buildings is required through
compliance with BREEAM “Very Good”  water efficient standard.
3.4.4 Water reuse and recycling and rainwater and storm water harvesting and other suitable measures
should be incorporated wherever feasible to reduce demand on mains water supply. Projects
are expected to aspire beyond these ratings where possible to do so. Applications should
include sufficient detail as to intended standard and set out the measures to be incorporated
to enable compliance
3.4.5 Viability of development is not affected by water efficiency requirements. The cost per dwelling
of implementing the higher Building Regulations water efficiency standard and BREEAM is
marginal, with the Governments own assessment putting the cost at around £10 per dwelling
and BREEAM compliance between 0.1 and 0.2%. The North Norfolk Viability Assessment has
shown that such a low additional cost will have no impact on development viability.
3.4.6 Compliance will be required through planning condition and the Building Regulations process
for residential and condition for BREEAM certification for non-residential.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 34
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable GrowthPolicy CC 4
Water Efficiency
All new development must be designed and constructed in a way that minimises its impact on
water resources.
1. All new dwellings, including building conversions, must be designed and constructed in a way
that enables them to meet or exceed Building Regulations Part G, amended 2016 water
efficiency higher optional standard or any higher standard subsequently established nationally
or locally.
2. Non-housing development will meet the BREEAM “Very Good”  water efficiency standard, or
equivalent successor.
3. Projects are expected to aspire beyond these ratings where possible to do so. Applications
should include sufficient detail as to intended standard and set out the measures to be
incorporated to enable compliance.
3.5 Coastal Change Management
The purpose of this policy  is to reduce the risk from coastal change by managing the types of
development in potential risk areas.
3.5.1 North Norfolk’ s coast is in places low-lying and in others it is characterised by cliffs comprising
soft silts, clays, sand, gravel and other material that is susceptible to erosion. Erosion has taken
place over thousands of years and these natural processes will continue to affect the coastline.
Hard defences protect settlements such as Sheringham, Cromer, Overstrand and Mundesley
as well as large sections between Happisburgh and Winterton Ness.
3.5.2 The  National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) states that Plans should reduce the risk from
coastal change by avoiding inappropriate development in vulnerable areas and not exacerbating
the impacts of physical changes to the coast. It states that Plans should identify Coastal Change
Management Areas (CCMA) which cover areas likely to be affected by physical changes to the
coast.The Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) states that a Coastal Change Management Area
should be defined where change is likely to be significant over the next 100 years. The PPG
states that Shoreline Management Plans (SMPs) should be taken into account. The NPPF
states that Plans should be clear as to what development will be appropriate in the Coastal
Change Management Areas and in what circumstances. The National Planning Practice
Guidance states that residential development will not be appropriate within a Coastal Change
Management Area but some commercial and community development may be appropriate
within the area depending on the level of risk and the sustainability of the proposals.
3.5.3 SMPs set out the strategic high level policies for the coast.They determine appropriate, strategic
policies for coastal management that balance the many, and often competing, aspirations of
stakeholders with proper regard for economic and environmental sustainability. They include
policy statements for discrete lengths of coast with shared attributes, broken down into short,
medium and long-term time epochs. SMPs covering the North Norfolk coast are SMP5: North
Norfolk and SMP6: Kelling Hard to Lowestoft Ness (adopted 2012)(25). The SMPs identify a
high level strategy for each section of the coast, divided into the three time bands up to 2105.
The overarching aim of the strategy is to move towards a more sustainable naturally functioning
coast.This will allow for cliff erosion in some areas so that the sediment supports healthy beach
25 https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/tasks/coastal-management/vie w-shoreline-management-plans35 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3levels. Since the adoption of the SMPs, a number of studies have been undertaken to better
understand these natural processes and schemes are being taken forward to extend the life of
existing hard defences such as at Mundesley. An innovative sandscaping scheme was completed
in September 2019, which protects the local communities of Bacton and Walcott and critical
infrastructure at the Bacton Gas Terminal site from the North Sea. This bold new approach is
expected to offer 15-20 years of protection from coastal erosion and the effects of climate
change to this stretch of North Norfolk’ s coastline.
3.5.4 At this time the SMP evidence remains the best available information on likely future coastal
erosion and should be used as a basis for assessment of properties at risk, unless an applicant,
through a Coastal Erosion Vulnerability Assessment (CEVA) provides more up to date, robust,
site-specific information. However, it should be noted that the relevant SMPs and erosion
mapping is likely to be updated during the lifetime of the Local Plan. The Coastal Change
Management Area is defined in this Plan as those areas identified in the Shoreline Management
Plan as potentially at risk over the long term (100 years), or from any updated risk mapping
which may supersede that currently in use.
3.5.5 All planning applications for development within the CCMA must be accompanied by a CEVA
and take into account the potential risk of erosion upon the development. The vulnerability
assessment should be appropriate to the degree of risk and the scale, nature and location of
the development. Where required, it should demonstrate that new development provides wider
sustainability benefits that outweigh the predicted coastal change impact; will be safe through
its planned lifetime, without increasing risk to life or property, or requiring new or improved
coastal defences; does not affect the natural balance and stability of the coastline or exacerbate
the rate of change (beyond the policies of the relevant SMP) and should consider and identify
measures for managing the development at the end of its planned life. The assessment will
also need to demonstrate that the proposed development will not increase the risk of erosion
(e.g. from surface water run-off).
3.5.6 These affected coastal communities may have already experienced blight in the form of reduced
property values and investment and there is recognition of the need for a more flexible approach
to coastal management which allows for natural processes while also enabling coastal
communities to be sustainable, economically viable and maintain attractiveness to visitors.
3.5.7 SMPs provide a strategic approach to the management of the coast. As such, proposals for
new coastal management works or other essential infrastructure should be in accordance with
the management policies identified in the SMPs. Where there is a need or a desire to develop
a coastal management scheme that is contrary to the current SMP , this should be dealt with
through the appropriate SMP processes prior to a planning application being considered.
3.5.8 Within the SMP’ s, Hold The Line areas are those where the policy approach is to hold the
existing defence system where it is, by maintaining or changing the standard of protection. In
areas defined as Hold The Line, new development or the intensification of existing development
that falls outside the CCMA, such as the promenade frontages of Cromer and Sheringham,
also need to consider the impacts of coastal change. Although these areas are protected by
hard defences, the changing sea levels and increased extreme weather events as a result of
climate change will impact on these areas and consideration needs to be given to future-proofing
such developments so that they are designed to withstand likely future conditions. As such, a
CEVA will need to accompany planning applications where the site is within 30 metres of the
landward edge of SMP ‘Hold The Line’  areas, in order to demonstrate that the proposal will not
add to existing risks. T he extent of the CCMA and 30m Hold The Line  Zones are defined on
the Policies Maps, and are shown in this document as indicative maps in 'Appendix 5: Coastal
Change Management Area' .Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 36
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth3.5.9 More details about the requirements of CEVAs and general guidance about the types of
development allowed within the CCMA will be available in the forthcoming Coastal Adaptation
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD)(26).
Policy CC 5
Coastal Change Management 
1. Within the Coastal Change Management Area , as defined on the Policies Map , proposals
for new permanent residential development, including the conversion of existing buildings(1),
will not be permitted.
2. For other development proposals, within the Coastal Change Management Area planning
permission will be granted subject to:
a. demonstration through a Coastal Erosion Vulnerability Assessment that the proposal
will not result in an increased risk to life or to property; and,
b. the works are consistent with the relevant Shoreline Management Plan and it is
demonstrated that there will be no adverse impact on the environment or elsewhere
along the coast; and,
c. the proposal comprises essential infrastructure including coast protection schemes;
or,
d. proposals for temporary time-limited development directly related to the coast, together
with appropriate planning conditions or a legal agreement to secure the long term
management potentially including the eventual demolition and removal of the
development; or,
e. proposals are for commercial, leisure or community infrastructure which provides
substantial economic, social and environmental benefits to the community.
3. In any location, development proposals that are likely to increase coastal erosion as a result
of changes in groundwater and surface water run-off will not be permitted. Any development
proposals shall not hinder the creation and maintenance of any coastal infrastructure.
4. New development or the intensification of existing development in a coastal location that is
within Hold The Line Zones , as defined on the Policies Map, but outside the Coastal
Change Management Area , will need to demonstrate that the long-term implications of
coastal change on the development have been addressed in a supporting Coastal Erosion
Vulnerability Assessment.
1. Excluding permitted development rights contained within the Town & Country (General Permitted Development) (England) Order
2015 (as amended)
26 https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/coastaladaptation37 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 33.6 Coastal Change Adaptation
The purpose of this policy  is to make provision for development and infrastructure that needs to be
relocated away from Coastal Change Management Areas.
3.6.1 The stretch of the coast from Kelling Hard to Cart Gap, Happisburgh consists of soft glacial
cliffs and sandy beaches and has been subject to coastal erosion for thousands of years. The
Kelling Hard to Lowestoft Shoreline Management Plan identifies areas and properties at risk
from coastal erosion. The area at risk, the Coastal Change Management Area (CCMA), is
illustrated in 'Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management Area'  and on the Policies Map.
3.6.2 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) states that Local Plans should make provision
for development and infrastructure that needs to be relocated away from Coastal
Change Management Areas. The National Planning Practice Guidance advises that either
formally allocating land in a Local Plan or allowing for relocation where planning permission
would normally be refused are two ways in which this can be achieved.
3.6.3 Policy CC 6 'Coastal Change Adaptation'  allows for the relocation of residential,
community, agricultural and commercial properties that are within the Coastal Change
Management Area to areas inland defined as the Countryside where development is normally
restricted.
3.6.4 In view of the likely effects of coastal erosion on coastal communities and the local economy
of those areas at risk, it is considered important to enable adaptation to take place in advance
of the actual loss of property. Allowing replacement development to take place in the Countryside
Policy Area is intended to assist in minimising the blighting effects resulting from the identification
of Coastal Change Management Areas and enabling communities to “roll-back”  in order to help
secure the long-term future sustainability of coastal areas.
3.6.5 In order to be eligible residential properties must be at risk from erosion within a 50 year period.
This enables property owners to take a pro-active decision to relocate to an alternative location
well before erosion becomes an imminent threat. In order to maintain the sustainability of coastal
settlements, relocation should take place close to the existing community.
3.6.6 Temporary uses for the affected properties, in advance of their loss, are to safeguard the
economic and social well-being of the settlements affected and secure environmental gains.
The future use of such sites or buildings should be secured (by legal agreement) in perpetuity,
and in relation to vacated dwellings, interim uses will be considered if beneficial to the well-being
of the local community, however, the occupancy will be time-limited to minimise risk.
Policy CC 6
Coastal Change Adaptation
1. Proposals for the relocation and replacement of community facilities, infrastructure, commercial,
agricultural and business uses affected by coastal erosion will be permitted in the Countryside
Policy Area , provided that:
a. the proposed development replaces that which is in the Coastal Change Management
Area   as defined on the Policies Map, and is forecast to be affected by erosion within 50
years of the date of the proposal;
b. the new development is beyond the Coastal Change Management Area  and is in a
location that is well related and accessible to the coastal community from which it was
displaced;Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 38
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growthc. the site of the development / use it replaces is either cleared and the site rendered safe
and managed for the benefit of the local environment, or put to a temporary use that is
beneficial to the well-being of the local community, as appropriate; and, 
d. taken overall (considering both the new development and that which is being replaced)
the proposal should result in no net detrimental impact upon the landscape, townscape
or biodiversity of the area, having regard to any special designations.
2. Proposals for the relocation and replacement of dwellings affected by erosion will be permitted,
provided that:
1. the development replaces a permanent dwelling (with unrestricted occupancy), which is
within the Coastal Change Management Area and is forecast to be at risk from erosion
within 50 years of the date of the proposal;
2. the new dwelling is used as a primary residence;
3. the new development is beyond the  Coastal Change Management Area  and is in a
location that is well related to the coastal community from which it as displaced; and:
i. adjoins an existing group of dwellings;
ii. the development does not result in an isolated form of development;
iii. the development is in proportion to and respects the character, form and appearance
of the immediate vicinity and surrounding area; and,
iv. is consistent with other policies in the Local Plan.
3. If such a site is not available, the relocated development is within or adjacent to a defined
Selected Settlement ; and,
a. the site of the dwelling it replaces is either cleared, and the site rendered safe and
managed for the benefit of the local environment, or put to a temporary use that is
beneficial to the well-being of the local community, as appropriate. The future use of the
site should be secured (by legal agreement) in perpetuity. Interim use as affordable
housing will be considered beneficial to the well-being of the local community in
interpreting this clause; and,
b. taken overall (considering both the new development and that which is being replaced)
the proposal should result in no net detrimental impact upon the landscape, townscape
or biodiversity of the area, having regard to any special designations.
3.7 Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure flood risk is evaluated in development proposals and to require
the appropriate management of surface and foul water disposal in order to reduce flood risk across the
District.
3.7.1 The Plan is supported by an updated Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)(27), published
in 2018. The study was prepared in cooperation with the Environment Agency and the Lead
Local Flood Authority and Internal Drainage Boards. It provides a comprehensive and robust
appraisal of the extent and nature of flood risk from all sources, now and in the future, taking
27 North Norfolk Strategic Flood Risk Assessment, 2017 - available in NNDC Document Library - www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr ary39 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3into account the future effects of Climate Change and its implications for land use planning. As
such, it provides the most up to date source of information and guidance on flood risk across
North Norfolk.
3.7.2 Accompanying the SFRA is a suite of interactive GeoPDF maps. These illustrate the extent of
surface water and ground water, tidal (sea), and fluvial (river) flood risk, and include relevant
climate change projections. These have been published in the Document Library(28)and are
available to developers. The mapping can be used in high-level screening exercises to identify
whether a location has the potential risk of flooding.The mapping should be read with the SFRA
and SFRA Addendum.
3.7.3 All new development should be located so as to minimise flood risk and increased flood risk
resulting from that development. The policy approach is to steer development towards areas
of low flood risk (Flood Zone 1) and avoid inappropriate development in areas at higher risk of
flooding(29) by directing development away from areas at the highest risk of such flooding.
Where development is by exception necessary in such areas, the approach is that development
should be made safe for its lifetime, without increasing flood risk elsewhere and where possible,
reducing flood risk overall.
3.7.4 The Council will require proposals to accord with national policy and national Planning Practice
Guidance(30). Development proposals in areas which are vulnerable to flood risk should
demonstrate how guidance  has been fully addressed as part of the application process, including
via Flood Risk Assessment, the application of sequential and exception test, and the projection
of climate change flood extents.
3.7.5 Development should firstly be steered to areas of low risk demonstrating that there are no
reasonably available alternative sites at a lower risk of flooding, and that the proposed uses
are suitable in terms of their vulnerability. Following the application of the Sequential Test, if it
is not possible for the development to be located in zones with a lower probability of flooding,
for example through non availability of such sites the Exception Test must be applied. The
Exception Test is a method to demonstrate and help ensure that flood risk to people and property
will be managed satisfactorily.
3.7.6 For all development proposals in Flood Zones 2 & 3 as shown on the Policies Map and local
maps a Flood Risk Assessment will be required. In Flood Zone 1, an assessment should
accompany all proposals involving: sites of 1 hectare or more; land which has been identified
by the Environment Agency as having critical drainage problems; land identified in the Strategic
Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) as being at increased flood risk in future; or land that may be
subject to other sources of flooding, where its development would introduce a more vulnerable
use.
3.7.7 The SFRA identifies 38 areas across the District that are in Flood Zone 1 but are surrounded
by areas at a higher risk of flooding i.e. areas falling within Flood Zones 2 & 3. In certain cases
development within such 'dry islands' can present particular hazards to public safety and risks
such as those risks associated with maintaining safe access and exit for occupants during flood
events. The distribution of dry islands and risks posed by them in terms of access/exit vary
considerably and proposals in such areas may be required to submit a Flood Risk Assessment,
even if less than the national threshold of 1 hectare in size. Where proposals are located on
Dry Islands developers should consult at the earliest stage with the Council, to determine the
requirements of a Flood Risk Assessment and whether it should focus on the site proposal and
the wider area in order to detail appropriate emergency response arrangements.
3.7.8 Flood Risk Assessments (FRA) should be proportionate to the nature, scale and location of
28 www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr ary
29 Note: the Environment Agency would object to any new development in Functional floodplain, Flood Zone 3b
30 NPPF 2019, para 166-169 and National Planning Practice Guidance, Flood Risk and Coastal ChangeProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 40
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growthdevelopment, be prepared by a suitably qualified professional, demonstrating that the
development provides wider sustainability benefits(31) to the community that outweigh flood risk
from all sources and that the proposed development will be safe for its lifetime, taking account
of the vulnerability of its users, without increasing flood risk elsewhere, and, where possible,
will reduce flood risk overall. The following should be considered in any FRA: The design of
any flood defence infrastructure; access & egress; operation & maintenance of defences; design
of the development to manage & reduce flood risk wherever possible; resident awareness;
flood warning and evacuation procedures; and, any funding arrangements required for
implementing and management, and take into consideration climate change. Further information
on the requirements of site specific FRA is available in the SFRA.
3.7.9 New development and extensions in areas of high flood risk must be designed to be resilient
in the event of a flood and ensure that, in the case of new residential development and in line
with Environment Agency Guidance that: ground floor should ideally be raised above the design
flood level, including allowances for climate change; there are no bedrooms at ground floor
level; an area of refuge should be provided (often on a first floor) above the extreme 0.1% (1
in 1000) annual probability flood level (inclusive of climate change) and a flood evacuation plan
should be accompany a flood risk assessment to address any concerns in relation to access
to and from the site. In line with the sequential test, areas of functional floodplain should be
protected from development. Where possible, through proposals for re-development,
opportunities to reinstate areas of functional flood plain should be taken e.g. reducing building
footprints or relocating to lower flood risk zones.
3.7.10 This Plan makes adequate provision to deliver all necessary growth without the need to develop
in areas susceptible to flooding (Flood Zones 2 & 3) and there is limited justification for additional
residential development proposals in areas of increased flood risk. Only in exceptional
circumstances will permission be granted. Such an example could be where, through the
preparation of a Neighbourhood Plan, additional need for housing has been identified in the
designated Neighbourhood Plan Area. Here housing could be allocated on a site at risk from
flooding provided it is demonstrated through the Neighbourhood Plan preparation that the
sequential and exception tests have been undertaken including demonstrating that there are
no other available sites at a lower risk of flooding within the Neighbourhood Area, that there
are additional sustainability benefits and that the development can be made safe for its lifetime.
This assessment would take into account all sources of flooding during Plan preparation. In
such circumstances applicants will need to provide a site specific Flood Risk Assessment.
3.7.11 Norfolk County Council is the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) with responsibility for managing
local flood risk and surface water flooding and the take up of sustainable drainage systems and
is tasked with coordinating the management of local flood risk and the provision of advice to
LPAs and developers on drainage for new major development.
Surface Water Run-off, Foul Water and Sustainable Drainage 
3.7.12 Surface water flooding occurs where the ground and rivers can no longer absorb heavy rainfall
and when man-made drainage systems have insufficient capacity to deal with the volume of
rainfall. Typically this type of flooding is localised and occurs very quickly in extreme weather
and so is difficult to predict and warn against. It is predicted that climate changes will result in
more short-duration, high intensity rainfall and therefore surface water flooding is likely to
become an increasing problem, particularly within the district’ s urban settlements, and which
development proposals should adequately seek to address. i.e thorough layout and form of
development, provision of green infrastructure, use of permeable materials and on site / off site
works that support development and reduce risk.
31 e.g. the opportunities that the development brings to the Local Plan objectives, and benefits in terms of affordable housing, transport,
regeneration, community facilities etc41 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 33.7.13 Surface water and foul water disposal/treatment created by new development needs to be
managed in sustainable ways, to reduce the potential for the increased risk of flooding and
prevent environmental impacts.The default position is that Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems,
SuDS, should be provided. These should be in line with the requirements of the NPPF , para
169 and updates plus local guidance provided by the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) and
Environment Agency(32). Ensuring that there are separate disposal routes for foul and clean
surface water which will also help alleviate the risks of surface and foul water flooding.
3.7.14 In order to ensure that flood risk and associated issues, and that the impact of drainage measures
on the form and visual appearance of developments is properly taken into account in the
assessment of new development, the  policy requires surface water drainage issues to be
addressed in planning applications, with early consideration at pre-application stage.
3.7.15 Development proposals should prioritise the use of sustainable drainage systems (SuDs)(33)
wherever possible which should be considered at the earliest possible stage of an application.
Alternatives will only be permitted where sustainable drainage is shown to be impractical or
where it is clearly demonstrated to compromise the viability of the scheme. Any alternative
scheme must be consistent with both national and local planning policy.
3.7.16 SuDS should form an integral part of a schemes overall design and layout in conjunction with
any open space, landscaping and green infrastructure and utilised as providing multi-functional
benefits providing wider amenity and recreational benefits where appropriate. SuDS can also
enhance biodiversity opportunities within new development. There are clearly merits of green
solutions to manage surface water which have benefits to ecology, local habitat and biodiversity.
Developments should be designed with this in mind and the areas with the most scope for
infiltration / soakaways should be reserved for SuDS features. The use of soft landscaping and
permeable surface materials should be maximised. On-site rainwater storage (ponds, basins
and swales), living roofs and walls (where appropriate) will be required unless the developer
can provide justification to demonstrate that this would not be practicable or feasible within the
constraints or configuration of the site and would compromise wider regeneration objectives.
3.7.17 Many of North Norfolk’ s waterbodies are UK BAP priority chalk streams habitat, and much of
the district landscape is internationally and nationally designated. It is important to ensure that
there is no net deterioration in water quality as a result of development. Appropriate consideration
should be given to all four pillars of Water Quantity, Water Quality, Amenity and Biodiversity,
alone with the multi-functional benefits of land use and permeable materials to aid infiltration
and ground storage such as permeable paving and green roofs and the use of water butts to
capture and reduce water use as well as run off . Where SuDS proposals are submitted, a
drainage strategy detailing the requirements from the LLFA, the appropriate minimum operational
standards, and a detailed maintenance and management arrangements for the lifetime of the
development will be required.
3.7.18 In adherence with LLFA guidance, drainage strategies must also consider and address the
drainage hierarchy, the potential increase in the volume of runoff from a development as a
result of increases in the area of impermeable surfaces, water quality and exceedance. Although
post development runoff rates may be restricted to equivalent pre-development greenfield runoff
rates, the duration of the storm over which the site could discharge at this rate is likely to increase
and the volume of water leaving and increase flood risk downstream. Proposals should
adequately address the potential increase in the volume of runoff along with other requirements
of the LLFA who require rain water harvesting to be considered, but not necessarily delivered.
32 LLFA Guidance document V4 March 2019 and subsequent updates. Groundwater protection position statements (2018), in particular
Position Statements G1 and G9 – G13 available at:
https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/g roundw ater-protection-position-statements
33 Sustainable drainage systems should be provided for all major schemes unless demonstrated inappropriate, smaller schemes should
adopt sustainable drainage principles.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 42
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth3.7.19 The degree to which any solution may be considered appropriate will depend on its impacts
on water quality and wider land drainage interests and strategies to address water disposal
management and flood risk. Phased development must not compromise the overall drainage
scheme of any larger scheme. Where different phases rely on each other for connection to an
infiltration basin or the wider watercourse network information on how this will be implemented
during construction and operation of the development will need to be provided. Appropriate
legal agreements may be required to show how phases will be able to develop if they are
progressed by different applicants. Where an application is part of a larger site which already
has planning permission it is essential that the new proposal does not compromise the drainage
scheme already approved.
3.7.20 Proposals should take account of LLFA and national guidance outlined in the Planning Practice
Guidance(34) and follow a hierarchy of drainage options set out in order of preference for surface
water run off:
1. collect for re-use
2. discharge into the ground (shallow infiltration);
3. discharge to a surface water body;
4. discharge to a surface water sewer, highway drain, or another drainage system;
5. discharge to a combined sewer
3.7.21 Anglian Water advise that discharge to SuDS is the preferred method of surface water disposal
and that discharge to the public sewerage network would be considered as a last resort only
ensuring that there is no detriment from the additional surface water flows.  A surface water
connection to the combined or foul sewer will only be permitted under exceptional circumstances
if evidence shows that the previous site was connected to the same sewer and there are no
other new feasible discharge options. It is current Anglian Water Policy to seek to separate any
surface water from any new developments to relieve the existing pressures and treatment
requirements. The LLFA and the EA also do not consider that deep infiltration i.e greater than
2m below ground level or borehole soakaways as infiltration systems, meet the requirements
of the first level of the drainage hierarchy and as such should be seen only as a last resort on
a par with sewer disposal when all other methods have been considered.Whilst they can provide
important groundwater recharge via infiltration at depth, the provision does not mimic the natural
drainage system (as shallow infiltration would) as it bypasses the soil zone increasing the
potential for pollution of groundwater to occur.
3.7.22 Further guidance on these issues and the information required from developers and at what
stage of the application process is available in the LLFA guidance document(35). Anglian Water’ s
SuDs Adoption handbook, and Anglian Water’ s Surface Water policy & Sewers for Adoption
v8 and any successor documents are also a useful source of information. Further broad guidance
to the surface water management and SuDs is included in chapter 9 of the 2017/18 SFRA
including the identification of ground water protection zones and soil type. Early engagement
through pre-application advice with the Council is encouraged. Developers should provide the
appropriate information required to assist in the determination of such application as outlined
in Appendix 1, which supports section 10 of the LLFA guidance.
3.7.23 Proposals that do not include the use of SuDS will need to demonstrate why it would be
inappropriate and provide clear evidence. The decision on whether a sustainable drainage
system would be inappropriate in relation to a particular development proposal is a matter of
judgement for the Council, and advice will be sought from the LLFA on submitted material and
34 PPG Flood Risk & Coastal Change at Paragraph: 080 Reference ID: 7-080-20150323, Revision date: 23 03 2015
35 NCC, LLFA Statutory Consultee for Planning, Guidance Document V4 March 2019 as updated 2021.43 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3what sort of drainage system they would consider to be reasonably practicable by way of
reference to the technical standards published by the Department for Environment, Food and
Rural Affairs(36).
Policy CC 7
Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage
1. All new built development will:
a. be located to minimise the risk of flooding, mitigating any such risk through avoidance,
design and the implementation of sustainable drainage (SuDS) principles unless it can
be demonstrated that it is not feasible;
b. not materially increase the flood risk to other areas and incorporate appropriate surface
water drainage mitigation measures to minimise its own risk of flooding ;
c. have regard to climate change and flood extents from all sources identified in the NNDC
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment 2017/18, and subsequent updates.
2. Developers will be required to demonstrate that the proposed development:
a. complies with national policy including where appropriate the sequential and exceptions
tests;
b. does not increase greenfield run off rates and vulnerability of the site, or the wider
catchment, to flooding from surface water run-off from existing or predicted water flows;
c. has a positive impact on the risk of surface water flooding on site and in the surrounding
area adjacent to the development, where appropriate;
d. addresses the potential impact of infiltration upon groundwater Source Protection Zones
and/or Critical Drainage Catchments.
e. provides adequate foul water treatment and disposal already exists or can be provided
in time to serve the development;
f. that suitable access is safeguarded for the maintenance of water supply and drainage
infrastructure;
g. that no surface water connections will be made to the foul system; and,
h. does not compromise the drainage scheme of a larger site which already has planning
permission.
3. For brownfield sites, the run off rate should be agreed in conjunction with the LLFA and be
no more than the rate prior to any new development and as adopting betterment principle
be as close to greenfield rates as possible.
4. Open areas, including highways, within new development must be designed to optimise
drainage and reduce run-off, while protecting groundwater and surface water resources and
quality.
5. Proposals for vulnerable development in (zone 2 and higher flood risk areas, zones 3a and
3b) must be accompanied by a site-specific flood risk assessment in line with national policy.
Proposals for re-development, should demonstrate how opportunities to reinstate areas of
functional flood plain have been taken into account.
6. Where SuDS are proposed, development proposals should be an integral part of the green
infrastructure framework of the site and seek to provide multi-functional benefits by combining
water management with open space with benefits for amenity, recreation wildlife and
Biodiversity.
36 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/sustainab le-drainage-systems-non-statutor y-technical-standardsProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 44
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth7. The approach to surface water drainage should be based on evidence of an assessment
of site conditions and national guidance, reflecting best practice and the Lead Local Flood
Authority guidance(1). Developers should provide the appropriate information required to
assist in the determination of such application as outlined in Appendix 1.
8. In adherence with LLFA guidance, drainage strategies must also consider the potential
increase in the volume of runoff from a development as a result of increases in the area of
impermeable surfaces along with water quality and exceedance issues.
9. A proportionate Flood Risk Assessment and Drainage Strategy/Statement comprising of
checklist and drainage sketch layout plan should be included at pre-application stage.
10. Surface water should be managed at the source, with reduced transfer and discharge
elsewhere following the drainage hierarchy. Evidence of how the hierarchy has been followed
is required and where a drainage option is not feasible, evidence of all alternatives considered
should be submitted. Where there is no alternative option but to discharge surface water
into a surface water or combined sewer, developers will need to engage with the Anglian
Water and the LLFA and demonstrate why there is no alternative. Clear evidence depicting
the above and that the discharge of surface water will be limited to attenuation rate, including
climate change allowance, will need to be submitted.
11. Drainage requirements including detailed maintenance and management arrangements for
the lifetime of the development will be secured by way of planning conditions and and/or
planning obligations.
1. Including but not limited to Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) Guidance v4 March 2019 and 2021 update, NNDC SFRA 2017/18,
national PPG and Sustainable Drainage Systems, Non-statutory technical standards for sustainable drainage systems (March
2015), Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, Anglian Water’ s Suds Adoption Handbook, Anglian Water’ s Surface
Water Policy and Sewers for Adoption v8 and any successor documents.
3.8 Electric Vehicle Charging
The purpose of this policy is to promote and ensure delivery of appropriate electric vehicle charging
infrastructure and to future-proof developments in the District.
3.8.1 The Government’ s Road to Zero (2018) strategy(37) sets out the ambition for at least 50%, and
as many as 70% of new car sales to be Ultra Low Emission Vehicles (ULEVs) by 2030, alongside
up to 40% of new vans. In the Government’ s Decarbonising Transport Plan (2021)(38), the
commitments seek to end sales of new petrol and diesel cars and vans by 2030 (10 years
earlier than previously planned) and sets out that from 2035, all new cars and vans must be
zero emission at the tailpipe.These commitments steer a significant shift away from diesel and
petrol fuelled cars and vans towards electric powered vehicles. As part of the Government’ s
strategy there is an expectation that all new homes, where appropriate, will be electric
vehicle-ready by having a chargepoint available. As such, new development proposals that
include the provision of parking will need to actively enable this transition.
3.8.2 To support this, the NPPF specifically references this at paragraph 112(e) stating that
'applications for development should… be designed to enable charging of plug-in and other
ultra-low emission vehicles in safe, accessible and convenient locations '. In addition, the
Framework requires Local Planning Authorities, if setting local parking standards, to take into
account the need to ensure an adequate provision of spaces for charging plug-in and other
ultra-low emission vehicles.
3.8.3 There is the potential that the next version of the County Council Parking Standards will
37 The Road to Zero, Department for Transport, July 2018
38 https://www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/tr anspor t-decarbonisation-plan45 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3incorporate required levels of EV charging points for different types of development. Any such
future standards will be a material consideration and consequently, relevant development
schemes will need to accord with either these standards or the details set out in this draft policy,
whichever provides the greater level of EV chargepoint provision.
3.8.4 The Automated and Electric Vehicles Act 2018 came into effect on 19th July 2018. It gave the
Government new powers to improve air quality and enhance public chargepoint availability, for
example, by ensuring that motorway services are upgraded with plenty of points, and improving
consumer confidence in charging their vehicles by: making sure that public chargepoints are
compatible with all vehicles; standardising how they are paid for; setting standards for reliability.
3.8.5 However, access to overnight charging at home and charging at the workplace will be crucial
in promoting the shift towards the use of plug-in hybrids and battery electric vehicles (EV). It is
important therefore that new development seeks to encourage continued growth and responds
to this essential change. The Government is also keen to ensure that people are not
disadvantaged on the basis of having communal parking or by not owning their own home(39).
3.8.6 The Policy will provide an important delivery mechanism to contribute to the Government’ s
stipulated emissions reduction targets by minimising one of the barriers to EV uptake and will
assist in mitigating the impacts of climate change through reducing transport associated carbon
emissions. This will also have positive benefits for local air quality.
3.8.7 The level of provision of electric vehicle charging points should be appropriate to the development
size and type, its level of parking provision and its context and location. The type of charge
point required for most residential development, including buildings converted to dwellings, will
be slow charging, while those required for commercial development, including public car parks,
will mainly need to be quick charging points. Development proposals, including those for changes
of use and conversions where parking is provided, should specify the type or types of
chargepoints to be installed. In the case of car parks, upstanding or inset charging points can
be integrated into the design, whereas more innovation may be required for on-street charging
points which should be integrated into street lighting columns or other smart street furniture
items so as to reduce street clutter. There is the potential that the next version of the County
Council Parking Standards will incorporate required levels of EV charging points for different
types of development. Any such future standards will be a material consideration and
consequently, any relevant development schemes will need to accord with either these standards
or the details set out in this draft policy, whichever provides the greater level of EV chargepoint
provision.
3.8.8 For major developments, details of how the required electric vehicle charging points will be
allocated, located and managed will need to be included within a relevant Transport Assessment
or Transport Statement. This information should also include details of any necessary
management scheme for the chargepoints, including the mechanism/procedure for taking
payments and who will have overall management responsibility.
3.8.9 In determining the appropriate power capability to install at a given parking space the main
consideration is how long vehicles would typically be expected to park at that location. Currently
there are three levels of charging capability, notably: standard chargers - typically rated at 3kw
that can fully charge a vehicle in 6 – 8 hours, which are best suited for overnight charging. This
being the standard used for residential properties as they can be installed as part of the electricity
supply without any additional capacity on a distribution board; fast chargers - typically rated
between 7-22kW that can fully recharge some models in 3-4 hours, rapid DC chargers that are
typically rated at 50kW and can charge an EV to 80% charge in 30 minutes (depending on
battery capacity).
39 The Road to Zero, Department for Transport, July 2018Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 46
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth3.8.10 As technology advances there may be changes to these figures, and regard should always be
had to the latest and best available information. Given the rapid change in technology and
variations in provision, it is likely that Supplementary Planning Guidance will be needed to offer
further information on this matter.
Policy CC 8
Electric Vehicle Charging
1. Proposals where vehicle parking is incorporated will include appropriate provision for electric
vehicle charging points, taking account of the development type and size, the level of parking
provision and its context and location. Electric vehicle parking spaces should be counted
as part of the total parking provision, and bays should be clearly marked on a layout plan.
The delivery of chargepoints should include parking space provision for people with
disabilities. Proposals should specify the type of chargepoints to be installed.
2. Proposals for residential development (excluding use class C1 hotels and C2/C2A residential
institutions) where private driveways and garages are provided, will provide 1
active(1) charging point per unit, in the form of an external charging point on a driveway or
a wall-mounted internal charging point in a garage. Where off-plot or communal parking is
provided, a minimum of 50% of spaces will provide active(1) chargepoints and the remainder
will be passive(2). The spaces should be made available to all residents in accordance with
a management agreement.
3. Proposals for all non-residential development, residential institutions (use classes C2/C2A),
and proposals for stand-alone car parks, will include active(1) provision for electric vehicle
charging points of a minimum of 1 charging point or 20% of all new parking spaces, whichever
is the greater.
4. Proposals for hotels (use class C1) will include active(1) provision for electric vehicle charging
points of a minimum of 30% of all new parking spaces.
5. For major developments, details of how the required electric vehicle charging points will be
allocated, located and managed, including the mechanism/procedure for taking payments,
will be detailed in the relevant Transport Assessment or Transport Statement.
6. Developments with dedicated electricity sub-stations should specify the sub-station to a
sufficient capacity to fully cater for all electric vehicle charging requirements.
1. Active - fully wired and connected chargepoints, ready to use points at parking spaces.
2. Passive - provision of the necessary underlying infrastructure (e.g. capacity in the connection to the local electricity distribution
network and electricity distribution board, as well as cabling to parking spaces) to enable simple installation and activation of a
chargepoint at a future date.
3.9 Sustainable Transport
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that new development maximises the opportunities for the use
of sustainable forms of transport and that the public highway remains safe and convenient to use for
all road users.
3.9.1 The NPPF sets out sustainable transport objectives and states that significant development
should be focused on locations that are or can be made sustainable, through limiting the need
to travel and offering a genuine choice of transport modes. This can help to reduce congestion
and emissions and improve air quality and public health.
3.9.2 As such, the planning system should actively manage patterns of growth, address the impacts47 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3of development on transport networks, promote opportunities to increase walking, cycling and
use of public transport, and ensure that patterns of movement, streets, parking and transport
considerations are an integral part of designing schemes.
3.9.3 Reducing the reliance on the private car and promoting active lifestyles are mutually beneficial
aims that can be achieved by supporting sustainable travel options. Whilst the opportunities to
maximise sustainable transport solutions are more challenging in rural areas, this makes it even
more important to embrace changing transport technology and usage, as well as focus
development in locations that reduce the need to travel by car and by providing a choice of
transport modes.This in turn, helps reduce emissions and improves air quality and public health.
In addition, changing work practices, including working from home, is higher in North Norfolk
at 16% when compared to England at 10% (2011 Census) and the likelihood is that this
percentage will increase post-pandemic.
3.9.4 Norfolk’ s Local Transport Plan 4 Draft Strategy 2021- 2036 , sets out the strategy and policy
framework for transport in the County. It guides transport investment in Norfolk and is considered
by other agencies when determining planning or delivery decisions.The strategy is accompanied
by an implementation plan, setting out the measures to be delivered over the short term. It
envisages a transport system that allows residents and visitors a range of low carbon options
to meet their transport needs and attracts and retains business investment in the County. It
sets out seven strategic objectives, which are: embracing the future; delivering a sustainable
Norfolk; enhancing connectivity; enhancing Norfolk’ s quality of life; increasing accessibility;
improving transport safety; and a well managed and maintained transport network. It aims to
respond to a number of challenges, including addressing air quality and carbon reduction, as
these remain key priorities.
3.9.5 A primary planning consideration is to ensure that development proposals achieve a suitable
connection to the highway that is safe for pedestrians, cyclists and occupants of vehicles.
Equally important is the need to ensure that road safety is not jeopardised by allowing proposals
that would generate levels of traffic beyond the capacity of the surrounding road network.
3.9.6 All new development is required to address the transport implications of that development.
Larger schemes are required to prepare Travel Statements or Transport Assessments (TA) to
illustrate how the amount of trips generated will be accommodated and how accessibility to the
site by all modes of transport will be achieved. For proposals that are likely to have significant
transport implications, the Government also requires the submission of Travel Plans, the purpose
of which is to promote more sustainable forms of transport in relation to the activities of a
particular development by (e.g. encouraging reductions in car usage and increased use of
public transport, walking and cycling).The PPG also provides information on the circumstances
in which Travel Plans, Transport Assessments and Transport Statements will be required and
what they should contain.
3.9.7 The Principal Routes shown on the Policies Map accord with the primary and principal routes
of the County Council route hierarchy. Proposals outside designated settlement boundaries
that involve a new direct access onto these roads (where the only access is directly onto the
road), will not be permitted in order to assist with traffic flow and reduce risk. Exceptions will
only be made where the type of development is such that it requires a principal route location,
such as road side service stations.
3.9.8 Transport Statements will be required for residential developments of between 50-100 dwellings.
Transport Assessments and Travel Plans will be required for residential developments larger
than 100 dwellings. The requirements for non-residential development will be considered on a
case by case basis.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 48
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable GrowthPolicy CC 9
Sustainable Transport
Development will be well located and designed to minimise the need to travel and maximise the
use of sustainable forms of transport appropriate to its particular location. Development proposals
will be considered against the following criteria:
1. the proposal provides for safe and convenient access on foot and by cycle, public and private
transport addressing the needs of all, including those with a disability;
2. the proposal is served by safe and suitable access to the highway network, without detriment
to the amenity or character of the locality;
3. outside of designated Settlement Boundaries, as defined on the Policies Map, the proposal
does not involve direct access onto a Principal Route, as defined on the Policies Map, unless
the type of development requires a Principal Route location;
4. the expected nature and volume of traffic generated by the proposal can be accommodated
by the existing road network without detriment to the amenity or character of the surrounding
area, that it would not  cause an unacceptable impact on highway safety and that any residual
cumulative impacts on the road network would not be severe;
5. if the proposal would generate significant amounts of traffic movement, it is supported by a
Travel Plan. In the case of larger schemes, the proposal is accompanied by a Transport
Statement or Transport Assessment, the coverage and detail of which reflects the scale of
development and the extent of the transport implications.
3.10 Biodiversity Net Gain
The purpose of this policy is to ensure biodiversity net gain is achieved through development in order
to help protect and enhance the natural environment, which in turn, will support the long term adaptability
and resilience to climate change across the District.
3.10.1 Biodiversity net gain, in relation to planning, is when development leaves biodiversity in a
measurably better state than before and is a mandatory consideration for all development
through the Environment Act(40).The Act aims to introduce legally binding targets and establish
a new domestic environmental governance system following the departure of the UK from the
EU. Net gain is not a new concept to planning as the NPPF(41) already encourages net gains
for biodiversity to be sought through planning policies and decisions and many developers are
already designing biodiversity net gain into their development projects. Whilst the mandatory
targets have yet to come into force, the policy direction is clear, that all future development
deliver at least a 10% calculated biodiversity net gain that will be secured for a period of 30
years. It remains reasonable and sensible that given the Council’ s declaration of climate change
emergency that the Local Plan includes a  policy approach  at this stage to stipulate and quantify
biodiversity net gain as a condition of granting planning permission.
3.10.2 Enhancing biodiversity is an essential and integral part to sustainable development, in adapting
to and mitigating the effects of climate change and to address the ecological emergency that
is intertwined with the climate emergency. In order to embed and demonstrate biodiversity
enhancement within development, it first involves avoiding and then minimising biodiversity
loss as far as possible, and then achieving measurable net gains that contribute towards local
and strategic biodiversity priorities. The approach supports and reinforces other policies
40 The Environment Bill received Royal Assent in November 2021.
41 NPPF , 2021 paragraphs 145, 153,174(d), 180 (d) and as set out in the PPG Natural Environment Section.49 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3throughout this Local Plan and should be used in conjunction with that set out in Policy ENV
4 'Biodiversity & Geodiversity'  and in line with policy requirements for the provision of any
enhanced on site open space requirement, opportunity areas identified in the Norfolk GIRAMS
strategy or future identified green infrastructure corridors / ecological network and wider county
strategies such as any Norfolk County Council Nature Recovery Network and the emerging
Local Nature Recovery Strategies (LNRS).
3.10.3 Biodiversity net gain complements and works with the biodiversity mitigation hierarchy set out
in NPPF paragraph 179a. It does not override the protection for designated sites, protected or
priority species and irreplaceable or priority habitats set out in the NPPF . In delivering biodiversity
net gain, developers will need to assure the Council that habitat improvement will be a genuine
additional benefit, and go further than measures already required to implement a compensation
strategy. A key element of achieving biodiversity net gain is the correct application of the
mitigation hierarchy in the initial stages to ensure what is delivered is additional to what is
already required through the planning process.
3.10.4 Measurable biodiversity net gains will be sought for all development at the very least in
accordance with the minimum requirements of the policy and proportionate to the scale of the
proposal and any potential impacts and any subsequent mandatory targets. A development
with limited or no impacts on biodiversity will still need to demonstrate a measurable biodiversity
net gain.
3.10.5 It is possible to achieve BNG for small scale development and those where there is little or no
impact on biodiversity.  Small-scale development proposals form a significant proportion of the
planning applications received by this authority and collectively these applications could make
a notable contribution to BNG.
3.10.6 The biodiversity net gain approach to addressing ecological impacts from development is
through the use of a metric to provide a quantitative assessment of overall biodiversity loss
after the mitigation hierarchy has been applied. The results from this assessment can then be
used to create a development that delivers a net gain for biodiversity in a quantifiable way.  In
order to measure biodiversity net gain the Council requires the use of the DEFRA Biodiversity
Metric(42) or its successor in accordance with the PPG(43) and established good practice
principles(44).  Minor applications and small-scale proposals, where applicable, should use the
small sites version of the Metric currently being developed. In all cases the full assessment and
completed metric must accompany proposals.The Council reserves the right to request further
information.
3.10.7 An assessment of the existing biodiversity value of the onsite habitat of the development site
(the pre-development value) will be required at the point that planning permission is applied
for. In order to establish the pre-development value, consideration will be given to whether any
deliberate harm to the biodiversity value has taken place in the recent past. Where there is
evidence of deliberate neglect and/or damage, or the relevant date has not been subsequently
agreed with the Council, the pre-development biodiversity value of the onsite habitat will be
taken as that established at January 2020(45),  or as directed in the Act.
3.10.8 Applicants will be required to demonstrate how biodiversity net gain can be achieved through
the metric, using information taken from habitat surveys of the development site before
development and any related habitat clearance or management has taken place, by calculating
losses and gains and through assessing habitat distinctiveness, condition and extent.To achieve
biodiversity net gain, a development must have a sufficiently higher biodiversity unit score after
development than before development. When demonstrating biodiversity net gain applicants
42 The Biodiversity Metric v3.0 & Small Sites Biodiversity Metric Test Version, Natural England, July 2021 (or successor)
43 PPG https://www .gov.uk/guidance/natur al-en vironment
44 Such as Biodiversity net gain: Good Practice Principle for Development – Baker, J., Hoskin, R., Butterworth, T. CIRIA 2019.
45 As quoted in Schedule 14 of the Environment ActProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 50
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growthwill be required to clarify the predicted biodiversity outcomes both qualitatively and quantitatively,
provide evidence on the application of the mitigation hierarchy, describe the outcomes and how
these contribute towards local and strategic biodiversity priorities, demonstrate at least equivalent
or better levels of ecological functionality, clarify the timescales for delivery, provide costed
management and monitoring plans, identify accountabilities (including enforcement) and
responsibilities for delivery of the biodiversity net gain. This will be provided through the
submission of a Biodiversity Strategy at validation stage. Any evidence and rationale supplied
by applicants should be supported by the appropriate ecological expertise and if appropriate
local wildlife knowledge and stakeholders.
3.10.9 The mitigation hierarchy is fundamental in the development of biodiversity net gain and applicants
must do everything possible to first avoid and then minimise impacts on biodiversity and only
as a last resort, and in agreement with decision makers, compensate for losses that cannot be
avoided.  If adequately compensating for losses within the development footprint is not possible
biodiversity losses should then be offset by gains elsewhere. The mitigation hierarchy should
be applied in the sequential order as set out in Table 1 'Applying the Mitigation Hierarchy' , with
each stage taken in turn and all possibilities considered before moving onto the next stage.
Development and biodiversity net gain proposals will be required to demonstrate the
consideration and feasibility of each stage rather than assume provision can be accommodated
off-site through compensation at the beginning. In following the mitigation hierarchy, significant
loss of distinctive habitats on sites is avoided. If it is demonstrated that it is not possible to avoid,
mitigate and compensate all impacts on site then compensatory habitat creation should be
obtained firstly through a combination of on-site and local third party schemes, then local third
party schemes only, and lastly through any statutory credit scheme. Off-site provision should
be informed by and support Local Nature Recovery strategies, wider policy objectives and those
of the emerging Local Nature Recovery Strategy.
3.10.10 Any alternative off-site provision must avoid the best and versatile agricultural land(46).
3.10.11 The national policy is changing in this area and the approach will be supported by a
Supplementary Planning Guidance and/or a further implementation note following the Local
Plan adoption as necessary.
3.10.12 Given that biodiversity net gain should be considered from the outset of a development scheme,
information that is proportionate to the proposal and stage of the project should be submitted
with requests for pre-application advice. Equally, with Outline or Reserved Matters applications,
the information provided should be relevant and proportionate to the matters for consideration.
Aim In Practice Stage
Achieving biodiversity gains or net gain
at all stages of the mitigation hierarchy.The first stage is to avoid harm, for
example by locating to an alternative1. Avoidance
site. It is the most important stage and
can ease the consent process, whereas
missing this stage can lead to criticism,
objections and refusal of permission for
the development.
If avoiding all adverse effects is not 2. Minimisation
possible, action is taken to minimise
these effects, such as those in the
CIEEM EcIA guidelines (CIEEM, 2018),
which include timing works to avoid
sensitive periods.
Addressing residual adverse effects is 3. Compensation
46 There are five grades of agricultural land, with Grade 3 subdivided into 3a and 3b. The best and most versatile land is defined as
Grades 1, 2 and 3a.51 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3Aim In Practice Stage
the final stage, only considered after all
possibilities for avoiding and minimising
the effects have been implemented.
Compensation does not prevent the
effects, rather it involves measures to
make up for residual effects that cannot
be prevented.
Offsetting is a form of compensation that
trades losses of biodiversity in one
location with measurable gains in
another – biodiversity offsets have a
formal requirement for measurable
outcomes. Offsetting losses of
biodiversity with gains elsewhere can be
within or outside of the development
footprint.
Table 1 Applying the Mitigation Hierarchy
Policy CC 10
Biodiversity Net Gain
1. Development must achieve a minimum of 10% Biodiversity Net Gain, or higher as stipulated
in national legislation, over the pre-development biodiversity value as measured by the DEFRA
Biodiversity Metric or agreed equivalent.
2. Development proposals will be accompanied by a biodiversity net gain strategy that:
a. Establishes the pre-development biodiversity value of the development site;
b. Demonstrates that the mitigation hierarchy below has been employed in securing
biodiversity net gain;
i. Avoidance
ii. Mitigation
iii. Compensation
c. Clarifies and explains the predicted biodiversity outcomes both qualitatively and
quantitatively; and,
d. Details of how the biodiversity net gain will be maintained for at least 30 years after the
development is completed.
3.11 Green Infrastructure
The purpose of this policy  is to conserve and enhance existing green infrastructure and ensure the
provision of new green infrastructure to improve connectivity and access.
3.11.1 National policy says that strategic policies should make sufficient provision for the conservation
and enhancement of green infrastructure and should identify the strategic location of existing
and proposed green infrastructure networks.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 52
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth3.11.2 Green infrastructure is a strategic network of multi-functional green space, urban and rural,
which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits for local
communities and it offers important opportunities for sport and recreation as well as providing
visual amenity. It is an important part of our communities and contributes towards the identity
of North Norfolk. As set out in the Planning Practice Guidance, Green Infrastructure can embrace
a range of spaces and assets, including parks, playing fields, other areas of open space,
woodland, allotments, private gardens, sustainable drainage features, green roofs and walls,
street trees and ‘blue infrastructure’  such as streams, ponds, Lakes, canals and other water
bodies.
3.11.3 This policy has been informed by the contents of the Green Infrastructure Background Paper
and the Norfolk Green Infrastructure & Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy
(GIRAMS). Both of these documents set out a strategic approach towards improving the existing
green infrastructure network and will ensure the right types of green spaces and access are
provided and enhanced where they will provide the greatest benefit.
3.11.4 This policy provides for the network of green infrastructure in North Norfolk to be conserved
and enhanced. In line with Policy HC 2 regarding Open space protection and quality standards,
the Norfolk Green Infrastructure & Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy and
Policy ENV 5, open space and enhanced green infrastructure is to be incorporated into
appropriately sized proposals.The aim is to provide areas attractive enough for local recreational
use on or near where new homes are built that are of a suitable quality that can deflect people
away from European Habitats Sites for recreation purposes. Collectively development should
seek to maximise opportunities for the restoration, enhancement and connection of the District’ s
green infrastructure network throughout the lifetime of the development, both on-site and for
the wider community in line with the principles, priorities and action plans detailed in the North
Norfolk Green infrastructure Background Paper, any subsequent SPD, and the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure & Recreational Impact Mitigation & Avoidance Strategy.
3.11.5 The Green Infrastructure Background Paper identifies GI opportunities for the major growth
towns of Cromer, Fakenham and North Walsham. The key green infrastructure opportunities 
for the three major growth towns are illustrated on the green infrastructure settlement maps
which show where existing green infrastructure is located, an overview of key findings in the
area and a number actions to improve green infrastructure. Enhanced Green infrastructure
(EGI) is in addition to any local open space requirements identified in Policy HC2 and should
be of a proportionate scale and standard, as outlined in the GIRAMS and be at a scale and
quality able to divert and deflect visitors from Habitat Sites. Such green infrastructure is often
referred to as Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspace (SANGS).  SANGS are usually one area
of an alternative attractive semi-natural environment but in the context of the Norfolk GIRAMS,
EGI is proposed as an alternative to a SANG and can incorporate a network of open spaces,
permissive routes and natural or semi-natural environments across a given area. Enhanced
Green Infrastructure should be incorporated into to existing open spaces and or provided through
opportunities for new EGI provision and specific EGI project/target areas.The GI/RAMS identifies
a number of Strategic Opportunities Areas (SOA), which could be developed to meet an
enhanced standard and help act as genuine alternatives to the existing recreational destinations
and help rectify deficiencies in existing provision.
Public Rights of Way
3.11.6 The Public Rights of Way network allows people access to enjoy North Norfolk and in the
process can make a contribution towards improving their health and well-being. The Public
Rights of Way network can also provide an alternative to car use for some journeys by forming
an important component of the District’ s overall sustainable transport network, providing access
on foot or by cycle to the wider countryside, services and facilities.
3.11.7 The NPPF , at paragraph 100, states that planning policies and decisions should protect and53 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3enhance public rights of way and access, including taking opportunities to provide better facilities
for users, for example by adding links to existing rights of way networks including National
Trails.
3.11.8 Where the location and scale of new development requires connections and / or could lead to
the increased use by new and existing residents, there may be a need for improvements to the
Rights of Way network in order to encourage more walking, cycling and horse riding through
improved accessibility, surfacing and / or connectivity. Where this is the case, the Council will
secure appropriate contributions from the applicants. Particular consideration will be given to
connecting development sites with open spaces, leisure / community uses and strategic access
routes, making links within the wider Rights of Way network or to creating circular or extended
routes.
England Coast Path and Coastal Margin 
3.11.9 The England Coast Path is a new long-distance trail that will eventually allow people to walk
around the whole of the English coast, designated under the Countryside and Rights of Way
Act, 2000,(CROW) and Marine and Coastal Access Acts. Natural England has a statutory duty
to provide this path and expects the path to be complete in 2020. The designation of Coastal
Margin land enables spreading room for the coastal trail and aims to ensure the public enjoyment
of this area by establishing new rights of access and to make the extent of people’ s access
rights clearer and more cohesive on the ground.
3.11.10 Paragraph 172 of the NPPF states that Local Planning Authorities should ensure that
development does not hinder the creation and maintenance of a continuous signed and managed
route around the coast, as required by the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009.
3.11.11 Part 9 of the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009 (“the 2009 Act”) aims to improve public
access to, and enjoyment of, the English coastline by creating clear and consistent public rights
along the English coast for open-air recreation on foot. It allows existing coastal access to be
secured and improved and new access to be created in coastal places where it did not already
exist. Section 296 of the Act places a duty on Natural England and the Secretary of State to
use their powers to secure the twin objectives:To secure a route round the whole of the English
coast (an approved mapped line not a physical path); and to secure an associated margin of
land for the public to enjoy.
3.11.12 The margin includes all land between the trail and the sea. It may also extend inland from the
trail if: it is a type of coastal land identified in the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000
(CROW Act), such as beach, dune or cliff there are existing access rights under section 15 of
the CROW Act Natural England and the landowner agree to follow a clear physical feature
landward of the trail.
3.11.13 Collectively, the approach  aligns with the wider Local Plan objectives and in particular the
Healthy Communities objectives 5.1 – 5.4, which aim to provide improved open space provision,
access and connectivity across the Districts network of green infrastructure in order to ensure
it  functions as a strategic multi- functioning network, facilitates increased walking and cycling,
improves the accessibility of new homes and contributes to health communities, as well as,
deflecting pressures and avoiding adverse impacts on the existing Habitat Sites from recreational
pressure.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 54
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable GrowthPolicy CC 11
Green Infrastructure
1. Development proposals will be supported in principle where they fully incorporate green
infrastructure and provide a detailed scheme for:
a. the provision and delivery of new green infrastructure;
b. the mitigation and enhancement of existing green infrastructure;
c. improving green infrastructure connectivity; and,
d. its future maintenance and management.
2. Where it can be clearly demonstrated that green infrastructure cannot be delivered on site
then off site provision followed by financial contributions will be required to deliver
enhancements and mitigation to existing green infrastructure close to the site.
3. Enhanced Green Infrastructure  will be in accordance with that identified in the Norfolk
Green Infrastructure & Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy and any
subsequent SPD.
4. Public Rights of Way(47) and access will be protected, enhanced and promoted. New
development should create convenient and attractive links within development and to the
surrounding area, assist with creation of a network of accessible greenspace and provide
links to public transport and walking and cycling networks.
5. Development will not be permitted if it would hinder the creation, maintenance or planned
investment in a continuous signed and managed route around the English coast(1).
1. As required by the Marine and Coastal Access Act 2009.
3.12 Trees, Hedgerows & Woodland
The purpose of this policy  is to support the retention and incorporation of existing and new trees,
including street trees, within development proposals and to protect trees, hedgerows, woodland and
other natural features from harm, including loss and deterioration and ensure compensatory replacement
is provided.
3.12.1 In line with the national ambitions of the government’ s 25 Y ear Environment Plan(48), there is
a strong local to part play to mitigate and adapt to climate change and reduce pollution by
making our towns and villages more liveable by providing more and better green spaces and
tree cover. The Environment Act(49)legislates for mandatory net gains for biodiversity as a
condition of most new development. Additionally, paragraph 131 of the NPPF confirms that
trees make an important contribution to the character and quality of the environment, as well
as helping mitigate and adapt to climate change and requires that planning policies and decisions
should ensure that new streets are tree-lined.
3.12.2 Trees, hedgerows, woodland and other natural features form an essential part of North Norfolk’ s
landscape character, enhancing the aesthetics of an area, the quality of the environment,
providing a habitat for a range of wildlife and providing important ecological corridors or ‘stepping
stones’  through the landscape for a variety of species for commuting or foraging.They can also
47 Public Rights of Way are maintained by Norfolk County Council and can be viewed at https://www .norfolk.go v.uk/pub licrightsofw ay
48 A Green Future: Our 25 Y ear Plan to Improve the Environment, DEFRA, 2019 -
www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/25-y ear-en vironment-plan
49 https://bills .parliament.uk/bills/259355 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3have many other benefits including providing shade, stabilising soil, helping to reduce noise,
filtering air pollution and flood mitigation. As such, the planting of new and appropriate trees
and woodland across the district will be positively encouraged in order to mitigate against the
impacts of Climate Change and to enhance the character and appearance of the area.
3.12.3 Where new development is proposed the preference will always be to incorporate existing
natural features into the development. In exceptional circumstances where the benefit of
development is demonstrated to outweigh the benefit of preserving natural features, development
will be permitted subject to adequate compensatory provision being made, of a suitable size
and native species for the location, which is also of commensurate biomass and value to that
which is lost.
3.12.4 Many trees in the District have protected status, under the designation of Tree Preservation
Orders (TPO) or by being situated within a Conservation Area. A TPO is an order made by the
Local Planning Authority (LPA) in England to protect specific trees, groups of trees or woodlands
in the interest of amenity. The NPPF defines an ‘ancient’  or ‘veteran tree’  as “A tree which,
because of its age, size and condition, is of exceptional biodiversity, cultural or heritage value”.
‘Ancient trees’  are usually older than the majority of trees of the same species in the same
geographic area, whilst a ‘veteran tree’  is one with similar characteristics to an ancient tree,
but not necessarily ancient in years.
3.12.5 Harm to protected trees includes, but is not limited to, excessive pruning, incursion in the root
protection area, alterations to ground levels or complete removal of the tree. Planning permission
will only be granted where development would not conflict with the purposes of the preservation
order of a tree, group of trees or woodland unless there is a substantiated justification.
3.12.6 Where a proposed development retains existing trees and hedgerows on-site, or where
development occurs within a tree root protection area, provision must be made for their care
and protection throughout the duration of the development with mitigation measures being put
in place to ensure that development works do not have a harmful impact on existing trees. A
satisfactory arboricultural impact assessment should be submitted in accordance with BS5837
(or the equivalent applicable standard should this be superseded over the plan period), which
sets out these details.
3.12.7 Proposals must also take into account the longer-term relationship between trees and a
development. In some circumstances, even when a development can be physically constructed
without resulting in harm to a tree, the proximity and liveability of the development with the tree
can result in long-term pressure for the tree to be constantly pruned or even felled.
Policy CC 12
Trees, Hedgerows & Woodland
1. The retention of existing trees and hedgerows and the provision of new trees and hedgerows
including street trees within a proposal will be supported.The planting of appropriate native
new trees, hedgerows and woodland throughout the District having regard to the North
Norfolk Landscape Character Assessment will be encouraged;
a. to mitigate against the impacts of climate change;
b. to enhance the character and appearance of the district;
c. to improve the green infrastructure provision and ecological connectivity, where it would
not conflict with other nature conservation interests.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 56
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth2. Development that harms or requires the loss of a protected tree, hedgerow or
woodland(1) will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances where the public benefit
of the development would clearly outweigh the loss or deterioration of any tree, hedgerow
or woodland. In such circumstances, adequate replacement provision, taking account of
size, comparable biomass and suitable native species for the location, will be required.
3. Harm or loss to any natural landscape feature will not be permitted unless a landscape
strategy, which would compensate for the loss or harm, is secured or where the overriding
benefits arising from the development outweighs the harm.
4. Where a proposed development retains existing trees and hedgerows on-site, or where
development occurs within a tree root protection area, provision must be made for their care
and protection throughout the duration of the development with mitigation measures being
put in place to ensure that development works do not have a harmful impact on existing
trees.
1. Includes preserved trees and woodland, protected hedgerows, trees in Conservation Areas, ancient trees and woodland, aged
and veteran trees and any other tree of category A or B as per BS 5837:2005 (as amended).
3.13 Protecting Environmental Quality
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure that every opportunity is taken to avoid, minimise and reduce
all emissions and other forms of pollution, including light and noise pollution, and to ensure no
deterioration in water quality.
3.13.1 The Local Plan plays a key role in determining the location of development that may give rise
to pollution, either directly or indirectly, and, as far as possible, in ensuring that other uses and
development are not affected by major existing or potential sources of pollution. New
development should minimise all types of pollution and where possible seek to reduce emissions
and other pollution in order to protect the natural environment.
3.13.2 The policy is intended to restrict polluting development and does not cover general amenity
issues around small scale uses such as hot food takeaways that will be covered by Policy ENV
6 'Protection of Amenity'  and Environmental Health regulations.
Air Quality
3.13.3 Air quality is important to the environment and human health. In North Norfolk air quality is
generally good and monitoring shows that pollutants are within target values. Annual average
concentrations(50) of Nitrogen Dioxide in the period January to December 2019 did not exceed
the national objectives. The only exception to this was a single peak in Hoveton (Hotspot Site
1) during the month of March 2019. However, the annual average at this location remains below
the national objective. To date no Air Quality Management Areas have been declared. The
Council will continue to monitor air quality for the foreseeable future, but it should be noted that
air quality requirements are likely to become stricter over the time period of the Plan and that
restrictions on particulate matter and Nitrogen Oxide may need reviewing in light of these future
changes.
Water Quality
3.13.4 Many water courses in North Norfolk and neighbouring areas, such as The Broads, have national
or international environmental designations and it is particularly important that water quality
50 North Norfolk District Council, 2020 Air Quality Annual Status Report (June 2020) -
https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/inf o/environmental-protection/pollution/air-quality57 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3standards are met. New development must ensure that any effects such as increases in sewage
effluent discharges can be achieved without detriment to water quality. Developers must be
mindful that the pollution of ground water and/or surface water is an offence under the Water
Resources Act 1991. As such, proposals should take account of the objectives of the Water
Framework Directive (WFD)(51) and the requirements of the Conservation of Habitats and
Species Regulations 2017 (as amended), as the maintenance and improvement of the status
of water is an important factor in the protection of the designated habitats or species.
3.13.5 The WFD objectives require no deterioration in water status and improvement in water quality
and consequently, developers must achieve the objectives contained within it. As such, any
developments impacting the water environment must carry out a WFD compliance assessment.
The Anglian river basin district River Basin Management Plan 2015 (RBMP)(52) is the key
over-arching source of information on the water environment, including the condition of water
bodies and measures to help meet the objectives of the Water Environment Regulations 2017.
Light and Noise Pollution
3.13.6 Light and noise pollution arising from new development can, individually and cumulatively, have
a significantly damaging impact on the countryside and settlements in North Norfolk where
many places do not have street lights and where the tranquil environment is highly valued.
3.13.7 Paragraph 185 of the NPPF relates to development being appropriate for its location; referring
specifically to noise and light pollution, and draws attention to intrinsically dark landscapes and
nature conservation. North Norfolk boasts some of the darkest skies in the county and this lack
of artificial light helps the area retain its rural character.
3.13.8 The Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Partnership states as part of its 20 year
vision that "the area will still be essentially unspoilt with a strong feeling of remoteness, peace
and tranquillity, with wide skyscapes, seascapes and dark night skies that show the richness
and detail of constellations. ”(53) External lighting in new development should be limited to that
necessary for security and consideration should also be given to ways of minimising light
pollution using sensitive design details, for example, to avoid large glazed areas.
3.13.9 The NPPG provides further advice on how to consider light within the planning system, in
particular setting out the factors to be considered when assessing whether a development
proposal might have implications for light pollution(54). This guidance and the information set
out in the North Norfolk Landscape Character Assessment SPD will be used to inform decision
making.
3.13.10 To help reduce the impact of noise, appropriate and proportionate mitigating measures will be
required where a proposal is likely to result in some adverse impact on the health, well-being
and quality of life of future occupiers of the proposed development by increasing their potential
exposure to existing sources of noise in the vicinity. In determining individual proposals for
noise generating uses or uses which may increase noise exposure, account will need to be
taken of the operational needs of a business, the character and function of the area, the levels
of neighbourhood noise which might be reasonably expected in the daytime, evening and late
at night, the disposition of uses and activities in the vicinity in relation to residential occupation,
and the reasonable expectation of residents for a high standard of amenity and a period of quiet
51 Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2000 establishing a framework for Community
Action in the field of water policy.
52 Anglian river basin district River Basin Management Plan 2015 (RBMP) - https://tinyurl.com/y5u75b8x
53 http://www .norfolkcoastaonb .org.uk/par tnership/dar k-skies/1120
54 https://www .gov.uk/guidance/light-pollution  Paragraph: 001 Reference ID: 31-001-20140306 to Paragraph: 007 Reference ID:
31-007-20140306 accessed on 05/12/18Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 58
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growthenjoyment for at least part of the day. Where uses sensitive to noise are proposed close to an
existing source of noise or when development that is likely to generate noise is proposed, the
Council will require an acoustic report to accompany the application.
Contaminated Land
3.13.11 In accordance with the provisions of the NPPF , local authorities must ensure that sites are
suitable for development taking account of ground conditions, pollution arising from previous
uses and any proposals for land remediation.
3.13.12 The most frequent cases of contaminated land in North Norfolk are old quarries that have been
filled with unknown material, old brickworks, old town gas sites, ochre, previous landfill sites
and bio-contamination from animals. Redundant RAF bases are a potential source of
contaminated land that may come forward as new uses are considered. Some of these have
already been made suitable for use through the planning system, and future development will
continue to present opportunities for remediation. It is important that these issues are identified
and addressed early in the preparation of proposals for a site. In order to ensure a sufficient
and proportionate level of information is provided, a Contaminated Land Assessment will need
to be submitted for all new development proposals where contamination is known or suspected
(on the site or on adjacent land) and/or where the proposed use would be particularly vulnerable
to the presence of contamination, for example for any residential schemes, care homes, holiday
lets, allotments and small holdings.
3.13.13 Remediation will need to remove unacceptable risk and make the site suitable for its new use.
As a minimum, after carrying out the development and commencement of the new use, the
land should not be capable of being determined as contaminated land under the relevant
Regulations(55).
3.13.14 The Environment Agency offers a charged for discretionary Planning Advice Service(56) and
the Health and Safety Executive provides advice online via their ‘Planning Advice Web App’(57)
and a more detailed ‘Consultancy Package’(58) service to seek to ensure that contaminated
land / pollution / hazard issues are resolved before an application is submitted.
Policy CC 13
Protecting Environmental Quality
1. All development proposals will protect the quality of the environment and will avoid, minimise
and take every opportunity to reduce through proportionate mitigation measures, all
emissions, contamination and other forms of pollution. Proposals will need to comply with
statutory environmental quality standards and demonstrate, individually or cumulatively,
that the development would not give rise to adverse impacts on;
a. the natural environment;
b. the health and safety of the public;
c. air quality;
d. water quality, including surface water and groundwater;
55 Part IIA of the Environmental Protection Act 1990
56 https://www .gov.uk/guidance/de velopers-get-en vironmental-advice-on-y our-planning-proposals  accessed on 05/12/18.
57 https://www .hse.gov.uk/landuseplanning/padhi.htm
58 http://www .hse.gov.uk/landuseplanning/de velopers .htm accessed 05/12/18. Confirmation whether proposed development is within a
HSE consultation zone of a major hazard site or major accident hazard pipeline is a free service. Any detailed advice relating to a
proposed development is a charged service.59 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth 3e. light and noise pollution; and,
f. land quality and condition.
2. Exceptions will only be made where it can be clearly demonstrated that the environmental
benefits of the development and the wider social and economic need for the development
outweigh the adverse impact.
3. Proposals for development should minimise the impact on tranquillity and dark skies in North
Norfolk and the adjoining Authorities’  areas.
4. Development proposals on contaminated land (or where there is reason to suspect
contamination) must include an assessment of the extent of contamination and any possible
risks. Proposals will only be permitted where the land is, or is made, suitable for the proposed
use.
5. Development that would result in unacceptable(1) risk to life or property, will not be permitted
in:
1. Major Hazard Zones ;(1)
2. in the vicinity of existing developments that require particular conditions for their
operation or that are authorised or licensed under pollution control or hazardous
substances legislation (including hazardous pipelines) where new development would
be likely to impose significant restrictions on the activities of the existing use in the
future.
1. As identified by the Health and Safety ExecutiveProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 60
3Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable Growth4 Spatial Strategy
4.0.1 The distribution of development and consideration of the right type and location of
development is fundamental to delivering sustainable growth.The policies in this section
align with those in the Housing and Economy sections helping to ensure that sufficient
homes, of the right types, are built in the right places in order to address the housing
and economic needs identified by local evidence.
4.1 Spatial Strategy
The purpose of this policy is to set out the distribution of development (Spatial Strategy) and provide
the framework to deliver the growth that is necessary to meet the District’ s existing and future needs
for all types of development.
The approach reflects the function of, and relationships between settlements, growth requirements,
together with the constraints and opportunities to contribute towards sustainable growth.
4.1.1 In establishing the Settlement Hierarchy account has been taken of the distinct characteristics
of each settlement, environmental constraints, and the local issues that prevail. In particular,
careful consideration has been given to:
the level of supporting services and infrastructure in each place;
the character of each settlement;
the extent to which future development may be constrained by environmental, social and
economic considerations;
the identified development needs and particularly, the need for affordable homes;
the wider community benefits which may be delivered by growth in a particular location;
the availability of suitable development sites.
4.1.2 The approach is informed by the Sustainability Appraisal which supports this Plan. It recognises
that growth, both in urban and rural areas, is required to meet the growing needs of the District's
population including providing affordable homes, the provision and retention of services and
employment, social and community facilities and improvements in infrastructure including
connectivity and access to green infrastructure. In accommodating the growth requirements
the focus is for larger scale growth to be directed to the larger towns. Smaller towns which have
a good range of services will accommodate more limited growth, while growth villages, large
and small, will provide for more locally derived needs which assist in delivering community
benefits, including necessary infrastructure improvements and service provision.
Settlement Hierarchy
4.1.3 The Large Growth Towns  are the main centres of population and have the broadest range of
day-to-day services including ‘higher order’  services. These towns have primary, secondary
and higher education, health care, an extensive choice of convenience and comparison goods
shopping, good public transport and extensive local employment opportunities. They perform
a strong role as service centres and employment providers across a wide area.
4.1.4 The Small Growth Towns have more limited services but nevertheless a comprehensive range.
They each contain a public secondary school (with the exception of Holt), at least one large
convenience store, a reasonable selection of comparison shops, health services and a range
of local employment opportunities. Whilst their service role is more limited compared to the
Large Growth Towns they nevertheless meet most of the day to day needs of residents within
the towns and adjoining catchment areas.61 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Strategy 44.1.5 Together, the Large & Small Growth Towns provide the focus for the distribution of development
and service provision across North Norfolk and collectively they will accommodate the majority
of the required development.
4.1.6 The Large Growth Villages  have a number of services but the range is often limited and only
Ludham, Mundesley, Briston and Blakeney include a Primary School, convenience shop(s),
doctors' surgery, some public transport, some local employment, and a limited selection of
other services such as a public house, church, post office, and village hall. They act as limited
service hubs for other nearby villages.
4.1.7 The Small Growth Villages  have a limited number of services but none the less they provide
an important element of the Settlement Hierarchy where provision is made through Policy HOU
1 'Delivering Sufficient Homes'  for a small proportion of total growth across the network of
these smaller villages. In these smaller and more rural villages it would not be appropriate to
allocate larger scale market housing given their more dispersed nature, smaller size, rural
character and much more limited service provision and infrastructure availability. Never the
less they provide an element of day to day services and growth at an appropriate scale that
reflects the character of the villages, has the potential to aid their vitality and the viability or
existing services
4.1.8 Each of these Selected Settlements  is defined by a Settlement Boundary,  the position of
which determines the acceptability of various types of development in accordance with the
policies of this Plan.
Small Growth Village Strategy 
4.1.9 The approach provides for approximately 6% growth in any identified Small Growth Village
from the date of adoption of the Plan delivered via a process of infill developments within a
defined settlement  boundary and developments adjacent to the boundary which meet the
specified policy criteria.  A number of the settlements are constrained by environmental factors,
as such the figures in Table 2 'Small Growth Villages Housing Apportionment'  are presented
as an allowance rather than a specific target to be delivered. Potter Heigham, Sea Palling and
Walcott in particular are constrained with large parts of these settlements  situated within Flood
Risk Zone 3b where housing development would not be acceptable. Therefore no indicative
allowance is put forward for these settlements. They do however have the level of service and
facility provision to meet the classification and appropriate growth could be delivered should
suitable development proposals come forward.
4.1.10 The 6% housing allowance does not include any development that is brought forward through
Policy SS 3 'Community-Led Development' , Policy HOU 3 'Affordable Homes in the
Countryside (Rural Exceptions Housing)' , or conversions and dwelling subdivisions within
the defined settlement.
4.1.11 The indicative level of growth that this approach could deliver across the Small Growth Villages
over the plan period is set out below in the Housing Apportionment Table below. The Table
also forms the basis for any subsequent Neighbourhood Plan that seeks to set a housing target
with the LPA and bring forward housing policies including allocations.
4.1.12 Further information, including information on monitoring, is included in 'Appendix 4: Growth
Levels in Small Growth Villages' .
4.1.13 The delivery of affordable homes is a key priority of this Plan. For those suitable development
sites which are located outside of adopted development boundaries that might be suitable for
affordable homes the policy requires that these are first offered to an affordable housing provider
before being considered suitable for market housing.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 62
4Spatial StrategyIndicative  Housing Allowance
(Indicative, 31 March 2021)Settlement
(Parish)
15 Aldborough
37 Badersfield
(Scottow)
31 Bacton
8 Binham
27 Catfield
19 Corpusty & Saxthorpe(1)
43(2)East Runton
24 Happisburgh
17 High Kelling
29 Horning
16 Little Snoring
21 Little Walsingham (Walsingham)
25 Overstrand
0 Potter Heigham(3)
24 Roughton
20 Sculthorpe
0 Sea Palling(3)
21 Southrepps
30 Sutton
24 Trunch
0 Walcott(3)
21 Weybourne
452 Total Housing Delivery @ 6%
Table 2 Small Growth Villages Housing Apportionment
1. Indicative allowance allocated through adopted Neighbourhood Plan
2. Housing figures in Small Growth Villages are based on the existing housing stock as detailed in available census data. Census data
is only available for East & West Runton settlements combined.
3. Indicates that although the settlement has the service and facilities to be considered an infill village , the settlement is environmentally
constrained and no growth is relied upon. Settlement referred to as a ‘Constrained Small Growth Village’63 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Strategy 4Policy SS 1
Spatial Strategy
1. The majority of new development will be located in the larger towns and villages in the
District having regard to their role as employment, retail and service centres, the identified
need for new development and their individual capacity to accommodate sustainable growth.
Where sustainable alternatives are available, major development will not be permitted in
the North Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. Development will be located
where it minimises the risk from flooding and coastal erosion and mitigates and adapts to
the impacts of climate change.
Selected Settlements
Cromer, Fakenham and North Walsham are defined as Large Growth Towns  where a
high proportion (approximately 50%) of new housing, commercial and other developments
will be located.
Holt, Hoveton, Sheringham, Stalham, and Wells next the Sea are defined as Small
Growth Towns  where a lesser quantity of development will be located.
Blakeney, Briston, Ludham and Mundesley are defined as Large Growth
Villages  recognising their wider role as local service centres in meeting the needs of
residents and those of a wider rural hinterland.
A small amount of development will be focused in and adjacent to the defined Small
Growth Villages reflecting their limited service role to help address housing needs and
support vitality and sustainability across the rural area. The Small Growth Villages are:
Aldborough, Bacton, Badersfield, Binham, Catfield, Corpusty & Saxthorpe, East Runton,
Happisburgh, High Kelling, Horning, Little Snoring, Little Walsingham, Overstrand, Potter
Heigham, Roughton, Sculthorpe, Sea Palling, Southrepps, Sutton, Trunch, Walcott, West
Runton and Weybourne.
2. Development will be permitted within the defined Settlement Boundaries  of the Selected
Settlements subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan. Within designated
Residential Areas , residential and compatible small scale non-residential developments
will be permitted.
3. Outside of the defined boundaries of Small Growth Villages  residential development will
be permitted only where all of the following criteria are satisfied:
a. The site immediately abuts the defined Settlement Boundary ;
b. The number of dwellings combined with those already approved since the date of
adoption does not increase the numbers of dwellings in the defined settlement by
usually more than 6% as outlined in Table 2 'Small Growth Villages Housing
Apportionment' , (1); and,
c. The proposal is small scale, incremental growth compatible with the form and character
of the village and its landscape setting in terms of siting, scale, design, impact on
heritage assets and historic character; and,
d. Safe and convenient access can be provided; and,Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 64
4Spatial Strategye. The proposal incorporates substantial community benefits, including necessary
infrastructure and service improvements and improved connectivity to the village and
wider GI network; and,
f. In the case of sites in excess of 0.25 hectares, the site, together with any adjacent
developable land, has first been offered to local Registered Social Landlords on agreed
terms which would allow its development for affordable homes, and such an offer has
been declined.
4. The rest of North Norfolk, including all settlements not listed above, is designated
as Countryside Policy Area  where development will be limited to those types allowed for
in Policy SS 2 'Development in the Countryside' .
1. 6% allowance excludes dwellings built under, Policy SS 3 'Community-Led Development', Policy HOU 3 'Affordable Homes
in the Countryside (Rural Exceptions Housing)'  and, building conversions and dwelling subdivisions.65 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Strategy 4Long Distance PathSettlement Hierarchy Movement Network
Small Growth VillageLarge Growth Town
Local / Tourist Access RoadSmall Growth Town
Large Growth VillageFigure 6 - Settlement Hierarchy
Primary / Most Principal Road
Main Distributor Road
National Railway RouteSpecial Access Road
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.FAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAM
STALHAMWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEASHERINGHAM
HOLT
HOVETONMundesleyBlakeney
LudhamBriston & Melton
Constable
Sea PallingAldborough
BadersfieldSculthorpeRoughton
Corpusty & SaxthorpeOverstrand
High Kelling
TrunchSouthrepps
BactonLangham
Little Walsingham
HorningLittle Snoring
CatfieldSutton
Potter HeighamWalcottBinhamWeybourne
East & West
Runton Happisburgh
Figure 6 Settlement HierarchyProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 66
4Spatial Strategy4.2 Development in the Countryside
The purpose of this policy is to manage the types of development allowed in the designated Countryside
Policy Area.
4.2.1 Much of the countryside in North Norfolk is subject to national designations such as an Area
of Outstanding Natural Beauty, Heritage & Undeveloped Coast designations, there are a number
of large rural conservation areas and many internationally important wildlife sites. Outside of
these designated areas the countryside is sparsely developed, attractive and retains a sense
of remoteness, particularly along parts of the coast.
4.2.2 The countryside is an intrinsic and defining feature of North Norfolk. It provides land for food
production, homes for wildlife, space for outdoor recreation and contributes to the health and
well-being of residents and visitors alike. The countryside provides for a high quality of life and
together with the historic built environment it underpins, and is the reason for, a strong tourist
economy.
4.2.3 The NPPF requires that '...the intrinsic character and beauty of the countryside is recognised
and that planning policies should contribute to and enhance the local environment'  (para 174).
4.2.4 This Plan provides ample opportunities to address most development needs without the necessity
to build in the wider countryside. Nevertheless it is important that the countryside area remains
vibrant and provides for local employment, food production, recreation, and services to support
the vitality and viability of local communities. Policies SS2 & SS3 provide a positive framework
to support necessary developments which add to the viability and vitality of the countryside and
the rural communities within it, whilst protecting the area from the adverse impacts of
unnecessary developments.
4.2.5 The policy approach sets out the strategic and overriding principle in areas outside settlements
with development boundaries. Residential development is limited to that appropriate to:
agricultural/ forestry use, affordable homes, replacement dwellings, subdivision of dwellings,
essential rural workers accommodation accommodation and that for gypsies and travellers,
community led development, and specialist accommodation for the elderly and others requiring
care, where there is a demonstrable need.
Policy SS 2
Development in the Countryside
In the designated Countryside Policy Area, as defined on the Policies Map, planning permission
will be granted which complies with the policies of this Plan and is for one or more of the following:
a. use and development of land associated with agriculture or forestry;
b. the provision of infrastructure including, but not limited to, roads, drainage, coastal and flood
protection, power including renewable energy, and development by statutory undertakers,
utility and telecommunications providers;
c. affordable homes, replacement dwellings, sub division of dwellings, essential rural workers
accommodation;
d.  temporary and permanent accommodation for gypsies and travellers;
e. community facilities and services including, but not limited to, community halls, health,
education, places of worship and community led developments;
f. recreation and tourism;
g. extensions to existing dwellings and businesses;
h. re-use of existing buildings;67 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Strategy 4i. new employment generating development or specialist accommodation for the elderly
infirm (and others requiring care), where there is a demonstrable need for the development
and where alternative sites within defined Settlement Boundaries  are shown not to be
available or suitable; and,
j. small-scale residential development adjacent to the defined settlement boundaries of Small
Growth Villages in accordance with Policy SS 1 'Spatial Strategy' .
4.3 Community-Led Development
The purpose of this policy  is to make clear the Council's support for various types of development
proposals which are led by, and have the support of, the community.
4.3.1 Giving communities greater say in and control of development in their areas is a central theme
of government policy. Community-led schemes are those that are proposed by local communities,
rather than by local authorities or private developers.They can help communities to tackle local
issues that are important to them such as a shortage of affordable homes, key worker
accommodation, or the provision of local jobs, and can generate income to help fund further
investment in the local area. Such schemes can bring communities together and deliver
increased investment for the benefit of all.
4.3.2 Mechanisms for delivering community-led developments include Community Land Trusts (CLTs),
the preparation of Neighbourhood Plans, or simply making a planning application for community
developments. CLTs are not-for-profit organisations based in, and run by, the community that
seek to develop key community assets. The usual starting point for CLT’ s is the provision of
affordable housing but other benefits such as community shops, pubs, allotments, gardens,
play areas, orchards, work space, and renewable energy can also be provided via this
mechanism.
4.3.3 Neighbourhood Plans are separate Development Plan documents which are prepared by a
designated community group (usually a Parish or Town Council) and can be used as a way to
promote additional development in an area beyond that which is proposed in this Plan or to
add locally distinctive policies which complement and support the delivery of the strategic
policies of a Local Plan. North Norfolk District Council is supportive of the preparation of
Neighbourhood Plans(59).
4.3.4 Some community-led schemes are likely to be located outside of the settlement boundaries
identified in this Plan where some types of development including market homes would be
contrary to the policies of the Plan.The Council wishes to support Community-led developments
including those which may not comply with some aspects of this Plan provided it is demonstrated
that the development proposed is needed and will make a meaningful and lasting contribution
to the vitality of the community and deliver improved services and infrastructure. To secure
planning permission under this policy it will be necessary to demonstrate compliance with a
number of criteria including that the proposal has wide spread community support.
4.3.5 Demonstrable community support means that at the point of submission of a planning application
to the Local Planning Authority there should be clear evidence of local community support for
the scheme, generated through pre-application community consultation and support from the
applicable parish council.
59 Further advice is available at https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/neighbourhoodplansProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 68
4Spatial StrategyPolicy SS 3
Community-Led Development
1. Community led development(1) will be supported where it is demonstrated that the proposal
will contribute positively to the vitality and viability of the community as a whole, provided:
a. there is evidence that the proposed development is needed to support the vitality and
viability of the community; and,
b. it is demonstrated that the location, scale, design and materials will protect, conserve
and enhance the distinctive landscape types, character areas and their settings; and,
c. the scale of the scheme is appropriate to the location; and,
d. the proposal Incorporates substantial community benefits, including necessary
infrastructure and service improvements; and,
e. the Council is satisfied that:
i. the scheme was initiated by, and is being led by, a legitimate local community
group such as a Parish Council or constituted Community Land Trust; and,
ii. the scheme has demonstrable community support as evidenced by meaningful
public engagement; and,
iii. it is demonstrated that the scheme will be effectively managed over the lifetime
of  the development and that any benefits provided by the scheme can be retained
by the local community in perpetuity and would be significantly greater than would
be delivered on an equivalent open market site.
2. Where housing is proposed it should be for affordable or key worker accommodation. A
small element of open market housing on the site will only be acceptable where:
a. it is clearly demonstrated to be the minimum necessary in order to deliver affordable
dwellings which would not otherwise be provided; and,
b. in all cases the majority of the homes provided are affordable.
1. This may include schemes involving affordable housing, community shops, pubs, allotments, gardens, play areas, orchards,
small business units, renewable energy generation and other uses where it is demonstrated that the Proposal will contribute
positively to the vitality and viability of the community as a whole.69 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Spatial Strategy 4Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 70
4Spatial Strategy5 Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities
5.0.1 The policies in this section of the Plan form an integral part of good planning and are
designed to ensure that local communities and supporting infrastructure are at the centre
of decision-making in order to meet a number of the Strategic Aims & Objectives, and
to align with Government aims.These include the protection and enhancement of
community facilities, including health, existing infrastructure, services, and public
transport, as well as, the promotion of broadband connectivity. The protection,
enhancement and provision of a range of formal and informal open spaces set out
in Policy HC 2 'Provision & Retention of Open Spaces' will achieve important health and
well-being benefits that complements multiple policies within the Plan.
5.1 Health & Wellbeing
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure that health infrastructure and well-being are considered as
integral to the development process.
5.1.1 The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) requires local planning authorities to ensure
that health and well-being and the provision of health infrastructure are considered in Local
and Neighbourhood Plans and in planning decision making. The Norfolk and Waveney
Sustainable and Transformation Partnership (STP) provide an integrated system of leadership
in health provision and have a Long Term Plan and STP Estates Strategy in order to deliver
cost efficient services in relation to planned growth.
5.1.2 The Council, under the agreed Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework (NSPF)(60), are signatories
to Planning in Health: An Engagement Protocol between LPA, Public Health & Health sector
organisations in Norfolk, and agree to ' consider matters relating to healthy environments and
encourage physical activity… drawing on key guidance such as Building for a Healthier Life
and Active Design'. The protocol sets a framework for health professionals, relevant health and
social care partners, commissioning bodies and Norfolk County Council Public Health and town
planners to work together to obtain robust and consistent health and social care and Public
Health information to inform Planning decisions  in order to support appropriate health and
well-being infrastructure and ensure the principles of health and well-being are adequately
considered through place making and in the evaluation and determination of planning
applications.
5.1.3 The protocol provides a practical tool to assist the Council, developers and health sector
organisations to participate in discussions and to consider the relative merits of different sites,
proposals and policies properly against public health related issues. The Planning in Health
Protocol also recognises that health sector organisations can bring a positive influence to the
design of new developments that offer people the chance to choose a healthier lifestyle. The
Council will consult with healthcare planning and commissioning bodies in line with the protocol
on applications for 50 homes or more and for those schemes including care homes, housing
for the elderly, student accommodation and any proposals which would lead to the significant
loss of public open space. Contributions will be sought on the advice of the Norfolk and Waveney
Sustainable and Transformation Partnership where it is advised as a result any specific proposal
developer funding to specific health care projects such as contributions towards new doctor’ s
surgery / medical facility are required to enable surgeries and other services to expand and
address the needs arising from growth.
60 NSPF May 2021, Agreement 18 - https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr ary71 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 55.1.4 The Council will require the submission of Health Impact Assessments, (HIA) by developers
for larger scale housing proposals (currently 500 dwellings) in order to assess how their proposals
will create healthy communities and provide adequate health facilities.
5.1.5  Developers are encouraged to engage through early pre-application advice. Pre-application
discussions should include the HIA’ s scope and nature in order to embed health planning
considerations into the development process.
5.1.6 Planning applications for residential development of all sizes and HIAs should be informed by
the Healthy Planning Checklist for Norfolk, which is available as Appendix 1 in the Health
Protocol(61).The Checklist is a practical tool to assist developers and their agents when preparing
development proposals and local planning authorities in policy making and in the application
process. It also provides a framework for Norfolk County Council Public Health when considering
health and well-being impacts of development plans and planning applications. The checklist
is designed to highlight issues and facilitate discussion and can be used flexibly, reflecting the
size and significance of the development. It is best used prospectively, before a plan or proposal
is submitted, but can also be used concurrently and retrospectively.
5.1.7 Discussions and comments provided on all planning applications (50 units and above) will make
use of the criteria set out in the Health and Well-being Checklist (Appendix 1) of the Health
Protocol. It is therefore in everybody's interests to utilise this protocol in the early stages of a
proposal.
Policy HC 1
Health & Wellbeing
1. A Health Impact Assessment will be required for development proposals of 500 dwellings
or more. For all non-allocated sites an accompanying HIA must be provided where there is
the potential for significant impacts.
2. Major development should be informed by the Healthy Planning Checklist as detailed in the
Planning in Health Protocol(1)and the updated criteria in ‘Building for a Healthy Life’(2) and
incorporate the measures identified as necessary to improve health and well-being.
1. Planning in Health Protocol, Norfolk Strategic Planning Forum, 2019 .
2. Further information: https://www .udg.org.uk/pub lications/other manuals/b uilding-health y-life
5.2 Provision & Retention of Open Spaces
The purpose of this policy  is to protect existing open spaces from the possible adverse impacts of
development and to ensure that where new development takes place it is served by the right quantity
and type of open space to meet the needs of residents.
5.2.1 It is one of a number of policies in the Plan dealing with use and provision of all types of green
infrastructure and should be applied in conjunction with Policy CC 11 'Green Infrastructure'
and Policy CC 10 'Biodiversity Net Gain' . The policy compliments and supports a countywide
Green Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (set out in Policy
CC 11 'Green Infrastructure'  and Policy ENV 5 'Impacts on International & European
sites: Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy' , which seeks to ensure
appropriate provision and compliance with the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations.
61 'Planning in Health' Protocol, available in NNDC Document Library - https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr aryProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 72
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities5.2.2 The provision of good quality open space and access to the wider countryside close to where
people live can have many benefits including for health and wellbeing, biodiversity, mitigating
flood risk, carbon storage, and food production as well as contributing towards the character
of places. It can also help to manage visitor pressures at important wildlife habitats by providing
alternative places for informal recreation.
5.2.3 North Norfolk has a diverse range of open spaces(62). These perform a range of functions and
make a significant contribution to the character of the District. Many of these lie within the built
up areas of the settlements selected for growth in this Plan and are in locations where, without
policy protection, they may be susceptible to development pressures. It is therefore important
that these spaces are protected from the potential impacts of development whilst allowing
improvements to their recreational and / or environmental value. This Plan designates three
types of green space:
Open Land Areas  - principally ‘open’  areas of undeveloped land that make a significant
contribution to the character of the area.
Formal Education & Recreation Areas  - Open spaces with an important recreational
function such as school playing fields, sports pitches and recreation parks and gardens.
Local Green Spaces - Spaces which meet specific criteria identified in the NPPF as being
‘demonstrably special’  to a local community.
5.2.4 As new housing development is built it creates an additional need for open space and sports
and recreation facilities. As well as protecting existing spaces the policy includes a requirement
for new developments to provide, or contribute towards, open space provision in accordance
with published local standards. In the first instance, new areas should be provided on the
development site itself where it is conveniently accessible to new residents. Off-site provision
may be appropriate in some circumstances as outlined in the table below. In determining how
much, and what type, of space is required consideration will be given to the existing provision
within the local area both in terms of quantity, quality and accessibility.
200+ Dwellings 100-199
Dwellings50-99 Dwellings 20-49 Dwellings 11-19 Dwellings Type of Provision
On-site On-site Off-site Off-site Off-site Allotments
On-site On-site On-site On-site On-site Amenity Green
Space
On-site Off-site Off-site Off-site Off-site Parks &
Recreation
Grounds
On-site On-site On-site On-site On-site(1)Play Space
(Children)
On-site Off-site Off-site Off-site Off-site Play Space
(Y outh)
On-site On-site Off-site Off-site Off-site Accessible Natural
Green Space
Table 3 Acceptable locations for Open Space associated with new developments
1. For children’ s play space, the minimum size required for new equipped provision is 0.01ha (100sq m). At smaller scheme sizes,
consideration should be given to the design of amenity green space to provide ‘playable’  space and making use of natural play solutions,
rather than equipped provision always being required.
62 'All open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas of water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer
important opportunities for sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity’  (NPPF 2021, Glossary Page 70)73 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 55.2.5 New open space, or improvements to existing areas, will be secured through planning conditions
and/or section 106 planning obligations attached to the grant of planning permission.
Open Space Standards
5.2.6 The policy approach is based on the quantity, quality and accessibility of open space in the
District as identified within the 2019 Open Space Assessment(63)Taking account of the planned
growth in the area this study identified a requirement for 72.39 hectares of new open space
over the plan period (to 2036) in order to meet the needs of residents in the proposed new
development. This is 4.36ha per 1,000 population. The study recommends the provision of the
following types and quantities of open space for each additional 1,000 people.
Play Space (children): 0.10ha
Play Space (youth): 0.06ha 
Parks and Recreation: 1.10ha 
Natural Greenspace: 1.5ha
Amenity Greenspace: 1ha
Allotments: 0.6ha
5.2.7 As part of the North Norfolk Open Space Assessment (2019), an open space calculator was
created to calculate the quantum of on-site open space that is to be provided based on the
number of bedrooms proposed by the development. Further detail on this and the quality
standards is set out in 'Appendix 2: Open Space'. Development proposals should be supported
by comprehensive details of open space provision including location, quantity, types, overall
design and proposals for its on-going maintenance. Developers are encouraged to use the
pre-application advice service to obtain details and to incorporate these into their proposals at
the earliest opportunity.
5.2.8 Any specific local open space requirements associated with the development site allocations
made in this Plan are set out within the individual site allocation policies (or associated
Development Briefs).
5.2.9 Neighbourhood Development Plans may also outline open space requirements in line with local
evidence and the North Norfolk Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study (2019).
5.2.10 For larger scale residential developments additional enhanced green Infrastructure in addition
to local open space provision and standards is required in order to assist in recreational mitigation
measures and compliance to Habitat Regulations. More information is set out in the Norfolk
Wide Green Infrastructure Recreational Impact Avoidance Strategy, (GIRAMS) and policies
CC11 and ENV5.
Policy HC 2
Provision & Retention of Open Spaces
Provision of new Open Spaces
1. All new residential developments of 11 or more dwellings, or with a combined gross
floorspace of more than 1,000 square metres (gross internal area) shall provide on-site
open space, or contribute towards off-site open space, in accordance with the standards
set out in Table 3 'Acceptable locations for Open Space associated with new developments'
and 'Appendix 2: Open Space' .
63 Document Library - www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr aryProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 74
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities2. All new open space and outdoor sport and recreation facilities shall be suitable, useable,
well located, accessible, and designed with appropriate management arrangements in place
having regard to the North Norfolk Open Space, Sport and Recreation Study (2019) and
the quality standards set out in Appendix 2
3. Open space and outdoor sport and recreation facilities will be provided on the development
site, except where evidence indicates that off-site delivery would provide a facility of equal
value in terms of quantity, quality and accessibility. In these circumstances direct provision
should be made off-site as part of the development proposal. Financial contributions will be
considered to support the creation or enhancement of off-site provision only where direct
delivery is not possible.
Protection of existing Open Spaces
4. Development on Formal Education & Recreation Areas  (designated and non-designated
facilities) will not be permitted unless:
a. it comprises of development which enhances the functional use of the site for outdoor
sport; or,
b. the loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or
better provision in terms of quantity, quality and local accessibility and the alternative
provision is made available for use prior to the loss of the area of open space to be
built upon; or,
c. It can be demonstrated (1) that the sport and recreation facility is surplus to requirements
within the settlement and that any proposed loss would not result in a current or likely
shortfall during the plan period (taking into account alternative forms of open space,
sport and recreation in the area).
5. Development on visually important open spaces including those designated as Open Land
Areas  and Local Green Spaces  on the Policies Map will not usually be supported.
1. Through a Local Assessment that demonstrates an adequate supply of sport and recreation facilities locally with regard to the
quantity, quality and accessibility as measured against currently adopted standards.
5.3 Provision & Retention of Local Facilities
The purpose of this policy  is to allow for new community facilities and services in sustainable locations
and to prevent the premature loss of important local facilities where their continued use is considered
to remain a reasonable prospect.
5.3.1 In a large rural area such as North Norfolk the loss of the last remaining convenience store,
public house or other important facility in a village, or even a small town, can have a significant
impact upon the ability of residents to meet their needs locally. As well as increasing the need
to travel, the loss of services can threaten the viability and vitality of rural communities.
5.3.2 Proposals for redevelopment of a local facility will therefore be carefully assessed and, where
there is no alternative provision planned, applications for redevelopment or change of use will
need to be justified, including in the case of commercial uses, via viability testing. As a minimum,
this should consider the demand for the use, demonstrate if there is a reasonable prospect of
the use being retained, and show that the property has been subject to appropriate marketing
for a period of at least 12 months in order to ascertain whether another operator is interested
in running the facility / service. Marketing strategies should accord with best practice guidance75 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 5published by the LPA. Applicants should not seek to demonstrate that the age or poor condition
of a facility makes it no longer viable to maintain, or reduces demand for it, as these are matters
that can often be addressed.
5.3.3 Increase in health care provision and the provision of homes suitable for the elderly, those with
disabilities, and those requiring specialist forms of accommodation for older people is a key
priority for the Council. Those areas designated as Health and Social Care Campuses, and
buildings used to provide specialist accommodation for the elderly will be safeguarded for health
and social care uses, or those developments which facilitate the delivery of improved health
and social care in the immediate vicinity.
Policy HC 3
Provision & Retention of Local Facilities
1. New or improved community facilities or services will be permitted within the Selected
Settlements  or within the designated Countryside Policy Area  where they meet the
identified needs of the local community.
2. Development proposals that would result in the loss of premises currently, or last used for,
important local facilities(1) will not be permitted unless:
a. alternative provision of an equivalent or better quality facility is available in the vicinity
or will be provided and made available prior to commencement of redevelopment; or
b. it can be demonstrated that there is no reasonable prospect of retention of the facility;
and, if it is a commercial operation:
a. it has been marketed for a period of at least 12 months;(2)
b. a viability test has demonstrated that the use is no longer viable; and,
c. that all reasonable efforts have been made to sell or let the property at a realistic
market price(3).
3. Development proposals on designated Health & Social Care Campuses  as identified on
the Policies Map at Cromer, Fakenham, High Kelling, North Walsham and Wells-next-the-Sea
that would otherwise accord with Development Plan policies but would result in the loss of
health care facilities will not be permitted unless the proposal enables the delivery of a
replacement facility of equal or greater community benefit in that locality before an existing
facility is lost.
1. Important local facilities include a primary school, convenience store, bank, post office, public house, petrol filling station, public
hall or indoor sports facility, theatres and cinemas and other cultural facilities, and specialist elderly persons accommodation
and health care facilities
2. To accord with best practice guidance published by the LPA.
3. Demonstrated as commercial market price by local valuer to the satisfaction of the Council.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 76
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities5.4 Infrastructure Provision, Developer Contributions & Viability
The purpose of the policy is to set out the strategic approach to ensure that all of the social, physical
and green infrastructure, which is necessary to make development acceptable is provided in a timely
manner as development takes place. It sets out the approach to developer contributions to support
infrastructure delivery whilst ensuring development viability across the District and that there is
transparency in the process.
5.4.1 Future development within the District will place pressure and demand on existing infrastructure
such as schools, open spaces, transport networks, health and community facilities. In order to
assist in mitigating this additional demand there will be a requirement for new development to
contribute toward the improvement of existing facilities and, where necessary to make the
development acceptable, the provision of new infrastructure.
5.4.2 Without appropriate measures to mitigate impact and/or investment to enable the provision of
infrastructure improvements, new developments that cause adverse impacts would be by
definition neither sustainable nor acceptable in planning terms. To support sustainable growth
in the District new development will be expected to provide and/or contribute towards necessary
and required infrastructure and to enable its provision in an appropriate and timely manner.
5.4.3 Where infrastructure improvements are required, planning obligations will be used along with
planning conditions attached to the planning permission to secure delivery. Section 106, Section
111 agreements along with Section 278 highway agreements will be completed between the
Local Planning Authority and developers in order to secure appropriate provision and
contributions.When such requirements are made they will be done so with the full consideration
of national planning policy in terms of the reasonableness of the requirement, in particular
paragraph 56 which states that planning obligations should only be sought where they meet
the following tests(64):
1. necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;
2. directly related to the development; and,
3. fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.
5.4.4 In the case of larger infrastructure requirements such as those associated with urban extensions
and regeneration initiatives where development may be phased s106 monies can now be pooled
in order to contribute towards a single piece or type of infrastructure. Developers will need to
liaise closely with the planning authority and take account of any specific requirements in a
development brief. In addition, off-site improvements may also be sought where necessary. In
such circumstances it may be appropriate for the Local Authority and other public sector agencies
to assist and facilitate in the development coming forward.
5.4.5 In line with policies and site proposals in this Plan, accompanying evidence and the Infrastructure
Delivery Plan, planning obligations will be sought where necessary on a range of infrastructure
requirements in response to specific schemes circumstances. Some infrastructure provision
will take place outside of development sites. Table 4 'Planning Obligations: Indicative
Infrastructure Types' sets out an indicative list of the potential types of infrastructure that should
be considered in order to make development schemes acceptable in planning terms and to
meet Local Plan Objectives. Developers are encouraged to enter into discussions about planning
obligations and heads of terms as early as possible in the planning process. Planning obligation
requirements under the responsibility of the County Council such as education, highways, and
adult services are clearly set out in the NCC’ s Planning Obligation Standards
publication,(65) which is updated annually.
64 Set out in Regulation 122(2) of the Community Infrastructure Levy Regulations 2010.
65 www .norfolk.go v.uk/rubbish-recycling-and-planning/planning-applications/planning-ob ligations77 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 5Health provision / services Affordable Housing
High speed internet access Education provision
Amenity Green Space including open space , play areas,
allotments , parks sports facilities, natural and semi-natural
green spaces and enhanced green infrastructureCommunity facilities
Recreational avoidance mitigation (RAMS) Libraries
Biodiversity enhancements - replacement/new habitat Highway access, safety & capacity
Cemeteries and churchyards Cycling, walking facilities
Flood defences Public Transport
Drainage infrastructure, improvements and Sustainable
Drainage SystemsElectric vehicle charge points
Adult social care and public health (accessible and
adaptable standards) Fire (hydrant provision/water supply)
Table 4 Planning Obligations: Indicative Infrastructure Types
5.4.6 Other on-site infrastructure could include addressing local deficiencies in community centres
and village halls as well as effective telecommunications, but only to the extent that improvements
are necessary to make the development proposal acceptable. Much larger sites have the
potential to support the provision of larger infrastructure requirements such as new and
secondary primary schools, subject to local need.
5.4.7 Infrastructure priorities and delivery, as well as showing how monies received have been spent,
will be monitored and reported annually through the Annual Monitoring Reports and Infrastructure
Funding Statement.
Affordable Housing  
5.4.8 The National Planning Policy Framework indicates that affordable homes should not normally
be required on schemes of 10 or fewer dwellings or site areas less than 0.5 hectares except
for in Designated Rural Areas where, a lower site size threshold is applied(66). Much of North
Norfolk is designated as a Rural Area and in light of the high need for affordable homes the
Council will seek affordable housing on schemes in this area which propose six or more
dwellings. To address the possible practical problems of providing affordable homes on small
sites the policy includes an option to make an equivalent financial contribution of sufficient value
to deliver the affordable homes requirement elsewhere. Further information is included in
section 7 'Housing' .
Green Infrastructure/Biodiversity
5.4.9 In line with the policies contained in this Plan, the Council will seek opportunities to increase
the provision of all types of open space including new on-site open space, play areas, recreation
areas and their accessibility. The Habitat Regulation Assessment along with the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance and Mitigation Strategy demonstrates that
all residential and tourism development has the potential to affect the integrity of Habitats Sites
and as such will be required to contribute towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk
wide GIRAMS (or any subsequent Supplementary Planning Document) through a tariff approach
and additional enhanced green infrastructure, as detailed in Policy ENV 5 'Impacts on
International & European sites: Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy'. In
66 PPG - Planning Obligations, Paragraph: 023 Reference ID: 23b-023-20190901 Revision date 01.09.2019.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 78
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communitiesaddition LPA’ s have a duty to conserve, restore and enhance biodiversity under section 40 of
the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act (2006) and in partnership with the County
Council may seek contributions towards improving areas of green space and or the creation of
new habitats, where they relate to new development as required by the NPPF and in relation
to net gain  biodiversity contributions in relation to satisfying developers obligations and the
policy requirements for biodiversity net gain set out in this Local Plan and national legislation.
5.4.10 New open space, or improvements to existing areas, will be secured through planning conditions
and/or section 106 planning obligations attached to the grant of planning permission in line with
requirements set in this Plan including Policy CC 11 'Green Infrastructure' ,  Policy HC
2 'Provision & Retention of Open Spaces'  and Policy ENV 5 'Impacts on International &
European sites: Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy' .
Health Contributions
5.4.11 The Council under the agreed Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework(67) are signatories to
Planning in Health: An Engagement Protocol between LPA, Public Health & Health sector
organisations in Norfolk. The protocol sets a framework for health professionals and town
planners to work together 'to consider matters relating to healthy environments and encourage
physical activity, drawing on key guidance such as Building for a Healthier Life and Active
Design' . Contributions will be sought on the advice of the Norfolk and Waveney Sustainable
and Transformation Partnership (STP) where it is advised as a result any specific proposal
developer funding to specific health care projects such as contributions towards new doctor’ s
surgery / medical facility are required to enable surgeries and other services to expand and
address the needs arising from the proposal. Developers are encouraged to engage through
early pre-application advice.
Viability 
5.4.12 The viability of development and its ability to fund necessary infrastructure is a central part of
the planning system. The Council expects that the uplift in land value as a result of planning
permission will be shared between the land owner, developer, and the local community in the
form of necessary infrastructure contributions. In line with Government advice the land
purchase price of land must fully reflect the cumulative policy costs of adopted Plans(68).
The onus is on site promoters and developers to ensure that the price paid for land does not
negatively affect the delivery of this Local Plan's objectives and compromise the delivery of
sustainable and climate resilient development. Where land with planning permission is
subsequently sold, the price paid for land should not be inflated to such an extent that it
compromises the existing permission. Such land transactions should remain at a price that
ensures that the development remains policy compliant. Risks taken will be those of the
purchaser.
5.4.13 The viability assessment is primarily undertaken during the Local Plan process. As such only
in exceptional circumstances, such as changes which could not have been reasonably predicted
at an earlier stage, should it be necessary to re-visit viability at the stage of a planning application
being submitted.
5.4.14 Proposal that are fully policy compliant and propose to deliver the full policy ask including
affordable housing requirements at the relevant level set out in the Plan will be taken to be
viable and as such there is no need to submit a viability assessment with such proposals.
67 NSPF , May 2021, Agreement 18 - https://www .norfolk.go v.uk/nsf
68 Planning Practice Guidance - Viability ' price paid for land is not a relevant justification for failing to accord with relevant policies in the
plan' PPG, Paragraph: 002 Reference ID: 10-002-20190509 revision 9.5.19. ' Under no circumstances will the price paid for land be a
relevant justification for failing to accord with relevant policies in the plan. Paragraph: 006 Reference ID: 10-006-20190509 Revision
date: 09 05 2019' .79 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 5Conditions will be attached to any permission granted in order to ensure delivery. Promoters
that seek a departure from policy on viability ground will need to substantiate the position through
the submission based on an appropriate viability assessment.
5.4.15 The Local Plan Viability Assessment sets the standard approach to appraisals. Any viability
assessment for specific applications must refer back to the assessment of the Plan and the
standard methodology used, be transparent, and utilise the agreed assumptions providing
evidence of what has changed since then. In all cases, submitted assessments should be set
out reflecting the governments approach to key inputs and be proportionate, simple, and
transparent. Any appraisal submitted will be publicly available as part of the application(69).
5.4.16 The weight given to such an appraisal will be down to the decision maker, the level of compliance
with the Local Plan viability methodology, the transparency of assumptions behind evidence
submitted and the site circumstances.
5.4.17 Where issues of viability arise the Council will require applicants to clearly demonstrate the
margins of viability. Where it is clearly demonstrated that there are issues of viability then the
Council will work with the applicant to understand whether alternative sources of funding are
available to secure the necessary infrastructure. Whilst the Council will work with applicants to
achieve a positive outcome it is clear that planning permission should not be granted for
development which is not considered acceptable in planning terms.
5.4.18 It is important that the planning application process runs efficiently in order to meet statutory
time frames for determination. Viability assessments should be submitted alongside other
required application documents and include all the relevant information required, or as otherwise
requested. A failure to accord with the requirements could result in limited weight being
subsequently given to any viability argument in the determination and decision making process.
If material changes are made to an application following submission that could affect viability,
a revised appraisal will be required at the same time and the Council could reasonably expect
to agree a new timetable for determination.
5.4.19 Viability assessments are based on current costs and values, however there are circumstances
where a scheme requires phased delivery over the medium and longer term and it is reasonable
that the Council should be able to take into consideration changes in the value of development
and the costs of delivery. Such re-appraisals are generally suited to phased schemes over the
longer term and as such the Council will use uplift clauses for the following types of development:
Medium and longer term developments (5 years or more from issuing of consent to completion
of scheme) or  schemes of more than one phase or which comprise of multiple sites.The decision
as to whether a scheme is considered medium/long term or multiple phased rests with the
Council as Local Planning Authority, having regard to up to date case law.
5.4.20 Scheme viability will only be assessed at outline stage where it can be reasonably demonstrated
to the Council that the proposed development includes significant Section 106 Agreement
requirements and/or exceptional development costs. In such cases it may be appropriate to
consider a shorter time frame for submission of any reserved matters and a shorter time frame
for commencement of development, not only to encourage early commencement, but to ensure
the development does not become classed as medium to long term development, at which
point an uplift clause may be required. The Council has the right to vary this approach but it is
anticipated that any such changes would first be reported to the Development Committee.
69 Viability PPG Paragraph: 010 Reference ID: 10-010-20180724, revision 24.7.18, Paragraph: 008 Reference ID: 10-008-20190509
revision 9.5.19, NPPF para 34,58.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 80
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy CommunitiesPolicy HC 4
Infrastructure Provision, Developer Contributions & Viability
1. To ensure the delivery of necessary infrastructure, secure sustainable communities and to
meet the wider sustainability objectives, the Council will secure infrastructure through specific
developer obligations and contributions in order to properly service, manage and mitigate
the impact of development, which:
a. meet the tests set out in NPPF(1) and the specific requirements set out throughout the
Development Plan and Supplementary Planning Documents;
b. are directly related to the development, and are necessary to make the development
acceptable; and,
c. cannot be secured by planning conditions.
2. Proposals are required to be informed by the infrastructure requirements needed to support
and service the proposed development. The delivery of development shall align with the
provision of infrastructure. The timing of provision of infrastructure and facilities will be
carefully considered in order to ensure that appropriate provision is phased and in place
when it is required.
3. Where on-site infrastructure provision is either not feasible or not desirable, off-site provision
or developer contributions will be required in order to secure delivery of the necessary
infrastructure.
4. In particular development will be expected to provide, or contribute towards the provision
of(2):
a. infrastructure requirements as identified in the site specific proposals;
b. the highest viable level of affordable housing;
c. the delivery of community infrastructure, including but not limited to education,
healthcare, libraries, community facilities, telecommunications;
d. satisfactory access to the development, and pedestrian & highway safety improvements
necessary to mitigate any impacts on the wider highway network;
e. the delivery and ongoing maintenance (or financial contribution/commuted sums) of
formal and informal open space including sport and recreation, play space, allotments
or other facilities required directly to serve the development and contribute to local
community facilities;
f. sustainable transport;
g. the delivery of environmental infrastructure including biodiversity management, net
gain landscaping, flood defences, SuDS, waste management and, where necessary
their maintenance;
h. visitor impact mitigation on European sites from additional pressure on Natura 2000
sites in line with the emerging mitigation and monitoring strategy for recreational impacts
on those sensitive sites;
i. the delivery of any other infrastructure requirements in a made Neighbourhood Plan;
j. monitoring purposes.
5. Proposals which are not supported by the necessary infrastructure will not be permitted
unless justified by a comprehensive Viability Assessment, prepared in accordance with the
latest national and any local guidance.
Viability Assessments81 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 56. Proposals that are not accompanied by a viability assessment(3)will be taken as fully policy
compliant.
7. Development proposals that seek to depart from policy on viability grounds must be supported
by a viability assessment at validation stage that is suitable, proportionate, and transparent
and accords with the required Council's methodology. Assessments should consider
alternative funding mechanisms to aid scheme viability 
8. Additional appraisals will be required to support applications that are materially altered post
submission.
9. On medium and longer term developments including phased schemes, the Council will
require additional viability appraisals at subsequent phased / reserve matter stages where
the Council and or Developer considers that there has been significant change in market
conditions.
1. As detailed i Paragraphs 56-58, NPPF 2021
2. The following list is not exhaustive
3. In all cases the submitted viability assessment will be made publicly available.
5.5 Fibre to the Premises (FTTP)
The purpose of this policy  is to improve the provision and quality of digital communications including
broadband across North Norfolk and to ensure that all new dwellings and work places are connected
by fibre, or are able to be connected, in the future.
5.5.1 High quality digital infrastructure is crucial to the success of businesses and also plays a vital
role in enhancing the provision of local community facilities, services, and employment. Well
connected places attract modern businesses and can create the conditions for new clusters of
digital and creative businesses to emerge. Access to high quality digital infrastructure can also
facilitate social inclusion, enable home working, diversify the rural economy, enhance educational
and social opportunities, as well as improve access to a wide range of services that are
increasingly provided online. Consequently, high quality digital infrastructure will make a
significant contribution towards the delivery of sustainable development.
5.5.2 New development should ensure that it has considered any need and demand resulting from
the development and taken proactive steps in engaging with service and infrastructure providers
to ensure that there is high-speed fibre broadband connectivity or mobile internet coverage in
the development.
5.5.3 Policy HC 5 'Fibre to the Premises (FTTP)'  and Policy HC 6 'Telecommunications
Infrastructure'  should be considered in parallel for all planning applications proposing new
dwellings and commercial proposals for more than 100 sqm. Proposals should be supported
by a Digital Infrastructure Connectivity Plan demonstrating that digital infrastructure has been
planned for as part of development proposals. This should:
a. evidence that developers have engaged with infrastructure and service providers
to ascertain fibre connectivity and mobile internet coverage for the site;
b. evidence that an agreement to connect to the development site to the fibre
broadband network has been secured, and details on how the physical infrastructure on
site is capable of supporting gigabit-capable networks;
c. where there are deficiencies in mobile coverage, development proposals must
provide information on how the coverage is to be improved. This may be informationProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 82
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communitiesprovided by operators regarding network improvements or it could be provision of
physical infrastructure, such as new masts on the development site, where practical.
5.5.4 Policy HC 5 will be applied to both new build proposals and those seeking the change of use
of existing buildings.
Policy HC 5
Fibre to the Premises (FTTP)
1. Prior to first occupation/use, all new dwellings, and all new commercial proposals of 100sqm
or over shall be provided with fibre connections to an approved industry standard within the
dwelling/building together with suitable ducting/cabling to the public highway to allow connections
to be made.
2. Where it can be demonstrated(1) that FTTP is not cost effective, then alternative technological
options, for example Superfast Fibre to the Cabinet or Fixed Wireless Access, should be provided.
For such schemes provision in the form of ducting and other necessary infrastructure for the
future delivery of FTTP should be provided.
1. The Authority will require applicants to demonstrate evidence of discussions with service providers and documentary evidence
in relation to the cost effectiveness of providing connections via the submission of a Digital Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
5.6 Telecommunications Infrastructure
The purpose of this Policy  is to maximise digital connectivity across North Norfolk by supporting the
provision of well-designed digital infrastructure, which takes account of its visual impacts.
5.6.1 In supporting sustainable communities’, timely provision of telecommunication infrastructure,
whether in the form of additional capacity or new infrastructure, should be provided to address
community and growth needs. A relevant Digital Infrastructure Connectivity Plan should support
appropriate applications demonstrating how the proposed development improves coverage
and addresses deficiencies as detailed in paragraph 5.5.3.
Policy HC 6
Telecommunications Infrastructure
Planning permission will be granted for new telecommunications infrastructure provided that:
a. it has been demonstrated that there are no reasonable opportunities for sharing a site, mast
or facility with existing telecommunications infrastructure in the area that would not result in
a greater visual impact;
b. it has been demonstrated that the least visually intrusive option has been selected, including
the use of innovative design and construction and/or sympathetic camouflaging and
landscaping; and,
c. for any building-mounted installations it would not have an unduly detrimental impact on the
character or appearance of the building.83 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 55.7 Parking Provision
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure the provision of adequate safe and secure vehicle and cycle
parking.
5.7.1 Government policy seeks to restrict levels of motor vehicle parking associated with new
development in order to reduce the use of the private car and to promote more sustainable
forms of transport. The provision of parking space can affect the overall appearance of a
development and result in an inefficient use of land, therefore careful consideration should be
given to how parking provision is incorporated into development proposals. The Framework
allows planning authorities to set local parking standards for residential and non-residential
development. Local standards should take into account accessibility of the development, type,
mix, and use of the development, availability of and opportunities for public transport, local car
ownership levels and the need to ensure an adequate provision of spaces for charging plug-in
and other ultra-low emission vehicles (ULEV).
5.7.2 The 2011 Census data revealed that travel to work by car in North Norfolk is higher at 61%
compared to England at 54% and travel to work by public transport is significantly lower in North
Norfolk at 3% when compared to England at 16%. Given the rural nature of North Norfolk and
the limited availability of public transport, it is considered essential that appropriate levels of
parking is provided within new developments. Insufficient or poorly designed parking provision
associated with new development can lead to problems of inappropriate parking on streets,
pavements and verges creating highway safety issues and unsightly environments.
Over-provision and poor management can lead to the inefficient use of land and can also
discourage greater use of more sustainable modes of transport.Whilst recognising the reliance
on the private car within a rural district and the need to provide adequate parking, development
proposals should seek to support a transition from diesel and petrol fuelled cars to electric
powered cars by including active and / or passive provision for electric vehicle charging points
where practicable. In addition, designs should strive for flexibility, due to the likelihood of future
technology-led changes to the way in which cars and other vehicles are used.Wherever possible,
designs should be adaptable, allowing for features, such as new charging technologies, to be
incorporated at a later date or for the conversion of parking areas to green space. However, it
remains important to address how parking at the existing rate of private car ownership can be
accommodated successfully into design.
5.7.3 In addition, vehicle parking is an important tool for visitor management particularly in relation
to tourism across the District. Consequently, the provision of off-street visitor parking, particularly
where it applies to tourism and town centre development, will be supported in appropriate
locations.
5.7.4 In considering appropriate levels of cycle and car parking for development proposals, the starting
point will be the latest Norfolk County Council Parking Standards. Proposals should demonstrate
how adequate off-road parking will be provided. However, these standards will be applied
flexibly having regard to the circumstances of the site, the highway network, relevant advice
on the design and integration of parking provision into development and place-making. For
example, the parking requirements may be adjusted to help achieve good design objectives at
locations with good walking access to public transport and essential services, and in order to
help protect heritage assets and designated Conservation Areas.
5.7.5 The Local Plan seeks to promote sustainable transport but recognises that due to the dispersed
rural nature of the District there will be a continued reliance on car based travel, which requires
appropriate provision of vehicle parking alongside new developments and in order to maintain
the viability and vibrancy of the District’ s town centres, visitor locations and wider communities.
It is considered that retaining public parking provision in the selected settlements at presentProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 84
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communitieslevels is essential. Development proposals that would result in the loss of public parking provision
will not be permitted unless alternative equivalent or better quality provision is made available
in a suitable location prior to the commencement of redevelopment.
Policy HC 7
Parking Provision
Development will be permitted where:
1. Adequate, safe and secure vehicle and cycle parking facilities are provided within the plot
or site curtilage to serve the needs of the proposed development and in order to avoid
inappropriate on-street parking, highway safety problems, and to protect living and working
conditions locally.
2. Development proposals make provision for vehicle and cycle parking in accordance with
the latest Norfolk County Council Parking Standards(1) as a ‘starting point’  which may be
varied in order to reflect local conditions such as the availability of public parking, sustainable
travel modes and design and conservation objectives.
3. Vehicle and cycle parking should be integrated as a key element of design in development
layouts to ensure good quality, safe, secure and attractive environments.
4. Proposals will be expected to comply with the requirements of the North Norfolk Design
Guide or any successive document.
In addition:
1. Development proposals will provide electric vehicle charging facilities in accordance with
Policy CC 8 'Electric Vehicle Charging' .
2. Development proposals that would result in the loss of designated Public Car Parks , as
defined on the Policies Maps, will not be permitted. Elsewhere, development proposals that
would result in the loss of public car parking facilities which make an important contribution
to the local parking provision will not be permitted unless alternative equivalent or better
quality provision is made available in a suitable location prior to the commencement of
redevelopment.
1. Norfolk County Council Parking Standards for Norfolk 2007 (with September 2020 revised use class references
added) https://www .norfolk.go v.uk/rubbish-recycling-and-planning/planning-applications/highw ay-guidance-f or-de velopment/pub lications
5.8 Safeguarding Land for Sustainable Transport
The purpose of this policy  is to safeguard land for potential sustainable transport related uses.
5.8.1 The likely availability and use of public transport is an important factor in securing the delivery
of climate resilient sustainable growth, which seeks to promote alternative modes of transport
that are designed to reduce the need for travel by car.To this end, national policy requires local
planning authorities to explore this potential and identify any proposals for improving public
transport by rail, including the re-opening of rail lines. Such routes could also provide walking
and cycle routes as an interim measure prior to the introduction of rail services.
5.8.2 Norfolk County Council's Cycling and Walking Strategy(70) seeks to encourage walking and
cycling within the County, illustrating the advantages to health and wellbeing, reducing carbon
70 https://www .norfolk.go v.uk/roads-and-tr anspor t/alter nativ e-ways-to-tr avel/cycling85 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities 5emissions and encouraging tourism.The Norfolk Strategic Infrastructure Delivery Plan 2020(71)
details a range of projects for infrastructure improvements across the County. One such
sustainable project relates to Weaver’ s Way, which utilises Public Rights of Way and the route
of a disused railway line. The project is mainly focused on revitalising the disused railway line
between Aylsham and Stalham. Route improvements include new surfacing to ensure year-round
accessibility for walkers (including access for impaired users) and cyclists.
5.8.3 Whilst the Government recognises that road transport is likely to remain the principal mode for
many freight movements, it considers that planning policies can help to promote more sustainable
distribution, including where feasible, the movement of freight by rail and water. Accordingly,
it also requires local planning authorities to identify and, where appropriate, protect sites and
routes, both existing and potential, which could be critical in developing infrastructure for the
movement of freight (such as freight interchange facilities allowing road to rail transfer).
Policy HC 8
Safeguarding Land for Sustainable Transport
1. Former railway track beds and other railway land will be protected from development that
would be prejudicial to the re-use of the railway, or to sustainable transport links and facilities
in the following locations:
a. between Stalham and North Walsham (mostly on the Weavers’ Way) and up to the North
Norfolk administrative boundary;
b. between North Walsham and Mundesley (Paston Way);
c. between Cromer and Mundesley (via Overstrand and Sidestrand);
d. Fakenham to Walsingham.
2. Areas designated as Land Safeguarded for Sustainable Transport  which are currently in
use as, or with potential for, rail freight terminal facilities in the following settlements will also
be protected from development:
a. Cromer 
b. Fakenham 
c. Great Ryburgh
d. North Walsham
71 https://www .norfolk.gov.uk/what-w e-do-and-ho w-we-work/policy-perf ormance-and-par tnerships/policies-and-str ategies/b usiness-policies/norf olk-infr astructure-deliv ery-planProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 86
5Delivering Well Connected, Healthy Communities6 Environment
6.0.1 The natural and built environments are important considerations in climate resilient
sustainable development in North Norfolk.The policies in this section of the Plan
collectively ensure the appropriate consideration of the important landscape of the
district and those of the wider built environment are at the forefront of proposals.
6.1 Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty & The Broads
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that the statutory duty and appropriate high level of protection
is given to these designated landscapes through conservation and enhancement of the defined special
qualities of the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and the Broads  
6.1.1 Local authorities have a legal duty to have regard to the statutory purpose of conserving and
enhancing the natural beauty of AONBs and National Parks during plan-making and
decision-taking on individual developments.This duty also applies to Parish and Town Councils
during the preparation of Neighbourhood Plans.These statutory duties are set out in the National
Parks and Access to the Countryside Act (1949) and Countryside and Rights of Way Act (2000)
and in which, Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONBs), along with National Parks are
recognised to be of national importance for their landscape quality and, as nationally designated
landscapes, are afforded the highest status of protection in relation to landscape, tranquillity
and scenic beauty. This is re-affirmed in paragraph 176 of the National Planning Policy
Framework (NPPF) which states that great weight should be given to conserving and enhancing
landscape and scenic beauty in the Broads and Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, AONB.
As such protection of these scenic requirements along with conservation and enhancement of
wildlife and cultural including historic heritage are closely linked and are material considerations
for any development proposals located within these areas.
6.1.2 The Norfolk Coast AONB includes the greater part of the remaining unspoiled coastal areas
between the Wash and Great Y armouth covering an area of 453 sq. km. 245.5 sq. km are within
North Norfolk and 7.2 sq. km within the Broads Authority (the only example of an AONB
overlapping with a national park/equivalent designation). Parts of the Norfolk Coast AONB are
within existing built up areas and majors towns of the District. Proposals in these areas need
careful consideration and will be assessed having regard to their landscape and visual impact
on the surrounding area and the wider benefits and public interest that they may bring.
6.1.3 Although both designations are of national importance for their landscape and the specialist
habitats that they provide the Norfolk Coast AONB and The Broads are also valuable assets
for North Norfolk in terms of character and beauty, sustainable tourism, quality of life and also
as wildlife habitats.The designations also extends to include the areas of several growth towns
and villages as identified in the settlement hierarchy.The Broads Authority is the Local Planning
Authority for the Broads Area and policies in the Broads Local Plan apply there. Development
in North Norfolk can however affect the Broads in a variety of ways such as through light
pollution, noise, landscape and visual impact and run off affecting water quality. Proposals
should therefore carefully consider any direct or indirect effects on The Broads. In the case of
development affecting the AONB the Council will expect proposals to have had regard to the
content of the AONB’ s Statutory Management Plan (or successor documents).
6.1.4 Although the AONB is recognised as a sensitive landscape, development should not be
prevented purely on the basis of its designation. Any development proposals within or affecting
its setting will have to demonstrate clearly that they are appropriate to the landscape character
type and designation.  Sites that are suitable for housing outside Local Plan allocations should
be developed specifically to meet local affordable and other locally identified housing needs .87 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 6This is not limited to only affordable housing provision but also to ensure wider local needs are
met and a wide range of people are able to continue to work and live in the AONB. To do
otherwise would fail to address these needs, which could then only be met by releasing more
sensitive sites, causing harm and compromising the primary purpose of the AONB designation.
6.1.5 National planning policy advises that the scale and extent of development within these nationally
designated areas should be limited and that permission for major development should be
refused in AONBs other than in exceptional circumstances and where it can be demonstrated
that the development is in the public interest. Footnote 60 of the NPPF advises that whether a
proposed development constitutes major development will be a matter for the relevant decision
taker, taking into account the individual characteristics and circumstances of the proposal and
the local context.
6.1.6 In determining whether a proposed development constitutes major development in the Norfolk
Coast AONB is a matter for the decision maker and the Council will consider whether by reason
of its scale, form, character and nature, the proposal has the potential to have significant adverse
impact on the landscape, wildlife, cultural heritage or special qualities of the AONB and whether
it seeks to address the identified housing needs and is in the wider public interest such as
helping to address coastal adaptation. Examples of major development may include medium
and large scale housing development, commercial development that is out of keeping with the
landscape, caravan sites, tall vertical structures, high voltage overhead power lines, renewable
energy schemes and quarrying.
6.1.7 Consideration of exceptional circumstances by the Council will include a review of the proposal
in relation to the following:
the need for the development, including any national considerations, and the impact of
permitting or refusing it upon the local economy;
the cost of, and scope for, developing outside the designated area, or meeting the need
for it in some other way;
any detrimental effect on the environment, the landscape and recreational opportunities
and the extent to which that could be moderated.
its regard to the objectives of the AONB statutory Management Plan;
alignment with the Key Characteristics, Valued Features and Guidelines set out in the
North Norfolk Landscape Character Assessment SPD (2021)
opportunities to deliver significant public benefits through the enhancement of landscape
features, wildlife, cultural heritage,  biodiversity and reinstatement of habitat including , in
particular those which contribute to the distinctive sense of place, relative wildness or
tranquillity, or to other aspects of landscape and scenic quality.
its relevance to the economic, social and environmental wellbeing of the area and it is
demonstrated that the proposal is sustainable and appropriately located.
6.1.8 Smaller developments can also be harmful and any development proposals that, by virtue of
their scale, design, and/or location, might cause significant adverse impacts on the Norfolk
Coast AONB or The Broads will not be permitted other than in exceptional circumstances. Small
scale developments that are essential for economic and social wellbeing including meeting
local needs, or other uses which are necessary to sustain the area such as employment and
community uses will also need to be well related to existing settlements and in line with other
policies contained in the Development Plan.
6.1.9 Consideration should be given to both the individual and cumulative impacts of a proposal in
any Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment, which will need to be carried out in line with
current best practice. Proposals which would have a significant adverse effect upon the character
of the landscape or which would harm the landscape quality, nature conservation interests,
geodiversity interests or cultural heritage will not be permitted.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 88
6Environment6.1.10 Many of the areas that are likely to experience erosion are either within or in close proximity to
the Norfolk Coast AONB. Policy CC 6 'Coastal Change Adaptation'outlines the circumstances
in which development can be permitted in the wider designated Countryside where it replaces
that threatened by coastal erosion. As such Development that complies with Policy CC
6 'Coastal Change Adaptation'  is acceptable in principle within the AONB.
Policy ENV 1
Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty & The Broads
1. The highest degree of protection will be given to the designated  landscapes and settings of
the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty  and The Broads .
2. Development proposals should contribute positively and conserve and enhance these valued
landscapes and their settings through appropriate siting, scale, massing, materials, and design.
3. Proposals for major development will be refused, unless exceptional circumstances exist and
it can be demonstrated that the proposal is in the public interest.
4. Proposals located in, or within the setting of, a protected landscape must demonstrate how
they:
a. respect the scenic quality and maintain an area’ s distinctive sense of place, and reinforce
local distinctiveness and local landscape character as defined by the North Norfolk
Landscape Character Appraisal SPD 2021 or subsequent updates, having particular
reference to the defined key characteristics and valued features;
b. conserve and enhance wildlife and cultural heritage including flora, fauna, and geological
features;
c. minimise negative impacts on key qualities of tranquillity and sense of remoteness and
nocturnal landscape character;
d. avoid, mitigate and compensate, for any residual adverse effects;
e. are limited in scale and are sustainable and are appropriately located locations;
f. are relevant to the economic, social and wellbeing of the area;
g. further the delivery of the objectives of the statutory management plans.(72)
5. Development proposals which are considered to have potential adverse impacts on the local
landscape character will need to be informed by a Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment
undertaken in accordance with current best practice.
72 Statutory management plans in relation the the AONB and Broads Executive Area are the AONB Management Plan, and the Broads
Local Plan89 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 6Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty
Local / Tourist Access RoadSettlement Hierarchy
Small Growth Town Broads Authority Executive AreaPrimary / Most Principal RoadConstraints
Large Growth Town
Small Growth VillageMain Distributor Road
National Railway Route
Long Distance PathMovement Network
Large Growth Village
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.Special Access RoadFAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAM
STALHAMWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEASHERINGHAM
HOLT
HOVETONMundesleyBlakeney
LudhamBriston & Melton
Constable
Sea PallingAldborough
BadersfieldSculthorpeRoughton
Corpusty & SaxthorpeOverstrand
High Kelling
TrunchSouthrepps
BactonLangham
Little Walsingham
HorningLittle Snoring
CatfieldSutton
Potter HeighamWalcottBinhamWeybourne
East & West
RuntonFigure 7 - Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty 
& Broads Executive Area
Happisburgh
Figure 7 Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty & The BroadsProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 90
6Environment6.2 Protection & Enhancement of Landscape & Settlement Character
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that development proposals reflect the defining and distinctive
qualities of the varied landscape character areas, their key characteristics and valued features and the
character, appearance and integrity of the historic and cultural environment of North Norfolk.
6.2.1 The variety, quality and uniqueness of the landscape, both visually and historically, are central
to the attractiveness, distinctiveness and diversity of the District. The visual character of North
Norfolk's landscapes, seascapes, townscapes, both within and outside of designated areas, is
highly valued by residents and visitors.The NPPF recognises that policies and decisions should
contribute to and enhance the natural and local environment by protecting and enhancing valued
landscapes, sites of geological value and soils (in a manner commensurate with their statutory
status or identified quality)(73).
6.2.2 Nine types and sixteen landscape character areas make up North Norfolk’ s unique and varied
landscape, as defined in the North Norfolk Landscape Character Assessment SPD (2021).
High priority is given to the protection, conservation and enhancement of the landscape
character(s). New development should be well-designed to sustain, enhance and/or create
landscapes and townscapes with a strong sense of place and local identity.
6.2.3 The Council will use its adopted Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs)(74) detailing
Landscape Character (LCA) and Landscape Sensitivity Assessments (LSA)(75), Conservation
Area Appraisals and other relevant evidence to assess the character of the District and its
sensitivity to change. The LCA sets out in fig 1.3 a flow chart which should be used to assist
development proposals and decision making. Development will be supported provided that it
does not adversely impact the identified intrinsic character and beauty of the District, as informed
by the 2021 North Norfolk Landscape Character Assessment and Landscape Sensitivity
Assessment SPDs, and complies with other relevant policies of the Local Plan.
6.2.4 The Local Plan contains policies relating to specific designations such as the AONB,
Undeveloped Coast and Heritage Coast as well as policies on design, green infrastructure,
biodiversity & geology, trees and hedgerows, coastal management, renewable energy, heritage
and nature conservation. All of these policies will contribute towards the conservation and
enhancement of the landscape. Policy ENV2 ensures that the landscape qualities of the District
are conserved and enhanced in order to attract and retain people to the area, and that landscape
considerations are properly taken into account when new development is planned, ensuring
greater resilience and enhancement.
6.2.5 Development proposals which are considered to have potential adverse impacts on the local
landscape character will need to be informed by a Landscape and Visual Impact Assessment
(LVIA). Such assessments should follow best practice guidelines, should systematically assess
the effects of change on both the individual and cumulative level, and inform proportionate
mitigation in order to minimise identified impacts. Proposals which would have a significant
adverse effect upon the character of the landscape or which would harm the landscape quality,
nature conservation interests, geodiversity interests or cultural heritage will not be permitted.
6.2.6 Many areas of North Norfolk are sparsely populated resulting in dark night skies highlighted as
a defining feature of the prevailing landscape character. Development proposals should have
regard to nocturnal character and align with the latest government guidance on external lighting
along with advice from professional bodies such as the Institute of Lighting Professionals and
the detail contained in the North Norfolk Design Guide and any adopted neighbourhood plans.
73 NPPF 2021 para 174.
74 Adopted 2021, and/or subsequent updates
75 In relation to renewable energy.91 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 6Policy ENV 2
Protection & Enhancement of Landscape & Settlement Character
1. Proposals for development should be informed by, and be sympathetic to the key
characteristics and valued features of distinctive Landscape Types and Character Areas,
their strategic objectives and guidelines as identified in the North Norfolk Landscape
Character Assessment SPD  (2021) and Landscape Sensitivity Assessment SPD
(2021)(1) and relevant Conservation Area Appraisals .
2. Outside of designated landscapes the Council will support development which is in scale
and keeping with the defined landscape character and which is appropriate to its surroundings
in terms of siting, design, materials, external appearance and landscaping. Consideration
will be given to both the individual and cumulative impacts of a proposal.
3. Development proposals should demonstrate that their location, scale, design and materials
will protect, conserve and enhance:
a. the defining qualities and local distinctiveness of the Landscape Character Type
including its key characteristics, valued features and qualities (including historical,
cultural biodiversity interests) and the relevant vision and landscape guidelines;
b. the distinctive settlement character;
c. the pattern and quality of the distinctive landscape features, such as watercourses,
woodland, trees and field boundaries, and their function as ecological corridors for
dispersal of wildlife;
d. visually sensitive skylines, hillsides, seascapes, valley sides and geological features;
e. the setting of, and views into and from the AONB, the Broads, Conservation Areas and
Registered Parks and Gardens;
f. nocturnal character.
4. Proposals should demonstrate measures that enable a scheme to be well integrated into
the landscape, and enhance connectivity to the surrounding green infrastructure and Public
Rights of Way network and provide biodiversity enhancements.
5. For development proposals with wider visual impacts the Council will require a LVIA
undertaken to current best practice.
1. Landscape Sensitivity Assessment - with particular regard to renewable energy and low carbon development.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 92
6EnvironmentRV3RHA1
RV3OCM1
DCM1
RV4
RV5WGR1
CP1RV6CS1
SF1RHA1DCM2DCM2
TF1TF1
TF1
TF1
TF1RV2
RV2 RV1LPF1
LPF1LPF1
LPF1ROF1
ROF1
ROF1
RV3RV3RV3
RV2Figure 8 - Landscape Character Areas
Landscape Character Types
Wooded Glacial RidgeTributary FarmlandSettled Farmland Coastal Plain
Coastal Shelf
Drained Coastal Marshes
Low Plains Farmland Rolling Open FarmlandRolling Heath & ArableRiver ValleysOpen Coastal Marshes
Broads Authority Executive Area
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.FAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAMWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEASHERINGHAM
HOLT
STALHAM
HOV
ETONBriston & Melton
ConstableBlakeney
Mundesley
Lud
hamLittle SnoringBinhamLangham
High Kelling
Corpusty & SaxthorpeAld
boroughEast & West
Runton
RoughtonOverstrand
BadersfieldBacton
Catfield
Potter Heigham
HorningSculthorpeSouthrepps
SuttonTrunch
WalcottLittle WalsinghamWeybourne
Sea PallingHappisburgh
Figure 8 Landscape Character Areas93 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 66.3 Heritage & Undeveloped Coast
The purpose of this policy  is to protect the appearance and character of the coast.
6.3.1 Large parts of the North Norfolk coast are protected by the Norfolk Coast AONB, the Heritage
Coast, Undeveloped Coast and nature conservation designations. Outside of the main
settlements the whole of the coast has an undeveloped character and appeal, which is critical
to North Norfolk’ s distinctiveness and tourism economy. Non-essential development in a coastal
area can have cumulative effects on landscape, biodiversity and recreation. Government policy
states that development that does not require a coastal location should not normally be provided
within the coastal zone. Policy CC 5 'Coastal Change Management ' , sets out the requirements
for development within the Coastal Change Management Area. The Heritage Coast and
Undeveloped Coast designations are designed to minimise the wider impact of general
development, additional transport and light pollution within the distinctive coastal area.
6.3.2 Policy CC 6 'Coastal Change Adaptation'  outlines the situations where development will be
permitted in the Countryside where it relocates that which is threatened by coastal erosion, and
these exceptions will be allowed in the Undeveloped Coast.
Policy ENV 3
Heritage & Undeveloped Coast
1. In the designated Heritage Coast  and Undeveloped Coast , as defined on the Policies
Map, development will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated to require a coastal
location and which will not be significantly detrimental to the open coastal character.
2. Community facilities, commercial, business and residential development that is
considered important to the social and economic well-being of the coastal community will
be permitted where it replaces that which is threatened by coastal erosion.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 94
6EnvironmentSmall Growth Town
Large Growth Village
Small Growth VillageLarge Growth TownSettlement HierarchyFigure 9 - North Norfolk Heritage Coast & Undeveloped Coast
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.Undeveloped CoastConstraintsHeritage CoastFAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAMWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEASHERINGHAM
HOLT
STALHAM
HOVETONBriston & Melton
ConstableBlakeney
Mundesley
LudhamLittle SnoringBinhamLangham
High Kelling
Corpusty & SaxthorpeAldboroughEast & West
Runton
RoughtonOverstrand
BadersfieldBacton
Catfield
Potter Heigham
HorningSculthorpeSouthrepps
SuttonTrunch
WalcottLittle WalsinghamWeybourne
Sea PallingHappisburgh
Figure 9 North Norfolk Heritage & Undeveloped Coast95 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 66.4 Biodiversity & Geodiversity
The purpose of this policy  is to protect and enhance biodiversity and geodiversity.
6.4.1 North Norfolk contains a wealth of biodiversity, geodiversity and natural environmental assets
and the protection and enhancement of designated areas, such as SSSIs and Habitats Sites
is paramount. The Council has statutory duties in relation to their protection.(76) Such sites are
identified on the Policies Map. In addition, guidance is provided by the Government on how to
review planning applications that might affect protected sites and areas.(77)  Such applications
must be assessed in accordance with this guidance and professional best practice.
6.4.2 Section 40 of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006 imposes a general
duty on all public authorities to have regard to the purpose of conserving biodiversity (where
‘conserving’  includes restoring or enhancing a population or habitat). Paragraph 180(a) of the
NPPF makes it clear that development that cannot avoid, adequately mitigate or, as a last
resort, compensate for any resulting significant harm to biodiversity, should be refused. In
addition, the Environment Act(78) establishes a new domestic environmental governance system
following the departure of the UK from the EU, which sets a legally binding minimum target of
10% biodiversity net gain (BNG) in development.
6.4.3 Biodiversity is essential to sustain our society and economy. Enhancing biodiversity is integral
to delivering climate resilient sustainable growth. Development that adopts a biodiversity net
gain approach seeks to make its impact on the environment positive, delivering improvements
through habitat creation or enhancement after avoiding or mitigating harm as far as possible.
6.4.4 Biodiversity net gains and contributions to ecological networks should be sought for all
development, proportionate to the scale of the proposal and any potential impacts, in accordance
with Policy CC 10 'Biodiversity Net Gain' . Applicants should, in accordance with Table
1 'Applying the Mitigation Hierarchy' , consider the potential effects of the proposal on biodiversity.
This will include, but not be limited to, the protection of features such as trees, hedgerows,
ponds, meadowland and woodland, designing buildings to include roosting or nesting spots
and including landscaping within sites and along boundaries which can provide feeding and
nesting opportunities as well as acting as habitat corridors aiding the passage of wildlife between
sites. In the long term, as our climate begins to change, this will maintain genetic diversity by
allowing populations to adapt to future changes in environmental conditions. A development
with limited or no impacts on biodiversity should still seek to demonstrate a minimum biodiversity
net gain of 10%, as required by Policy CC 10 'Biodiversity Net Gain' .
6.4.5 Biodiversity net gain does not apply to statutory sites or irreplaceable habitats, in which impacts
should be avoided where possible, or addressed as fully as possible by adhering to the mitigation
and legislative requirements on a case by case basis.
6.4.6 The highest level of protection will be given to International and European sites, with development
only permitted where the proposal is in accordance with the requirements of the Conservation
of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) or any successive Regulations. Any
development with the potential to impact on a Special Protection Area (SPA), Special Area for
Conservation (SAC) or Ramsar site will need to be supported by information to inform a Habitat
Regulations Assessment, in accordance with the Conservation of Habitats and Species
Regulations 2017 as amended (or subsequent revisions). Measures to mitigate for potential
adverse effects on European sites are required, the proposed mitigation measures must be
justified as fit for purpose with appropriate evidence and prepared with the best available factual
information, to inform the relevant Habitats Regulations Assessment.
76 Circular 06/2005 Biodiversity & Geological conservation - Statutory obligations and their impact within the planning system.
77 https://www .gov.uk/guidance/protected-sites-and-areas-ho w-to-re view-planning-applications  accessed on 11/12/18
78 The Environment Bill received Royal Assent in November 2021.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 96
6Environment6.4.7 Residential and tourism development has the potential to affect the integrity of European sites
through recreational disturbance and other impacts(79), and will be required to either contribute
towards strategic mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green Infrastructure &
Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS) (or any subsequent
Supplementary Planning Document), or, in exceptional circumstances, identify and implement
bespoke mitigation measures in perpetuity to ensure compliance with the Habitats Regulations,
in accordance withPolicy ENV 5 'Impacts on International & European sites: Recreational
Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy' .
6.4.8 Proposals should particularly seek to contribute towards the objectives for priority habitats and
species(80) and to the protection, enhancement and linking of core areas and networks identified
in the North Norfolk Green Infrastructure Position Statement 2019 (or subsequent updates),
and the Norfolk Green Infrastructure Mapping Project, June 2018(81).
6.4.9 The enhancement and expansion of the existing resource will be a priority. There is a need to
expand and re-connect existing areas and restore habitats where they have been destroyed.
In North Norfolk these include increasing woodland, heathland and wood pasture in the Cromer
Ridge area and management of the Broads margins to develop semi-natural habitats including
heathland. The Council’ s Landscape Character Assessment 2018 also provides guidance on
appropriate landscape and habitat creation.
6.4.10 The Norfolk Biodiversity Information Service (NBIS) can provide habitat and species distribution
data, including data about Local Sites of geodiversity importance, to inform Ecological Impact
Assessments required for development. Natural England can provide detailed information and
advice through their Discretionary Advice Service regarding designated and protected sites.
Further information about the two County Geodiversity Sites (CGS) and 42 candidate County
Geodiversity Sites (cCGS) is also available from the Norfolk Geodiversity Partnership.(82)
6.4.11 Where necessary, applications must be supported by an Ecological Impact Assessment (EcIA)
in accordance with BS42020:2013 and CIEEM Best Practice Guidelines. The EcIA will need
to include the results of all surveys and assessments that are deemed necessary by a Suitably
Qualified Ecologist; a non-technical summary is provided of the net losses and gains for
biodiversity of the development to provide clarity and certainty regarding the ecological impacts
of the development and any necessary mitigation or compensation in order that the Local
Planning Authority has sufficient information to make a decision.
6.4.12 The Shoreline Management Plan (SMP)(83) identifies areas that could become permanently
flooded under different options for long-term coastal realignment. If this occurs, then opportunities
for creating new habitats in these areas will be taken where possible and replacement habitats
may need to be provided to ensure no net loss of important habitats.This is especially important
for The Broads which contains habitats of international significance.
79 'Disturbance' relates to birds but other impacts such as trampling, dog fouling, increased incidences of fire are also relevant in relation
to other qualifying features besides the bird interest.
80 Habitats and species of principle importance - Section 41 of the NERC Act 2006, Norfolk Biodiversity Action Plan habitats and species,
Biodiversity 2020, and 25 Y ear Environment Plan
81 Norfolk Green Infrastructure Mapping Project, June 2018 -
www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/media/5037/norf olk-g reen-infr astructure-mapping-project-july_18_v4.pdf
82 https://sites .google .com/site/norf olkgeodiv ersity
83 https://www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/smp97 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 6Policy ENV 4
Biodiversity & Geodiversity
1. Development proposals where the principal objective is to conserve or enhance biodiversity
or geodiversity interests of European, international, national and local nature conservation
designations will be supported in principle.
2. All development proposals will be expected to:
a. provide a suitable ecological survey to establish the extent of potential impact where
there are grounds to believe that ancient woodland, veteran trees, protected species(1),
priority species or priority habitat(2) may be affected during and after development;
b. retain, protect and buffer ecological and geological features and provide for the
appropriate management of those features;
c. deliver a measurable biodiversity net gain, in accordance with Policy CC
10 'Biodiversity Net Gain' ;
d. incorporate biodiversity enhancement features, by designing-in provisions for wildlife,
including the provision of nests and roosts(3); and
e. avoid the net loss or fragmentation of habitats and support the creation of coherent
ecological networks in urban and rural areas and through Nature Recovery Networks.
3. Adverse impacts of development on biodiversity must be addressed in accordance with the
mitigation hierarchy detailed in Policy CC 10 'Biodiversity Net Gain'. Effective avoidance,
mitigation and compensation will be secured through the imposition of planning conditions
or planning obligations as appropriate including monitoring for the effectiveness of these
measures.
4. Where the requirements of this hierarchy cannot be met, development will be refused.
5. Development where there is a likely significant effect on a European site(4) should only be
permitted where the proposal is in accordance with the requirements of the Conservation
of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) or any successive regulations in
order to ensure adverse effects on integrity, alone or in combination, are ruled out and any
necessary mitigation secured.
6. Development likely to have a direct or indirect adverse effect on Nationally & Locally
Designated Sites :(5) will only be permitted where it can be demonstrated that the need and
benefits of the development clearly outweigh both the adverse impacts of the notified special
interest features of the site and any adverse impact on the wider network of natural habitats.
1. Including but not limited to those species protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 (as amended), the Conservation
of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) and the Protection of Badgers Act 1992.
2. Those identified in the 25 Y ear Environment Plan, the England Biodiversity 2020 Strategy, habitats and species of principle
importance in Section 41 Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, habitats and species in the Norfolk Biodiversity
Action Plan and any subsequent successor plans.
3. These include, but are not limited to: integrated swift boxes, house martin cups, sparrow terraces, integrated and external bat
boxes, owl boxes, connected spaces for hedgehogs eg. ‘Hedgehog Highways’  and other mammals and hibernacula.
4. Any site included within the definition at regulation 8 of the Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended)
for the purpose of those regulations, including candidate Special Areas of Conservation, Sites of Community Importance, Special
Areas of Conservation, Special Protection Areas and any relevant Marine Sites. These are defined at https://magic.defr a.gov.uk
5. National: Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), National Nature Reserves (NNR) and Marine Conservation Zones (MCZs).
Locally: County Geodiversity Sites, Local Nature Reserves, County Wildlife Sites, Ancient Woodland and Roadside Nature
Reserves. These are defined at https://magic.defr a.gov.ukProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 98
6Environment6.5 Impacts on Internationally Designated Sites: Recreational Impact
Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy
The Purpose of this policy  is to ensure compliance with the Conservation of Habitats and Species
Regulations 2017 (as amended) and enable growth in the District through the implementation of measures
to avoid adverse effects on the integrity of Habitats Sites arising from recreational disturbance, through
the Norfolk-wide Green infrastructure & Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).
6.5.1 All net residential development and tourism accommodation is likely to affect the integrity of
Habitats sites across Norfolk through recreational disturbance, alone or in-combination. These
Internationally designated sites include  Special Protection Areas (SPAs), Special Areas of
Conservation (SACs), European Marine Sites, and Ramsar sites (wetland sites designated to
be of international importance under the Ramsar Convention) and a range of candidate site(84).
These represent the areas with the highest level of designation for wildlife interest in Europe,
and internationally, ensuring that their protection objectives are not compromised is of paramount
importance.
6.5.2 Within North Norfolk, such sites include the North Norfolk Coast SAC/SPA, the Wash and North
Norfolk Coast SAC and European Marine Site, Overstrand Cliffs SAC, Winterton Horsey Dunes
SAC, the Norfolk Valley Fens SAC, the River Wensum SAC (one of the best examples of a
chalk river in the country) and the Broads and Broadland SAC and SPA.
6.5.3 All net residential development and tourism accommodation proposals will be required to
contribute towards strategic mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green Infrastructure
& Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS), or subsequent Supplementary
Planning Document, through the payment of a per-dwelling (or equivalent) developer
contribution(85) and for larger-scale proposals of 50 units plus through the additional provision
of onsite enhanced green infrastructure (EGI) or contributions towards off-site strategic green
infrastructure (as identified as strategic opportunity areas in the GIRAMS or opportunities
identified in the North Norfolk Green Infrastructure Position Statement 2019 or any subsequent
update or supplementary planning document). Such enhanced green infrastructure is in addition
to any local open space policy requirements identified in Policy HC 2 'Provision & Retention
of Open Spaces' and should be at such a proportionate scale and standard, as outlined in the
GIRAMS, and be of a scale and quality able to divert and deflect visitors from European sites.
Such green infrastructure is often referred to as Suitable Alternative Natural Greenspaces
(SANGS). SANGS are usually one area of an alternative attractive semi-natural environment
but in the context of the Norfolk GIRAMS, EGI is proposed as an alternative to a SANG and
can incorporate a network of open spaces, permissive routes and natural or semi-natural
environments across a given area. Prior to Local Plan and GIRAMS adoption, the authority will
seek a financial contribution, where appropriate, from proposed residential (and new tourism
accommodation) development to deliver all avoidance and mitigation measures identified in
the strategy (including strategic measures) through project level HRAs, or otherwise, to mitigate
recreational impacts in compliance with the Habitats Regulations and other relevant government
policy.
6.5.4 In exceptional circumstances, it may be permissible to identify and implement bespoke mitigation
measures in perpetuity to ensure compliance with the Habitats Regulations. Measures required
to mitigate the in-combination impacts of recreational disturbance on Habitats Sites will be
delivered according to the detailed mitigation package as set out in the GIRAMS.
84 RAMSAR and candidate (proposed) sites are afforded the same level of protection through para 181 of the NPPF as habitat sites.
85 Per dwelling tariff: £185.93 and per six bed space ratio for campsite, hotels, caravan sites/extensions.The strategy allows for appropriate
review of the charge to reflect inflation and any changes in mitigation measures required through the monitoring process and strategy
updates.99 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 6Policy ENV 5
Impacts on International & European sites: Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation
Strategy
1. Planning permission will be granted subject to demonstrating no adverse effect on the integrity
of European sites from recreational disturbance when considered alone or in-combination;
2. Contributions will be required towards a scheme of avoidance and mitigation measures in
accordance with the Norfolk Green Infrastructure & Recreational Impact Avoidance &
Mitigation Strategy .
6.6 Protection of Amenity
The purpose of this policy is to maintain, protect and promote adequate living and working conditions
for the District’ s communities in order to ensure that all occupants’  benefit from a good standard of
amenity.
6.6.1 For the purposes of this policy 'amenity' is defined as those desirable features of a place that
ought to be protected or enhanced in the public interest.The Council will expect all development
to avoid harmful effects on the amenity of existing and future occupiers and nearby properties
or, where this is not possible, to take appropriate measures to minimise potential negative
impacts.
6.6.2 The potential impact of development needs to be considered both on an individual, as well as
cumulative, basis. The NPPF is clear that the continuance of existing businesses, which are
already established in a locality, should not have unreasonable restrictions placed on them,
because of the introduction of new and incompatible land uses. Such matters will be an important
planning consideration in relation to amenity.
6.6.3 In relation to new residential development, it is important to also highlight that homes must be
designed to meet the minimum space standards set out in Policy HOU 9 'Minimum Space
Standards'  to ensure that they will offer a reasonable level of residential amenity and quality
of life.
Private Amenity Space
6.6.4 Provision will be made for adequate external private amenity space which is appropriate for
and integral to any new residential development. Any applications for conversions to residential
will also need to make provision for adequate external private amenity space or demonstrate
why this may not be feasible.
Privacy and Outlook 
6.6.5 A development's impact upon privacy and outlook can be influenced by its design and layout
and can affect the amenity of existing and future occupiers. The Council will expect that these
elements are considered at the design stage of a scheme. Further detail on amenity can be
found within the North Norfolk Design Guide.
Sunlight, Daylight and Overshadowing 
6.6.6 Loss of sunlight and daylight can be caused if spaces and buildings are overshadowed byProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 100
6Environmentdevelopment. To assess whether acceptable levels of daylight and sunlight are available to
indoor habitable spaces, as well as outdoor amenity and open spaces, in conformity with the
guidance set out within the North Norfolk Design Guide.
Artificial Lighting Levels
6.6.7 The North Norfolk coast boasts some of the darkest skies in the country. The lack of artificial
light helps the coast retain its rural character and overall tranquillity. The Norfolk Coast Area
of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) Partnership states, as part of their 20 year vision, that 
“the area will still be essentially unspoilt with a strong feeling of remoteness, peace and
tranquillity, with wide skyscapes, seascapes and dark night skies that show the richness and
detail of constellations." 
6.6.8 To date, two locations in North Norfolk (Wiveton Downs and Kelling Heath Holiday Park) have
been awarded Dark Sky Discovery Site status and special attention should be given to these
areas and the wider AONB. Lighting in new development should be limited to that necessary
for security and consideration should also be given to ways of minimising light pollution from
exterior lighting, large glazed areas, sky lights etc.
6.6.9 National Planning Practice Guidance provides further advice on how to consider light within
the planning system, in particular, setting out the factors to be considered when assessing
whether a development proposal might have implications for light pollution. Further detail
regarding artificial lighting can also be found in the North Norfolk Design Guide.
Noise and Vibration 
6.6.10 Noise and vibration can have a major effect on amenity.The World Health Organisation (WHO)
states that excessive noise can seriously harm human health, disturb sleep and have
cardiovascular and behavioural effects. Where uses sensitive to noise are proposed close to
an existing source of noise or when development that is likely to generate noise is proposed,
the Council will require an acoustic report to accompany the application.
Odours, Fumes and Dust 
6.6.11 Odours, fumes and dust can be generated from commercial cooking, industrial process and
construction and demolition which have the potential to cause a range of health problems,
including respiratory diseases. We will require all development likely to generate nuisance
odours to install appropriate extraction equipment and other mitigation measures.These should
be incorporated within the building where possible. External extraction equipment and ducting
should be sited sensitively, particularly on listed buildings and within conservation areas. Further
detail on amenity can be found within the North Norfolk Design Guide.
Policy ENV 6
Protection of Amenity
1. All new development will provide for a high standard of amenity including adequate living and
working conditions. This standard should be achieved and maintained without preventing or
unreasonably restricting the continued operation of established authorised uses and activities
on adjacent sites.101 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 62. Development will not be permitted which causes unacceptable impacts on the amenity of
neighbouring occupants, or does not provide for adequate levels of amenity for future
occupants.
3. In assessing the impact of development on the living and working conditions of existing or
future occupants, proposals will be in conformity with the North Norfolk Design Guide SPD or
provide a justification for any departure from this, having regard to the following considerations:
a. the provision of adequate areas of usable and secluded private amenity space;
b. loss of privacy and outlook and prevention of overlooking;
c. loss of daylight and/or sunlight and prevention of overshadowing;
d. prevention of disturbance from odour, noise, vibration, dust, air and artificial light pollution.
6.7 Protecting & Enhancing the Historic Environment
The purpose of this policy  is to conserve and where possible, enhance the historic environment.
6.7.1 The Local Plan aims to ensure that North Norfolk's historic environment is conserved or, wherever
possible enhanced and that new development is of high quality design. Paragraph 190 of the
NPPF states that ' Plans should set out a positive strategy for the conservation and enjoyment
of the historic environment '. The NPPF also states that Local Plans should include strategic
policies to ' make sufficient provision for …conservation and enhancement of the …historic
environment ' (Paragraph 20). The quality of the built environment and the presence of historic
assets make a valuable contribution to the appeal of North Norfolk.
6.7.2 There are 81 Conservation Areas, 2265 Listed Buildings, including 94 Grade I and 202 Grade
II*, 86 Scheduled Monuments and 33 Historic Parks and Gardens within the District. There are
also more than 250 buildings on the Council’ s Local List. These are buildings that do not fully
meet the criteria for being nationally listed, but are considered of architectural or historical
importance for the local area, meeting Historic England’ s criteria for Local Listing as set out in
Historic England’ s Advice Note 7: Local Heritage Listing.(86)
6.7.3 Local Listing does not introduce any additional powers of control, instead it acts as a means of
identification and plays an important role in the assessment of development proposals. The
effect of an application on the significance of a non-designated heritage asset is a material
consideration when deciding planning applications, and Local Listing strengthens the case for
retention of a historic building. The number of non-designated heritage assets on the list is
likely to increase over time as new buildings and other assets are identified. The requirements
of the policy equally apply to any local heritage assets identified and listed in adopted
Neighbourhood Plans.
6.7.4 Planning Practice Guidance (PPG) states ' any decisions relating to Listed Buildings and their
settings and Conservation Areas must address the statutory considerations of the Planning
(Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 1990 (see in particular sections 16, 66 and 72)
as well as satisfying the relevant policies within the National Planning Policy Framework and
the Local Plan '. The PPG sets out the detailed considerations that must be followed in these
applications.
6.7.5 The aim is to protect, conserve and, where possible, enhance heritage assets through the
special protection afforded to Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas, Registered Parks and
Gardens and Scheduled Monuments and through careful control of development that might
86 https://histor icengland.org.uk/images-books/pub lications/local-her itage-listing-advice-note-7/heag018-local-her itage-listingProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 102
6Environmentadversely affect non-scheduled, nationally important archaeological remains; other areas of
archaeological potential or importance; historic features and their settings; non-designated
heritage assets; and areas of historic landscape or parkland (including, but not limited to, those
on the Historic England Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest).
6.7.6 All development proposals should, in the first instance, avoid harm to any heritage asset. Only
where harm cannot be avoided will mitigation then be considered. Key distinctions are drawn
in the NPPF(87) between designated and non-designated heritage assets in respect of the level
of protection provided and between harm which is 'substantial' and 'less than substantial'. This
affects the level of planning benefit which a proposal will need to demonstrate in order to be
supported. The threshold for justifying substantial harm to a heritage asset is higher than the
threshold for justifying less than substantial harm.
6.7.7 All development proposals that would affect the significance of a designated or non-designated
heritage asset and / or its setting, or any known, or possible, archaeological sites, will be required
to provide, in the form of a heritage statement, sufficient information proportionate to the
importance of the asset and the impact of the proposed development, to enable any impact to
be accurately assessed.
6.7.8 The Council has prepared a number of Conservation Area Appraisals and Management Plans
(CAAs) which look at the boundaries, general conditions, identity and character of individual
Conservation Area designations. Negative features that detract from the special qualities of an
area are also identified and management recommendations for protection and enhancement
of the area are proposed.The Council is also in the process of completing a review programme
of a number of CAAs. The policy requires that proposals within Conservation Areas should be
determined in accordance with any relevant CAAs, which are a material planning consideration.
High quality maintenance and repair of historic assets will also be encouraged.Where necessary,
the Council will employ measures to maintain and enhance the quality of Conservation Areas
such as Urgent Works and Repairs Notices, Section 215 Notices and Article 4 Directions.
6.7.9 Development proposals should identify assets of archaeological significance. An archaeological
evaluation will be required for development sites that are known or thought to have the potential
to include non-designated heritage assets with archaeological interest. Where appropriate,
preference will be given to the preservation of archaeological remains in situ unless it can be
shown that the recording of remains, assessment, analysis, report, publication and deposition
of archive is more appropriate. It is important to note that, as a result of lack of information or
awareness, many heritage assets remain undiscovered or without official recognition. The
existence of an asset may become apparent as a result of a planning application, at which time
the Council may deem that it is appropriate to apply this policy.
6.7.10 Historic England hold a Heritage at Risk Register(88) which currently contains 19 entries in North
Norfolk. Support will be given to proposals that bring into use or improve an asset so it is no
longer deemed at risk on the Heritage at Risk Register.
Policy ENV 7
Protecting & Enhancing the Historic Environment
1. Development proposals will conserve and, where possible, enhance the North Norfolk historic
environment by:
a. conserving the historic dimension of the landscape;
87 Chapter 16. Conserving and enhancing the historic environment, NPPF 2021.
88 https://histor icengland.org.uk/advice/her itage-at-r isk103 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 6b. conserving cultural, built, historic and archaeological features of national and local
importance and their settings, including those that are not formally designated;
c. identifying and protecting locally important buildings that contribute to the area’ s local
character and identity;
d. increasing opportunities for access, education and appreciation of all aspects of the
historic environment, for all sections of the community; and,
e. better revealing the significance of the heritage asset, unless there are no identifiable
opportunities available, where the removal of existing features that have a negative
impact on the historic environment, as identified through character appraisals, should be
sought.
2. The re-use of Listed Buildings and buildings identified on the Local List will be encouraged
and the optimum viable use that is compatible with the fabric, interior and setting of the building
will be permitted.
3. Development proposals that affect the significance of a designated or non-designated heritage
asset including any contribution to that significance by its setting will be required to submit a
heritage statement that provides sufficient information proportionate to the importance of the
asset and the impact of the proposed development.
Designated Heritage Assets
4. Development proposals, including alterations and extensions, will conserve or where
opportunities arise, enhance a designated heritage asset including any contribution to that
significance by its setting. Harm should be avoided in the first instance.
5. Development proposals, including alterations and extensions, that result in substantial harm
to or total loss of significance of a designated heritage asset including any contribution to that
significance by its setting will only be permitted in exceptional circumstances for Grade II
heritage assets or wholly exceptional circumstances for Grade II* and Grade I heritage assets
and Scheduled Monuments, where it is demonstrated that the harm or loss is necessary to
achieve substantial public benefits that outweigh the harm or loss. Where a development
proposal will lead to less than substantial harm this harm should be weighed against the public
benefits of the proposal.
Non-designated Heritage Assets
6. Development proposals, including alterations and extensions, should conserve or where
opportunities arise, enhance a non-designated heritage asset including any contribution to
that significance by its setting.
7. Development proposals, including alterations and extensions, that result in substantial harm
to or total loss of significance of a non-designated heritage asset including any contribution
to that significance by its setting will be required to provide sufficient information to demonstrate
that any harm has been fully assessed.
8. Development proposals will conserve and where opportunities arise, enhance the character
and appearance of Conservation Areas , where account will be taken of any relevant
Conservation Area Character Appraisal and Management Plans in determining proposals.
9. Development proposals should identify assets of archaeological significance. An archaeological
evaluation will be required for development sites that are known or thought to have the potential
to include non-designated heritage assets with archaeological interest. Where appropriate,
archaeological remains should be left in situ following further design/engineering work. If the
benefits of a particular development are considered to outweigh the importance of retaining
archaeological remains in situ, satisfactory excavation and recording of remains will be required
before development is begun.
10. Development proposals that bring into use or improve an asset so it is no longer deemed at
risk on the Heritage at Risk Register will be supported where appropriate to their significance.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 104
6Environment6.8 High Quality Design
The purpose of this policy is to provide a set of design principles which will result in improved design
and ensure the special character and qualities of North Norfolk are maintained and enhanced.
6.8.1 North Norfolk has an exceptionally rich and diverse built and natural environment.The interaction
between people and place has resulted in the District's unique qualities that we see today.
Design is not just about how a place looks, but also how a place functions; well-designed
developments improve the functionality of places and create high quality environments that can
be enjoyed by residents now and in the future. Securing high quality design is important in
achieving many of the essential wider principles under the umbrella of achieving climate resilient
sustainable development, as set out in Policy CC 1 'Delivering Climate Resilient Sustainable
Growth' .
6.8.2 Securing high quality design contributes to quality of life and influences our health and well-being.
The Council, under the agreed Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework, has signed up to the
Planning in Health Protocol, which should inform planning applications for residential
development of all sizes, as set out in Policy HC 1 'Health & Wellbeing' . The protocol draws
on key guidance such as Building for a Healthier Life and Active Design which ensures proposal
consider matters relating to healthy environments and encourage physical activity which should
inform all major development
6.8.3 High quality design reinforces or creates a sense of place, making North Norfolk a better place
to live, work and spend time. Well-designed places encourage social interaction, helping to
create inclusive communities, providing equal access to opportunities, services and facilities,
whilst reducing opportunities for crime and promoting natural surveillance of the public realm
and open spaces.
6.8.4 The National Planning Policy Framework states that ' the creation of high quality buildings and
places is fundamental to what the planning and development process should achieve. Good
design is a key aspect of sustainable development, creates better places in which to live and
work and helps make development acceptable to communities. Being clear about design
expectations, and how these will be tested, is essential for achieving this' .
6.8.5 The Framework states that 'Development that is not well designed should be refused, especially
where it fails to reflect local design policies and government guidance on design, taking into
account any local design guidance and supplementary planning documents such as design
guides and codes.'  (Paragraph 134, NPPF 2021)
6.8.6 The North Norfolk Design Guide Supplementary Planning Document provides guidance on how
design should complement local architectural traditions and how sustainable construction
techniques can be incorporated within the context of the quality and character of the existing
built heritage. Conservation Area Appraisals and the Landscape Character Assessment provide
a more detailed local context for the consideration of development and should also be taken
into account where they have been produced. There will be reviews of such statements during
the lifetime of the Plan and the most up to date material should be referred to.
6.8.7 In January 2021 the Ministry for Housing Communities and Local Government published National
Design Guide , which sets out how an integrated design approach, incorporating ten
characteristics, can achieve well-designed, healthy, greener places that also 'positively address
environmental issues affecting Climate.' This guidance should be incorporated in proposals.
Any subsequent urban design good practice guidance or similar that the Council wishes to
endorse will be made available on the Council’ s website and should be incorporated into
proposals.105 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 66.8.8 The Council may encourage design reviews to take place during the assessment of large and
complex sites and encourages early engagement in line with Paragraph 132 of the NPPF and
will facilitate constructive dialogue at the pre-application stage.
6.8.9 Paragraph 80 of the NPPF states that planning policies and decisions should avoid the
development of isolated homes in the countryside ' unless the design is of exceptional quality,
in that it: is truly outstanding, reflecting the highest standards in architecture, and would help
to raise standards of design more generally in rural areas; and would significantly enhance its
immediate setting, and be sensitive to the defining characteristics of the local area'. Due to the
rural nature of the district it is envisaged that there will be a number of Paragraph 80 applications.
When considering these applications the Council would expect that the standards of design
would be above and beyond the typical high levels of design expected of all development within
the district. Further detail is to be provided through the North Norfolk Design Guide.
6.8.10 The Council intends that this policy relates to all forms of development within the District to
ensure that the highest design standards are applied equally across all development throughout
North Norfolk. Through this Plan the Council is seeking to deliver approximately 5,000 new
dwellings on allocated sites and, as a result, many of these proposed allocations will include
an element of affordable housing. Where this is the case, it is the intention of the Council that
the design principles, as set out within this policy and supported by the guidance in the North
Norfolk Design Guide, are equally applied to both market dwellings and all types of affordable
housing. In terms of design there should be no difference between market and affordable
dwellings.
6.8.11 The Council's design policy and supporting planning documents are intended to introduce a
step change in the design aspirations for the District. In line with the NPPF , PPG, and the
publication of a National Design Guide and National model Design Codes there is an increased
focus upon promoting high quality design. As such, the policy seeks to incorporate a number
of key design principles which must, where possible, be incorporated into all schemes.
Major Development 
6.8.12 Major Development is defined within the NPPF for residential development as development
where 10 or more homes will be provided, or the site has an area of 0.5 hectares or more. For
non-residential development it relates to floorspace of 1,000m2 or more, or a site of 1 hectare
or more, or as otherwise provided in the Town and Country Planning (Development Management
Procedure) (England) Order 2015.
6.8.13 Design and Access Statements are required to be submitted with all major planning applications
and these should demonstrate how a proposal is functional, attractive and accessible to all.
6.8.14 For larger residential schemes a Health Impact Assessment will be required as detailed in
Policy HC 1 'Health & Wellbeing' .
Climate Change & Energy Efficiency 
6.8.15 Delivering climate resilient sustainable development and adapting to climate change includes
the requirement to minimise demand for resources and mitigate the impacts from climate
change. With the focus on the quality of homes in the NPPF , the national emphasis on more
energy efficient homes and the aim of zero carbon homes, local authorities can play an important
role in incentivising industry to help meet the national carbon reduction targets as well as
increase long term sustainability and people’ s well-being. In line with Policy CC 3 'Sustainable
Construction, Energy Efficiency & Carbon Reduction', it is the Council’ s ambition that energy
efficient, low carbon homes will become integrated into the normal design of new build
developments in North Norfolk.This policy ambition also seeks to drive sustainability standardsProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 106
6Environmentacross all types of development. Therefore, in line with paragraph 133 of the NPPF , the policy
also promotes the appropriate use of tools and processes for assessing and improving the
design of development, such as BREEAM’ s very good standard for non-residential development.
6.8.16 In relation to managing SuDS, consideration should be given to the four pillars of Water Quantity,
Water Quality, Amenity and Biodiversity, and taking into consideration multi-functional benefits
of land use and materials such as permeable materials to aid infiltration and green roofs for
storage.
Quality of the Public Realm
6.8.17 For places to work and foster sustainable communities it is important that the public realm is
of high quality, feels safe, is vibrant, is inclusive to all social groups, and is adaptable to the
changing needs of the community. This can be achieved through: Locating public spaces on
main lines of movement and pedestrian connection nodes; ensuring that spaces present
imaginative, high quality design and contribute to the District’ s wider green infrastructure
framework; ensuring that spaces and routes are overlooked from surrounding buildings, with
active frontages onto spaces, where appropriate; creating incidental and/or small areas of
grass/open space should be used to complement green infrastructure and the overall movement
network; prioritising the retention of key natural features, such as mature trees, hedgerows and
land forms; provide new trees, including street trees, hedgerows and additional native species
planting as part of the overall landscaping framework throughout a site (as detailed in Policy
CC 12 'Trees, Hedgerows & Woodland' ); strengthening and protecting existing boundary
hedgerows around the site; providing appropriate landscaping and screening to aid residential
amenity; and reducing the potential impact of artificial light pollution and its effects on wildlife
and the rural setting.
6.8.18 Public art is recognised as having a significant role in creating successful places and establishing
vibrant communities. Public art has the ability to make buildings and places more distinctive,
attractive and legible.
Landscape & Green Infrastructure
6.8.19 The importance upon the spaces around new development should not be underestimated in
the design of new development. Good landscaping can actively enhance, complement, soften
or even obscure development as necessary. The landscape of North Norfolk gets its unique
identity from the natural setting and historical development. New development should share
common characteristics with its locality and reinforce local identity, as well as providing well
designed accessible landscapes and public open spaces. Development proposals should ensure
that public open space and landscape design strategies provide net gains for biodiversity and
incorporate coherent ecological networks that are more resilient to current and future
pressures(89), aligning with the most up to date strategies for ecological networks(90). In addition,
Policy CC 11 'Green Infrastructure'  and Policy CC 12 'Trees, Hedgerows & Woodland' ,
will ensure that existing and new natural features form an integral part of all new development.
Movement & Connectivity
6.8.20 In considering the potential of new development, making the right connections into and out of
the site is a major component of place-making. The distribution and hierarchy of streets have
an important relationship with distribution of land uses, density and pattern of activity.
6.8.21 Creating new walking and cycling routes and connecting to the existing walking and cycling
network by the simplest and most direct way should be a major consideration and priority in all
new developments in North Norfolk.
89 www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/national-planning-policy-fr amework--2
90 www .gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/25-y ear-en vironment-plan107 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 66.8.22 In many locations the vehicular approaches to settlements provide views both into, and out of,
settlements and provide important views of the settlement and its landscape setting. Development
proposals along such routes should have particular regard to their setting. The Government
publication ‘Manual for Streets’  aims to assist in the creation and integration of high quality
street design and should be used in such proposals.
Character
6.8.23 It is important that new proposals preserve or enhance the historic environment and/or respect
or improve the local character. This can be achieved through careful design, incorporating high
quality details and materials that respect and reflect the character of the area and through
careful consideration of layout, form, style, massing, scale, and density and the local vernacular.
Safety
6.8.24 'Secured by Design' principles should be considered in all schemes, with particular attention
to increasing natural surveillance, the layout of roads and footpaths, and specific consideration
of the use of open space and landscaping. Further advice on 'Secured by Design' is available
from Norfolk Constabulary. In town centres covered by CCTV systems, developers will be
required to consider these facilities in their design and / or contribute to the siting / re-siting of
cameras where appropriate.
Amenity
6.8.25 Residents have the right to adequate privacy levels, that allow for adequate external amenity
space and internal spaces that avoid direct overlooking. The Council will therefore look for
layouts to take account of the position of dwellings and the arrangement of their rooms and
windows and the adequacy of any private amenity space. The matter of amenity is set out in
greater detail in Policy ENV 6 'Protection of Amenity' .
Accessibility and Adaptability
6.8.26 The District has one of the highest percentage of over 65s in the country. The population is
ageing and the trend is accelerating. There is a historic deficit and lack of accessible and
adaptable properties across all tenures in the District with the greatest requirement remaining
in the private sector. Given the District's increasing older population structure and high proportion
of older, smaller traditional housing stock, it is important that the supply of accessible and
adaptable homes is significantly increased.With public health and social care strategies placing
more emphasis on supporting people in their own homes rather than moving to residential care
it is also important that the Council seek to ensure that more accessible homes are provided
in the district and that adaptations are easier and cheaper to undertake. This is set out in detail
in Policy HOU 8 'Accessible & Adaptable Homes' .
Space Standards
6.8.27 The size and layout of new dwellings have an important influence on health and well-being as
well as future adaptability and with the ageing population in North Norfolk is an important
consideration for the Local Plan. The nationally described space standards deal with internal
space within new dwellings across all tenures.The standard sets out the minimum requirements
for the Gross Internal (floor) area of new dwellings at a defined level of occupancy as well as
floor area and dimensions for key parts of the home, e.g. bedrooms, storage and floor to ceiling
height. As set out in Policy HOU 9 'Minimum Space Standards' , utilising these optional
technical standards allows the Council to seek to increase the dwelling sizes in relation to
property sizes where there is the greatest need, ensuring that properties across the District are
built to meet expectations and new dwellings continue to have a positive impact on Local plan
delivery targets.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 108
6EnvironmentParking & Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure
6.8.28 Parking provision and parking within the streetscene can have a significant impact on the
character and appearance of an area and its functionality. Parking can tend to dominate streets,
weaken the sense of enclosure and erode urban design qualities. Imaginative solutions are,
therefore, required to respond to the challenge. Parking has to be designed carefully and parking
capacity needs to be flexible, in accordance with Policy HC 7 'Parking Provision' .
6.8.29 The level of provision of electric vehicle charging points should be appropriate to the development
size and type, its level of parking provision and its context and location. In the case of car parks,
upstanding or inset charging points can be integrated into the design, whereas more innovation
may be required for on-street charging points which should be integrated into street lighting
columns or other smart street furniture items so as to reduce street clutter. Applicants should
also have regard to the detail within Policy CC 8 'Electric Vehicle Charging' .
Policy ENV 8
High Quality Design
1. All development proposals will seek to achieve an integrated design approach that reflects
the characteristics of the site,  respects  the distinctive local character in terms of layout,
landscaping, density, mix, scale, massing, materials, finish and architectural details and
delivers an energy efficient and low carbon development.
2. All development proposals should be in conformity with the North Norfolk Design Guide
SPD or provide justification for a departure and be informed by the Planning in Health Protocol.
3. All proposals will be expected to demonstrate a high quality of design that:
a. contributes positively to the public realm and public open spaces, incorporating public
art into schemes, where appropriate, to create high quality, sustainably designed places
and spaces that supports a mix of uses and activities that promotes a healthy lifestyle;
b. retains existing important landscaping and natural features, and includes landscape
enhancement schemes that are compatible with the Landscape Character Assessment
and the creation, restoration or enhancement of ecological networks;
c. provides and enhances the green infrastructure network across the District, which
maximises connectivity, creating a movement hierarchy which is legible, permeable and
well connected through incorporating footpaths, cycle paths, green links and networks
to the surrounding area, respecting important approach routes;
d. preserves and, where possible, enhances the special character of the historic environment;
e. reduces opportunities for crime and antisocial behaviour, creating safe, secure and
accessible environments;
f. provides appropriate private amenity space;
g. provides appropriate facilities for refuse, recycling and servicing;
h. ensures that development is designed in accordance with minimum space standards
and Accessible & Adaptable Homes policies;
i. maximises the opportunities for the provision of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS)
taking into account the multi-functional benefits of compatible land uses and materials;
and, 
j. provides adequate parking provision that incorporates appropriate Electric Vehicle
Charging Points, which are discreet and accessible.109 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Environment 6Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 110
6Environment7 Housing
7.0.1 The policies in this section of the Plan complement the housing distribution policies
(SS1-SS3) and are consistent with government policies to ensure that sufficient homes,
of the right types, are built in the right places to address all of the housing needs identified
by local evidence. Collectively, they enable the delivery of a wide range of both market
and affordable homes in sizes, tenures and types to match existing and future needs,
make efficient use of existing buildings, and ensure new homes are built to higher space
and accessibility standards which provide sufficient living space in the required energy
efficient homes.
7.1 Delivering Sufficient Homes
The purpose of this policy  is to set a minimum housing target for the District that ensures that all
existing and future housing needs are addressed in locations that comply with the Settlement Hierarchy
in Policy SS 1 'Spatial Strategy' .
7.1.1 Over the period 2016 to 2036 the population of North Norfolk is projected to grow by around
7,781 (2016 National Projections)  so that by the end of the Plan period 108,693 people are
likely live here. Much of this increase results from net inward migration mainly from elsewhere
in the south east by those retiring to the area. It is also expected that people will live longer,
that average household sizes will remain low, and that around 8-10% of all dwellings in the
District will be used as second homes.These factors and others will contribute towards significant
housing pressures in the District over the period covered by this Plan.
7.1.2 The NPPF aims to boost significantly the supply of homes and ensure that sufficient homes
are built to meet likely future needs. To deliver this increase in supply it requires that Plans
should ensure that all of the likely future needs for homes is planned for. This means taking full
account of a wide range of factors including the changing accommodation requirements of the
existing population, predicted population growth, migration trends, vacant and second home
rates, and considering how needs are being addressed by adjacent authorities.
7.1.3 The first stage of setting a housing target for the Plan is to establish how many new homes are
likely to be required. National planning policy refers to this as establishing Objectively Assessed
Needs (OAN) and includes a standard national methodology for arriving at this figure. The
starting point is household projections that are published every two years by the Office for
National Statistics (ONS) and provide a trend-based projection of new homes required for each
District over the next 30 years or so to address projected demographic growth. In the standard
national methodology this demographic growth trend is then subject to an adjustment (uplift)
with the size of the uplift determined by the local ratio between incomes and house prices, with
required uplifts being greatest in those areas where housing is the least affordable. The
expectation is that the resulting figure should be the minimum target to be set in the Plan unless
evidence suggests that providing for this number would have unsustainable consequences. In
such a scenario, any shortfalls would need to be met elsewhere by reaching agreements with
other authorities under the Duty to Co-operate.
7.1.4 The current standard national methodology is based on Office for National Statistics (ONS)
projections with a 2014 start date. The Authority does not consider that these 2014 based
projections accurately reflect likely future growth rates in the District because they project
forward higher rates of annual growth than were subsequently shown to have actually occurred.
The Office of National Statistics published revised projections with a base date of 2016 and the
Council considers these to be a more robust basis for establishing the future requirement for111 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 7homes in the District(91). Applying the national standard housing needs methodology to the
2016 projections, and using the latest available (2020) affordability ratio for the District, produces
a minimum housing requirement for around 480 dwellings per year, or 9,600 new homes in the
twenty years covered by the Plan. This Plan sets this figure as the minimum  target to be
provided. As a measure to extend choice and flexibility, the Plan includes specific allocations
and policies which would enable the delivery of around 12,000 new homes.
7.1.5 Delivering sufficient homes means addressing a wide range of housing needs including for
those who are unable to afford local homes and those who require specialist types of
accommodation.The evidence indicates that there is a need for around 2,000 affordable homes
and an existing and rising need for various types of elderly person’ s accommodation.This Plan
includes proposals and policies designed to help address these particular needs including those
of the gypsy and travelling community and those wishing to build their own homes. Where 
policies require a mix of homes the Council will require these to be provided in stages as the
development progresses to ensure provision on the site in a timely and integrated way.
7.1.6 As part of the Duty to Cooperate the Council has considered the housing needs arising in all
of the Norfolk Authorities and it has been agreed that North Norfolk need not make any allowance
for needs which arise elsewhere in the County as these will be addressed in full by the Local
Plans of the neighbouring Planning Authorities.
7.1.7 On the date that the Plan is adopted, part of the required housing target over the Plan period
2016-2036 will already have been built. A further quantity will have planning permission but will
not have been built, and over the remainder of the period the Council would also expect a
proportion of the required growth to be delivered via windfall developments. These windfall
developments comprise small-scale infills, redevelopments, re-use of existing buildings and
affordable dwellings in the designated Countryside Policy Area. For many years these sources
of new homes have collectively delivered a significant proportion of the total homes in the District
and the policies of this Plan will allow this to continue and increase the opportunities for such
developments. There is no evidence to suggest that this source of new homes will significantly
diminish in the future. Even so, in preparing this Plan the Council has been realistic and has
reduced its expectations in relation to future windfall housing to a figure which equates to around
50% of the historic rate and has carefully assessed the likely future supply of development
derived in this way. The remainder of the Plan housing target is provided for through the
suggested site allocations in this Plan, which are expected to deliver approximately 4,900 homes
(inclusive of elderly persons accommodation but excluding 400 units in Small Growth Villages).
7.1.8 As well as ensuring sufficient homes are built to address needs over the entire Plan period,
national policy also requires that land suitable for development is available at all times, that
there is a choice of sites, and that the quantity of land available is adequate to address at least
the next five years of the housing requirement plus a minimum 5% delivery buffer.The underlying
objective is to ensure that the absence of available and suitable land should not delay the
completion of the development that is required.
7.1.9 The Council expects delivery rates to be variable over the plan period. Nearly all of the sites
allocated in this Plan are immediately available for development, and many of the larger sites
are owned by, or are under option to house builders. To assist with delivery a range of sizes
of sites in a broad selection of locations have been identified providing opportunities for both
large and smaller home builders and those wishing to build their own homes. A positive and
flexible approach to the provision of affordable homes in the Countryside (Policy HOU3),
Community Led Developments and support for Neighbourhood Plans ( Policy SS
3 'Community-Led Development'), are all intended to support the regular and timely delivery
of both market and affordable homes.
91 North Norfolk Strategic Housing Market Assessment, Opinion Research Services, 2019 - available in NNDC Document Library -
www .north-norf olk.go v.uk/documentlibr aryProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 112
7Housing7.1.10 The two largest sites at North Walsham and Fakenham are assessed to take many years to
deliver in full with some of the development on both of the larger allocations taking place beyond
the period covered by this Plan. Some smaller site opportunities are identified in both towns as
a measure to ensure delivery in the earlier years of the Plan. A Housing Trajectory has been
prepared for this Plan (see 23 'Housing Trajectory' ) which will be reviewed on an annual basis
and published in Land Supply and Annual Monitoring reports.
7.1.11 National guidance indicates that plan-making authorities will need to count housing provided
for older people against their housing requirement and states that for residential institutions, to
establish the amount of accommodation released in the housing market, authorities should
base calculations on the average number of adults living in households (1.8 in North Norfolk
-2011 Census).The policies of this Plan require the delivery of a specific quantity of specialist
elderly persons accommodation on many of the larger site allocations and this requirement can
be addressed via the provision of either elderly persons dwellings, such as Assisted Living
units, or bed spaces provided in Care or Nursing Homes. The total dwellings yielded by Policy
HOU1 makes allowance for specialist elderly persons accommodation at a ratio of each 1.5
units of elderly persons accommodation being equivalent to a single dwelling reflecting the
range of unit types which could be provided. The site area likely to be occupied by such
accommodation has been taken account of in calculating the capacity of allocated sites to
deliver other types of housing.
Policy HOU 1
Delivering Sufficient Homes
1. The Council will aim to deliver a minimum of 9,600 new homes over the plan period 2016-2036.
As part of this total a minimum of 2,000 affordable dwellings will be provided. To achieve this
specific development sites suitable for not less than 4,900 new dwellings are allocated.
2. Development will be permitted in accordance with the adopted settlement hierarchy and the
table below. If during the plan period the Council is unable to demonstrate a Five Y ear Land
Supply it will apply a presumption in favour of sustainable development to proposals.
Total Elderly
Persons
Accommodation
on allocated
sites as
required in
Policy HOU2
at ratio of 1.5:1Dwellings
provided on
Allocated
Sites inclusive
of specialist
elderly
accommodationDwelling
Completions
(01/04/2016 -
31/03/2021)Dwellings with
Planning
Permission (at
31/03/21)Settlement /
LocationSettlement
Hierarchy
3,011 373 2,150 449 39 North Walsham Large Growth
Towns
(51.3%) 2,168 67 750 335 1,016 Fakenham
1,024 107 572 151 194 Cromer
768 40 207 327 194 Holt Small Growth
Towns
221 40 120 5 56 Hoveton
(16.2%)
465 133 141 191 Sheringham
305 150 101 54 Stalham
196 70 89 37 Wells-next-the-Sea113 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 7Total Elderly
Persons
Accommodation
on allocated
sites as
required in
Policy HOU2
at ratio of 1.5:1Dwellings
provided on
Allocated
Sites inclusive
of specialist
elderly
accommodationDwelling
Completions
(01/04/2016 -
31/03/2021)Dwellings with
Planning
Permission (at
31/03/21)Settlement /
LocationSettlement
Hierarchy
66 30 20 16 Blakeney Large Growth
Villages
(3.4%) 197 65 50 82 Briston &
Melton
Constable
48 35 2 11 Ludham
102 30 59 13 Mundesley
918 452(1)294 172 Villages named Small Growth
Villages
(7.6%)in Policy SS
1 'Spatial
Strategy'
717 0 399 318 All remaining
settlements and
countrysideRemainder of
District
(5.9%)
1,890 Across entire
DistrictWindfall
Development
(2021-2036) 
15.6%
12,096 644 4,764 2,422 2,393 Totals
Table 5 Completed & Planned New Growth by Settlement (2016-2036)
1. Delivered through Policy SS 1 'Spatial Strategy'
7.2 Delivering the Right Mix of Homes
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure that the type, size and tenure of homes provided closely
matches the existing and predicted future needs of the local population.
7.2.1 The NPPF states that major housing developments should meet the need for affordable housing
on-site, with at least 10% of the affordable homes available for affordable home ownership. It
also requires Local Plans to provide a mix of property types and sizes and a variety of affordable
housing tenures, as well as meeting the needs of all groups in the community. The provision
of First Homes for purchase at discounted rates is the governments preferred tenure for low
cost home ownership and at least 25% of affordable homes should be provided in this way.
7.2.2 To achieve the above, and based on local evidence, the policy requires the provision of a full
range of type, tenure and cost of housing to meet the varied housing needs of the District.
Minimum space standards and requirements for adaptable homes to provide an improved
quality of life and meet the needs of an ageing population are addressed in Policy HOU
8 'Accessible & Adaptable Homes'  and Policy HOU 9 'Minimum Space Standards' . The
specialist accommodation needs of the gypsy and traveller community and those of essential
rural workers are addressed in Policy HOU 5 'Gypsy,Traveller & Travelling Showpeople's
Accommodation'  and Policy HOU 4 'Essential Rural Worker Accommodation' respectively.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 114
7Housing7.2.3 All housing proposals should make efficient use of land and seek to maximise the number of
dwellings provided consistent with the objectives of protecting character and delivering attractive
developments. Proposals which seek to avoid the thresholds identified in this policy either by
reducing the number of dwellings proposed or size of site will not be supported.
Affordable Housing
7.2.4 The evidence indicates a high level of need for smaller social rented properties and this is
reflected in the policy. Where affordable homes for purchase, or part purchase, are provided
as part of the mix it is essential that these are made available at a price which allows those on
lower incomes in the District to access the local housing market at an affordable level.
7.2.5 The policy sets a general requirement for on-site affordable housing provision of between 15%
and 35% on sites of qualifying size determined by site location within two defined Affordable
Housing Zones.These are based on local evidence reflecting the viability of delivering housing
in the respective parts of the District and the high level of affordable housing need throughout
the area. The Council will seek to deliver the highest proportion of affordable homes that is
viable and save for very exceptional circumstances will require on site provision at the proportions
required by the policy.
7.2.6 The NPPF indicates that affordable homes should not normally be required on schemes of 10
or fewer dwellings save for in Designated Rural Areas where, if the evidence supports it, a
lower site size threshold can be applied. Much of North Norfolk is designated as a Rural Area
and it light of the high need for affordable homes the Council will seek affordable housing on
schemes in this area which propose six or more dwellings. To address the possible practical
problems of providing affordable homes on small sites the policy includes an option to make
an equivalent financial contribution of sufficient value to deliver the affordable homes requirement
elsewhere.
Specialist Housing
7.2.7 Norfolk, in common with the rest of the UK, faces an ageing population. In the period from 2016
to 2041 the number of households aged 75 and over is set to increase from 89,723 to 127,111
an increase of 41.7%.
7.2.8 At the District level, North Norfolk has one of the highest over-65 populations as a proportion
of its total population in the country, and this age cohort is also the fastest growing across the
District. By 2036 it is projected that there will be an additional 11,500 residents over the age of
65, increasing the percentage of people aged over 65 from 32% to 39.9% of the District's
population, nearly double the England average of 23.4%.(92) Significantly the higher age cohorts
of over 80 years of age are projected to increase at the fastest rate and will account for up to
14% of the District population by 2036.
7.2.9 Provision of specialist housing for older people can reduce health and social care costs, improve
quality of life and free up general needs housing for younger households. Older people living
in specialist accommodation enjoy better health and make fewer demands on health and social
care services. They feel more secure and enjoy improved quality of life.
7.2.10 Providing homes for people as they get older, have disabilities or experience a long-term illness
is important to retaining a quality of life and continuing to be an active part of the community.
To accommodate changing population demographics, new housing that can meet these needs
should be provided as new development comes forward. Taking this proactive approach will
help ensure the right properties are available when they are required by those who need them.
7.2.11 An increasing proportion of the population is over 65 or disabled, increasing the demand for
92 ONS Subnational projections 2016- NNDC Optional Technical Standards Topic Paper, 2018.115 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 7supported accommodation such as sheltered housing, extra care housing and care homes,
residential care and supported living. This Plan aims to reduce residential care home and
nursing home dependency and support people to remain more independent in their own homes
or in supported housing for as long as possible. Even so, there is a significant need for specific
types of accommodation to support those who are no longer able to remain at home.
7.2.12 The policy therefore supports the provision of housing to meet the needs of older people and
others with support needs, including sheltered housing, residential/nursing care accommodation
and extra care housing. Norfolk County Council’ s strategy(93) identifies a need for 2,842 additional
extra care units by 2028.The strategy also identifies the need for 486 specialist retirement units
(sheltered, age restricted or extra care housing) in North Norfolk between 2016 and 2036(93).
The Council defines 'Specialist Elderly Care' as including extra-care housing, sheltered housing, dementia
housing and use C2 residential care and nursing homes. The type and tenure will be agreed on a case
by case basis having regard to local evidence of supply and need at the time of application.
Custom & Self-Build Housing
7.2.13 Local authorities are required to keep a register of those seeking to acquire serviced plots in
the area for their own self-build and custom-build housing. In 2020/21, there were 14 people
on the register in North Norfolk. In line with the Right to Build and the NPPF , self and
custom-build housing delivery is promoted through the Plan on a range of sustainably located
sites. This policy sets a requirement for larger sites to provide serviced self and custom-build
plots. The thresholds have been set to ensure that plots are provided across the District. Plots
provided in this way should be fully serviced and made available for an agreed period of time
on terms which have been agreed with the Planning Authority.
Policy HOU 2
Delivering the Right Mix of Homes
Unless the proposal is for a Rural Exceptions Scheme, Gypsy and Traveller accommodation, or
specialist residential accommodation all new housing developments, including those for the
conversion of existing buildings, shall provide for a mix of house sizes and tenures in accordance
with the following:
Specialist
Elderly / Care
Provision(3)Number of
Serviced
Self-Build
Plots(2)Required
Affordable
Housing
Mix(1)Required
Market
Housing Mix% Affordable Homes Required
of which a minimum should be
provided as First HomesSize of
Scheme
(Dwellings /
hectares)
Affordable
Zone 2Affordable
Zone 1(4)
No
requirementNo
requirementNo
requirementNo
requirementNo
requirementNo
requirement0-5 dwellings
or sites smaller
than 0.2
hectares.
No
requirementNo
requirementNot more than
25% of theNot less than
50% two orAt least 35%
on siteAt least 15%
on site6-25 or sites
larger than 0.2
hectares.(5)affordable three bedroom provision. provision.
homes as First properties in a Option of Option of
Homes with mix comprising financial financial
the remainder approx. 20%
93 Norfolk County Council, Living Well Strategy, 2019Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 116
7HousingSpecialist
Elderly / Care
Provision(3)Number of
Serviced
Self-Build
Plots(2)Required
Affordable
Housing
Mix(1)Required
Market
Housing Mix% Affordable Homes Required
of which a minimum should be
provided as First HomesSize of
Scheme
(Dwellings /
hectares)
two-bed and
80%
three-bed.contribution on
schemes of
6-10 dwellings.contribution on
schemes of
6-10 dwellings.Rented in a
mix comprising
one, two and
three-bed with
the majority
two-bed.(6)No
requirementAt least one
serviced plotAt least 35%
on siteAt least 15%
on site26-150 or sites
larger than 4
hectares. or 2% of total
number ofprovision of
affordableprovision of
affordable
Minimum 60 151 dwellings
and above.units,
whichever is
greater.homes
delivered via
developer
contribution.homes
delivered via
developer
contribution.units and
further 40 units
for each
additional 250
dwellings
thereafter 
1. Size and tenure split determined on case by case basis in accordance with local needs evidence.
2. A plot of land of agreed dimensions which is serviced and made available for self-build housing on terms to be agreed with the
LPA for a period of not less than two years from the date of its availability.
3. Includes Extra Care, Sheltered Housing, Assisted Living, Dementia Care, and Nursing and Care Homes where there is
demonstrated to be a local need at time of application.
4. See Figure 11 'Affordable Housing Zones'.
5. See Figure 12 'Designated Rural Area'. Affordable homes will not be sought on schemes of 6-10 dwellings other than within the
Designated Rural Area. See Figure 11 'North Norfolk Rural Area'.
6. 'Rented' includes Social Rent, Affordable rent and Intermediate Rented products subject to affordability criteria.117 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 7Affordable Housing Zone 1
Affordable Housing Zone 2Constraints
Large Growth TownFigure 10 - Affordable Housing Zones
Settlement Hierarchy
Small Growth VillageLarge Growth VillageSmall Growth Town
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.FAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAMWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEASHERINGHAM
HOLT
STALHAM
HOVETONBriston & Melton
ConstableBlakeney
Mundesley
LudhamLittle SnoringBinhamLangham
High Kelling
Corpusty & SaxthorpeAldboroughEast & West
Runton
RoughtonOverstrand
BadersfieldBacton
Catfield
Potter Heigham
HorningSculthorpeSouthrepps
SuttonTrunch
WalcottLittle WalsinghamWeybourne
Sea PallingHappisburgh
Figure 10 Affordable Housing ZonesProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 118
7HousingLar
ge Growth Town Designated Rural AreaFigure 11 - Designated Rural Area
(in relation to Affordable Housing Policy)
Small Growth Town
Large Growth Village
Small Growth VillageSettlement Hierarchy Constraints
Crown copyright and database rights 2021 OS100018623. 
Use of this data is subject to T&Cs which can be viewed 
on Page 1 of the North Norfolk Local Plan.FAKENHAMCROMER
NORTH WALSHAMWELLS-NEXT-THE-SEASHERINGHAM
HOLT
STALHAM
HOVETONBriston & Melton
ConstableBlakeney
Mundesley
LudhamLittle SnoringBinhamLangham
High Kelling
Corpusty & SaxthorpeAldboroughEast & West
Runton
RoughtonOverstrand
BadersfieldBacton
Catfield
Potter Heigham
HorningSculthorpeSouthrepps
SuttonTrunch
WalcottLittle WalsinghamWeybourne
Sea PallingHappisburgh
Figure 11 Designated Rural Area119 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 77.3 Affordable Homes in the Countryside
The purpose of this policy  is to provide for the delivery of an increased supply of affordable homes
in locations close to where the need for such accommodation arises.
7.3.1 The delivery of affordable homes is a key priority for the Council. In the last decade the provision
of affordable dwellings in the designated Countryside Policy Area has provided a significant
proportion of all affordable homes built in the District. These homes, referred to as Rural
Exceptions, are granted planning permission as an exception to normally restrictive planning
policies and are designed to be relatively small in scale in order to address locally arising needs
in the area. Occupation of the dwellings provided via this policy is limited to those in need who
have a strong connection to the 'hosting' village and the surrounding parishes in line with the
Council’ s Housing Allocations policy.
7.3.2 In recent year’ s public funding for affordable housing provision has been reducing and the
NPPF now allows for some market homes to be included within these schemes provided the
value of the market homes is used to fund the delivery of additional affordable homes. Where
it is clearly shown that the inclusion of market homes on a rural exception scheme is necessary
to deliver affordable dwellings which would not otherwise be built, the Council will consider
whether allowing a limited amount of market housing would be appropriate, taking into account
the location of the site, the degree of need for affordable housing in the area,  and any excessive
development costs associated with the develop.  In such cases, clear evidence of viability will
need to be provided demonstrating that there are excessive development costs due to site
constraints, and that any additional revenue created by the inclusion of open market housing
is essential to the delivery of the affordable housing proposed. The Council will only support
the inclusion of the minimum number of market homes to make a rural exception scheme
deliverable. The additional value created by the inclusion of market housing should not
be reflected in the price paid for land.
Policy HOU 3
Affordable Homes in the Countryside (Rural Exceptions Housing)
1. Proposals for affordable housing development within the designated Countryside Policy
Area  will be permitted where they comply with all of the following criteria:
a. the proposal would help to address a proven local housing need for affordable housing
as demonstrated in up to date evidence;
b. the site is physically well related to a built up part of a settlement and the facilities it
provides;
c. the affordable housing provided is made available solely to people in local housing need
at an affordable cost for the life of the property (the Council will ensure that any planning
permission granted is subject to appropriate conditions and/or planning obligations to
secure its affordability in perpetuity);
d. the scheme is of a scale and design appropriate to its immediate surroundings and is
sympathetic to the local area; and,
e. where market housing is included within proposals it is clearly demonstrated to be
minimum necessary in order to deliver affordable dwellings which would not otherwise
be provided, and in all cases the majority of the homes provided are affordable.
2. For the purposes of this policy 'local housing need' means the need in the Parish and adjoining
Parishes as evidenced by the most up to date evidence.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 120
7Housing7.4 Essential Rural Worker Accommodation
The purpose of this policy is to meet the need for essential accommodation associated with the use
of land for agriculture, forestry and other rural based businesses in locations that would otherwise be
judged as unsustainable.
7.4.1 Very occasionally it will be essential for a rural worker to have accommodation in close proximity
to the business and none suitable for their household need will be available. The construction
of new dwellings in the countryside to meet these needs will, in exceptional circumstances,
need to be justified in line with the policy requirements. In particular it should be demonstrated,
in line with Policy HOU 7 'Re-Use of Rural Buildings in the Countryside', that the conversion
of an existing building is considered before new build. If permission is granted for such dwellings
it is important that they are occupied as intended and the Council will, therefore, impose
restrictive occupancy conditions to ensure that any dwelling remains available to meet the
needs of the particular business.
7.4.2 The PPG explains that an essential rural worker will need to live at, or in close proximity to,
their place of work to ensure the effective operation of an agricultural, forestry or similar
land-based rural enterprise. For example, where farm animals or agricultural processes require
on-site attention 24-hours a day and where otherwise there would be a risk to human or animal
health or from crime, or to deal quickly with emergencies that could cause serious loss of crops
or products.
7.4.3 Planning permission will only be granted in these circumstances where it is clearly shown to
be essential to live on the site and the business is, or is likely to be, financially viable, as set
out in the policy criteria below.
Policy HOU 4
Essential Rural Worker Accommodation
1. Proposals for development in the designated Countryside Policy Area  to meet the housing
needs of full-time workers in agriculture, forestry and other essential rural workers connected
with that land who need to live at or near their place of work will be permitted where they
comply with all of the following criteria:
a. there is a demonstrated essential need for one or more full time workers to be readily
available on site at most times for the enterprise to function properly;
b. it is demonstrated that the functional need cannot be met by another existing dwelling
on the site of the enterprise, or in the immediate vicinity and where practicable and
appropriate, first consideration is then given to the sub-division or conversion of an
underused or redundant building;
c. the enterprise has been established for at least three years and is, and is likely to remain,
financially viable;
d. the proposal does not represent a replacement for another dwelling on the site which
has been sold on the open market in the last five years; and,
e. the proposed dwelling is no larger than that required to meet the functional needs of the
enterprise, nor unusually expensive to construct in relation to the income that the
enterprise would sustain in the long term.
2. Where accommodation is required in relation to a newly created enterprise, where there has
been insufficient time to demonstrate financial soundness, permission may be granted for a
temporary dwelling in the form of a caravan or wooden structure which may easily be
dismantled and removed from the site.121 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 77.5 Gypsy,Traveller & Travelling Showpeople's Accommodation
The purpose of this policy is to meet the needs for both permanently occupied and transit pitches for
the gypsy and traveller communities.
7.5.1 The accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers should be considered alongside the
housing needs of the whole community. Gypsies are protected by the 2010 Equalities Act, and
the Council has a duty to seek to eliminate unlawful discrimination and to promote equality of
opportunity and good race relations in everything it does.
7.5.2 Government policy requires Local Authorities meet any identified accommodation needs for
gypsies and travellers. It is recognised that the location of sites needs to meet the working and
living patterns of Gypsies and Travellers and that this may include locations in the Countryside.
However it is also important to ensure that locations allow for access to essential services, are
not damaging to the character of the area, and foster good community relations and be consistent
with the wider sustainable development principles of the Local Plan
7.5.3 In 2017 as part of the Duty to Cooperate the Norfolk Authorities collectively prepared a Gypsy,
Traveller, and Caravan Needs Assessment(94). For North Norfolk this concluded that future
need for permanently occupied pitches is likely to be very small and mainly arises from the few
Gypsy families already resident in the District. Transit pitches for seasonal visits to the District
are available at Fakenham and Cromer and have proved to be sufficient to address these needs
in the Plan period.
7.5.4 In line with national policy, the criteria based policy approach set out in Policy HOU 5 'Gypsy,
Traveller & Travelling Showpeople's Accommodation'  provides the basis for decisions
should such applications come forward. The approach is one that facilitates the traditional and
nomadic life of travellers while respecting also the interests of the settled community and
promotes the peaceful and integrated co – existence between the site and the local community
whilst at the same time ensuring both the need to travel and undue pressure on local
infrastructure is avoided and services can be accessed.
7.5.5 The Planning Policy for Travellers Sites (PPTS, 2015) defines the travelling community as
comprising Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpersons. Gypsies and Travellers are defined
in the PPTS as ‘Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such
persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’ s or dependents’  educational or health
needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but excluding members of an organised
group of travelling showpeople or circus people travelling together as such’ . Travelling
Showpersons are defined in the PPTS as ‘Members of a group organised for the purposes of
holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not travelling together as such).This includes such
persons who on the grounds of their own or their family’ s or dependants’  more localised pattern
of trading, educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel temporarily, but excludes
Gypsies and Travellers as defined above’ .
7.5.6 In determining whether persons are ‘Gypsies and Travellers’  for the purposes of this policy,
consideration should be given to the following issues amongst other relevant matters:
a. whether they previously led a nomadic habit of life;
b. the reasons for ceasing their nomadic habit of life;
c. whether there is an intention to living a nomadic habit of life in the future, and if so, how
soon and in what circumstances.
94 Norfolk Caravan and Houseboat Needs Assessment 2017, RRR Consultancy LtdProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 122
7Housing7.5.7 In respect of those Gypsies and Travellers who do not lead a nomadic lifestyle, the Council will
continue to assess and plan to meet their needs as part of its wider responsibilities to plan to
meet the accommodation needs of its settled community
Policy HOU 5
Gypsy,Traveller & Travelling Showpeople's Accommodation
1. Development that meets the identified needs of Gypsies and Travellers and of Travelling
Showpeople will be permitted provided that it is of an appropriate scale and nature and that
it complies with all of the following criteria:
a. the intended occupants meet the definition of Gypsies and Travellers(95), or the description
of travelling showpeople(96);
b. development minimises impact on the surrounding landscape;
c. safe vehicular access to the public highway can be provided and the development can
be served by necessary utilities infrastructure;
d. the movement of vehicles to and from the site will not result in any unacceptable impact
on the capacity of the highway network;
e. there is adequate space for parking, turning and servicing on site;
f. the site is in a sustainable location on the outskirts of, or within a reasonable distance
of, a settlement which offers local services and community facilities;
g. suitable landscaping, boundary enclosures and screening are provided to give privacy,
minimise impact on the character and amenities of the surrounding area and neighbouring
settled community;
h. proposals should include any additional uses intended to be carried out from the site.
2. Conditions will be used to control the nature and level of non-residential uses on the site.
7.6 Replacement Dwellings, Extensions, Domestic Outbuildings & Annexed
Accommodation
The purpose of this policy is to manage the visual impacts of proposed replacement dwellings, house
extensions and domestic outbuildings on the character of the District. Policy ENV 8 'High Quality
Design'  and the detailed advice of the North Norfolk Design Guide are also applicable.
7.6.1 Replacement dwellings, house extensions, the erection of domestic outbuildings and the
provision of annexed accommodation account for a substantial proportion of all new development
in the District. Well-designed proposals can enhance a property and its setting but excessively
large and poorly designed proposals can individually, and cumulatively, damage both the
character of the property and the local landscape.
7.6.2 Proposals for replacement dwellings should always be carefully considered. In many cases the
existing building will be suitable for retention, extension and modification. Not only are such
proposals likely to have less visual impact they also make best use of the fabric of the existing
dwelling, reduce waste and are likely to minimise the carbon footprint of proposals and for these
reasons, this is the Councils preferred approach.Where demolition and replacement is proposed,
95 As defined for the purposes of planning policy in the Planning Policy for Traveller Stes, DCLG, 2015 and Planning Practice Guidance
Paragraph: 001 Reference ID: 67-001-20190722, revision date 22.7.2019
96 As defined for the purposes of planning policy in the Planning Policy for Traveller Sites, DCLG, 2015 and Planning Practice Guidance
Paragraph: 001 Reference ID: 67-001-20190722, revision date 22.7.2019123 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 7schemes will need to comply with Policy CC 3 'Sustainable Construction, Energy Efficiency
& Carbon Reduction'  including demonstrating how existing materials will be re-used on the
site or recycled.
7.6.3 Proposals in Conservation Areas and those affecting Listed Buildings must also comply with 
the approach  and all proposals should ensure no unacceptable impacts on the amenities of
adjacent occupants in accordance with Policy ENV 6 'Protection of Amenity' .
7.6.4 The North Norfolk Design Guide includes detailed requirements and applicants will be expected
to demonstrate how they comply with these or show why variations are justified.
Policy HOU 6
Replacement Dwellings, Extensions, Domestic Outbuildings & Annexed Accommodation
1. Proposals to extend or replace existing dwellings will be permitted provided that the proposal:
a. would not materially increase the impact of the dwelling on the appearance of the
surrounding area; and,
b. would comply with the provisions of Policy ENV8 'High Quality Design' and the North
Norfolk Design Guide.
2. In determining what constitutes a ‘material increase in impact’  account will be taken of the
size of the proposal in relation to the prevailing character of the area, the size of the existing
property, the prominence of the site, plot coverage, and impact of the proposal on the landscape
and townscape of the area.
3. Proposals for annexed accommodation will be supported provided that the proposal:
a. is physically attached to, and comprises an extension to, an existing dwelling; or
b. is for the sympathetic conversion and restoration of an existing building; and,
c. in both cases, provides a scale of accommodation which is subordinate to the existing
dwelling and clearly designed for the intended purpose.
7.7 Re-use of Rural Buildings in the Countryside
The purpose of this policy is to allow for the conversion and re-use of good quality, structurally sound
buildings in ways which respects their character and protects wildlife.
7.7.1 North Norfolk has a rich heritage of traditional rural buildings, many of which are no longer
suitable for their original purpose but may be suitable for alternative uses. The re-use of good
quality existing buildings, including traditional barns and more modern structures, for a range
of uses offers the potential to support the sustainability of rural communities and secure the
future of traditional rural buildings that contribute positively to the local distinctiveness of the
area. In addition, the re-use of existing buildings may reduce the requirement to build new
development elsewhere.
7.7.2 This policy is only intended to allow for the conversion of buildings that do not require extensive
rebuilding or alteration in order to make them suitable for the use proposed. Buildings which
do not meet this test will not qualify and will be treated as the erection of new buildings and 
determined in accordance with the applicable policies for such proposals. Applicants will need
to demonstrate how the proposal will ensure the retention of the structure of the building andProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 124
7Housinga substantial proportion of its external fabric throughout the conversion process. The authority
may require the submission of a structural survey to demonstrate that buildings are capable of
being converted.
7.7.3 Poorly constructed buildings, purpose-built holiday accommodation and those buildings that
have recently been constructed or altered for another purpose will not be eligible.
7.7.4 The objective of maintaining sustainable rural communities will be the primary consideration
when assessing individual planning applications. Safeguarding existing employment, community
facilities, and local services is integral to achieving this, so where buildings are used, or were
last used for commercial or community uses, a residential conversion will not normally be
supported. Buildings should be genuinely redundant and dis-used (vacant) and the Council will
consider the recent history of use of the building to determine if this is the case.
7.7.5 There are already large numbers of mainly traditional farm buildings that have been converted
to various forms of holiday accommodation, including holiday and second homes and single
or groups of commercial holiday lets. The use of these buildings is often restricted to holiday
use only via a planning condition imposed upon the grant of planning permission. These
conditions were imposed at a time when national policies did not encourage the creation of
dwellings in less sustainable areas and supported the positive contribution that such uses can
bring to the tourism and the wider economy. There are now significant pressures in the District
to provide more homes suitable for permanent occupancy.The removal of restrictive occupancy
controls provides an opportunity to help address this. The Council will support proposals to
remove holiday restrictions from previously converted buildings subject to the buildings being
suitable for permanent occupation, but only in those circumstances where continuation of the
existing use is shown not to be viable in accordance with Policy E 9 'Retaining an Adequate
Supply & Mix of Tourist Accommodation' .
7.7.6 In the case of Listed Buildings, conversion may be allowed provided the use is demonstrated
to be the best use to secure the future of the building (optimum viable use). Planning applications
submitted on this basis will need to include a supporting statement justifying why the building
is of such importance that its conversion would be in the public interest, and include a robust
consideration of why re-use of the building for the proposed use is the best option for the
building.
7.7.7 In all cases, conversion schemes are expected to be of the very highest quality and ensure
that the qualities of the building and its setting are protected or enhanced. The aim should be
to skillfully repair buildings in ways which protect their character. Particularly careful attention
should be paid to fenestration, roof alterations, boundary treatments, landscaping and car
parking provision all of which, if not considered carefully, may adversely affect the character of
buildings. The North Norfolk Design Guide provides detailed advice on the conversion of
buildings and proposals should comply with this Guide or justify alternative approaches. The
Council will consider the need to remove permitted development allowances for subsequent
alterations and/or extensions to ensure the character and appearance of buildings and their
settings are protected following their initial conversion.
7.7.8 Evidence indicates that there is a significant need for affordable housing across North Norfolk.
Allowing the opportunity for residential conversions in the countryside requires consideration of
how such development should contribute to the delivery of affordable housing. Although it is
recognised that it may be difficult and in some cases not practicable for conversion schemes
to provide for affordable housing on the site itself, it is considered entirely consistent with national
planning policy to seek financial contributions towards affordable housing where viable to do
so in accordance with Policy HC 4 'Infrastructure Provision, Developer Contributions &
Viability' .
7.7.9 Agricultural and other redundant buildings often provide important habitats for protected and125 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 7priority species such as bats, barn owls and nesting birds. All birds, their nests and eggs are
protected by law and barn owls receive special protection. It is also an offence under UK
legislation to damage or destroy a place used by a bat for breeding or resting (even if the offence
is committed accidentally). The planning authority will require the submission of an ecological
report, of adequate quality, to enable the authority to make an informed decision and to
demonstrate compliance with legislation and policy. This should include sufficient seasonal
surveys to establish the likely presence of protected and priority species and the extent to which
they will be affected by the proposed development. Where found to be present and affected,
proposals should clearly demonstrate adherence to Table 1 'Applying the Mitigation Hierarchy'
detailed in Policy CC 10 'Biodiversity Net Gain' to minimise harm and maximise benefits for
biodiversity.
Policy HOU 7
Re-Use of Rural Buildings in the Countryside
The change of use and conversion of existing buildings in the designated Countryside Policy
Area to residential and commercial uses will be permitted where they comply with all of the following:
a. it is demonstrated that the buildings are either vacant or no longer required for their former
use;
b. the proposal involves the conversion of existing buildings without significant rebuilding,
alteration or extension. It should be demonstrated that all structural elements and a substantial
proportion of the existing fabric of buildings will be retained throughout the conversion;
c. the proposal preserves or enhances the character and appearance of buildings and their
setting in accordance with the provisions of the North Norfolk Design Guide;
d. the buildings have not been erected or altered in the preceding ten years for another purpose;
e. it can be demonstrated that the proposal has no adverse impacts on protected species.
7.8 Accessible & Adaptable Homes
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that new homes address the District’ s needs, are built to
accessible and adaptable standards and as such can:
1. be easily and cost effectively adapted as people’ s needs change throughout their lifetime;
2. increase the overall percentage of appropriate housing across all housing types and
tenures;
3. address the historical deficiency in supply.
7.8.1 This policy brings positive impacts on health and well-being, and complements the overall
approach to adult care provision through planning by increasing the supply of decent homes
in order to meet the needs of an ageing population, save on future health and social care costs
and provide choice and flexibility around the housing options available. Peoples housing needs
change as they get older, and homes designed in this way from the outset provide safe and
convenient approach routes, circulation space and appropriate kitchens, bathrooms, and outside
space as well as making them more easier and cheaper to adapt should the need arise in the
future, allowing people to stay independent longer and stay in their own homes for longer.
Making homes adaptable and accessible from the start decreases the likelihood of people
having to leave their homes for specialist housing as their needs change and allows people to
stay local, fostering mixed and inclusive communities.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 126
7Housing7.8.2 North Norfolk has one of the highest over 65 population as a proportion of its total population
and a high percentage of home ownership. ONS publications consistently report that this age
cohort is the fastest growing age cohort across the District. The Old Age Dependency Ratio,
expressed as a proportion of people of state pension age per 1,000 working dependents is
projected to be 640 by 2026(97) and is significantly higher than the regional and national averages
of 335 and 303. The population is ageing and the trend is accelerating.  By 2036 it is projected
that there will be an additional 11,500 residents over the age of 65, increasing the percentage
of people aged over 65 from 32% to 39.9% of the District's population, nearly double the England
average of 23.4%(98). Significantly the higher age cohorts of over 80 years of age are projected
to increase at the fastest rate and will account for up to 14% of the District population by 2036.
7.8.3 The 2011 census shows that around a quarter of districts population reported a long term
disability or health condition while approx. a third (30%) of all households were further identified
with limiting long term illness and dependent children. The Institute of public care research
points to a raise in the number of people living with mobility problems and dementia in over the
Plan period. Within the demographics of North Norfolk this points a 49% rise in those with
limiting long term illness (activity limited a lot) and a 65% rise in dementia. As such the number
and proportion of the population that will have to cope with mobility and declining mental health
issues is rising significantly.
7.8.4 With public health and social care strategies placing significant emphasis on supporting people
in their own homes rather than in residential care it is important that we ensure that more
accessible homes are provided in the District and that adaptations are easier and cheaper to
undertake when they are required. Unsuitable and un-adaptable housing can have negative
effects both mentally and physically which can impact on lifestyle, employment opportunities
and health. There is a historic deficit in accessible and adaptable properties across all tenures
in the District with the greatest requirement remaining in the private sector. Given the District's
increasing older population structure and high proportion of older, smaller traditional housing
stock, it is important that the supply and overall proportion of accessible and adaptable homes
is significantly increased.
7.8.5 The introduction of the category 2 optional standards in relation to accessibility and adaptability
are not only justified on the grounds of the Districts ageing population. Homes that meet these
standards are well laid out, practice to live in, and contain features and measures that benefit
everyone, including families, home workers  and people with temporary or permanent mobility
issues or illnesses. North Norfolk has the highest proportion of those in employment working
from home in the East of England at 12.3%, compared to 8.6% East of England average. This
coupled with changing expectations, increased homeworking in recent times, a low wage
economy and the need to retain and attract working age population, dwellings need to be
functional and adaptable across the whole market and assist in the retention and attraction of
those of working age.
7.8.6 The Standard broadly equates to the Lifetime Homes standard that was encouraged through
previous Core Strategy Policy HO1, but was withdrawn by the Government following the National
Standards Review and the introduction of optional building standards. The introduction of the
optional requirement through Plan review is not considered a significant change to ambition or
policy.
7.8.7 The policy approach evokes Category M4(3) standards and requires that a proportion of new
dwellings on larger housing developments are also required to  meet the needs of wheelchair
users and allow for the simple adaption of the dwelling for future wheelchair users.
7.8.8 Households whose day-to-day activities are ‘limited a lot’  through long-term illness or disability
97 https://tin yurl.com/tda9szwz
98 ONS Subnational projections 2016 - NNDC Optional Technical Standards Topic Paper, 2018127 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 7is more prevalent for residents housed in the private sector(99). Nevertheless current national
policy directs the application of optional requirement M4(3) to where the local authority is
responsible for nominating a person to live in that dwelling.The evidence estimates a wheelchair
accessibility need (current and future) of approximately 10.5% households in order to meet
unmet and future need in an affordable property.
7.8.9 Given the projected large increase in population in the over 65 age cohorts and in particular
the over 85s, coupled with the high levels of home ownership the identified affordable need is
arguably the lower end of the District need. The intention is that the M4(3) requirement will be
applied to all larger housing developments, over 20 units irrespective of tenure.The policy could
be applied to only the affordable requirement but equally it could be split over the entire
development of market and affordable housing. Developers should seek further advice on the
most appropriate split according to the latest evidence through pre-application enquiries.
7.8.10 The viability of requiring enhanced accessibility or adaptability standards over and above building
regulations has been tested in the Local Plan Viability study 2018. The study concludes that
there is sufficient headroom across all areas and development typologies for new development
to meet optional technical standards. Affordable housing is confirmed to be able to meet the
costs in Local Plan consultation feedback(100), and the government’ s own cost impact study
shows that significant proportions of additional costs can be recovered through sales value
increases especially when there are perceived extra values in relation to space(101).
7.8.11 The Council will only consider exemptions to these requirements where the applicant can
provide evidence to robustly demonstrate that it is not practical to achieve given the physical
characteristics of the site and in line with the requirements Council’ s Developer Contribution
and viability policy provide robust, transparent viability assessment that accords with the Council’ s
methodology that the requirement would significantly harm the financial viability of the scheme.
7.8.12 Planning applications are required to include sufficient detail in submitted documentation to
allow determination of compliance for each housing type proposed as a validation requirement.
This should not left to the interrogation of designs and drawings. A separate statement and or
inclusive section in any Design and Access statement is required.
7.8.13 Monitoring of compliance with the standards will be through Building Regulations and included
in the Annual Monitoring Reports where appropriate.
Policy HOU 8
Accessible & Adaptable Homes
1. All new homes must be designed and constructed in a way that enables them to be adapted
to meet the changing needs of their occupants over their lifetime and comply with or exceed
the Government’ s Accessible and Adaptable Standards or successor. Planning permission
will be granted for new dwellings subject to:
a. all new dwellings meeting the Building Regulations M4(2) Standard: Category 2 -
Accessible and Adaptable Dwellings;(1)
b. 5% of dwellings on sites of 20 units or more being provided as wheelchair adaptable
dwellings in accordance with the Building Regulations M4(3) Standard: Category 3.(1)
99 NNDC Background Paper 7 - Housing Construction Standards.
100 Consultation Statement - Schedule of Representations (Reg 18) Policy HOU8 consultation feedback.
101 No additional sales uplift is applied to the Council’ s Reg 18 stage Viability Study.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 128
7Housing2. Exemptions will only be considered where the applicant can robustly demonstrate that
compliance:
a. is not practical to achieve given the physical characteristics of the site; and,
b. would significantly harm the financial viability of the scheme.
3. Where exemptions are sought on practicality or viability grounds, the minimum number of
units necessary will be exempted from the requirements.
4. All residential development proposals will set out in a Design & Access Statement(2) how
each dwelling type complies with or exceeds the M4(2) and M4(3) standards.
1. Or any subsequent national equivalent standard adopted by the council should the Building Regulations and or national policy
be reviewed in the future.
2. or equivalent separate statement
7.9 Minimum Space Standards
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that new homes offer a reasonable minimum level of residential
amenity and quality of life, ensuring that there is sufficient internal space, privacy and storage facilities
to ensure long term sustainability and usability of new homes.
7.9.1 The nationally described space standard deals with internal space within new dwellings across
all tenures. The standard sets out the minimum requirements for the gross internal floor area
of new dwellings at a defined level of occupancy as well as floor area and dimensions for key
parts of the home, e.g. bedrooms, storage and floor-to-ceiling height. The national space
standards are intended to ensure that new homes, conversions and dwellings provided through
permitted development rights including those that require prior approval provide a flexible and
high quality environment in line with the NPPF , capable of responding to occupants changing
needs and circumstances. The national space standard is currently optional but may be
introduced locally, where justified, via local policies.
7.9.2 With the population of North Norfolk ageing at one of the fastest rates in the country invoking
the optional minimum national space standard through the Local Plan is considered important
in relation to meeting identified needs, long term adaptability, and in creating sustainable
communities. Larger floor areas provide the opportunity for easier adaptability due to changing
circumstances such as impaired mobility and the requirement for liveable/ work space, and is
a key criterion in relation to how accessible a dwelling is. There is some overlap between the
Space Standards and the Accessible and Adaptable standards, but the introduction of the
national space standard complements and does not negate the requirement for M4(2) and
M4(3) compliance.
7.9.3 In some locations in North Norfolk, it may occasionally be the case that smaller homes are
more consistent with the prevailing historic character of the area. Such considerations need to
be balanced against the long term benefits of the minimum standard size homes with adequate
internal space built for modern needs and the prevailing landscape / historic character on a
case by case basis and in line with associated policies in this Plan.
7.9.4 Planning applications are required to include sufficient detail in submitted documentation to
allow determination of compliance for each housing type proposed as a validation requirement.
This should be in detailed tabulated form against each technical requirement and not left to the
interrogation of designs and drawings. A separate statement and or inclusive section in any
Design and Access statement is required.129 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing 77.9.5 The Government’ s national space standards as the minimum acceptable space standards will
be applied to both open market and affordable housing within North Norfolk.
Policy HOU 9
Minimum Space Standards
1. All new dwellings and conversions shall comply with or exceed the minimum Nationally
Described Space Standard(1)
2. All residential development proposals will set out in a Design & Access Statement(2)how
each dwelling type complies with or exceeds the minimum standards as set out in the
technical requirements of the Nationally Described Space Standards.
1. (or any subsequent national equivalent standard should the Building Regulations and or national policy be reviewed in the future).
2. Technical Housing Standards - Nationally Described Space Standard, DCLG, March 2015, or successor document.The standard
is detailed in 'Appendix 3: Technical Space Standards'  .Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 130
7Housing8 Economy
8.0.1 Delivering sustainable growth requires that housing growth is matched with improved
employment opportunities close to where people live.The policies of this section support
and enable the growth of the local economy, allowing for the provision of new jobs
through the expansion of existing businesses, safeguarding existing employment sites,
and providing new opportunities for inward investment.
8.1 Employment Land
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure that a sufficient quantity of land is reserved for employment
generating developments across the District.
8.1.1 To facilitate the employment requirements of the District as a whole, the Council considers it
is important to retain a supply of land which is reserved (designated) solely for employment
uses. The Council consider it is important to offer a range of employment opportunities across
the District to accommodate the expansion of local businesses and to ensure that there are
opportunities for companies to move into the area.
8.1.2 The North Norfolk District Council Growth Sites Delivery Strategy (2021) assesses employment
land not superseded by this Local Plan and allocated employment sites made through this plan
to ensure consistency with Paragraph 122 of the NPPF . Further, the study assesses the local
employment market in regard to market demand and market failures and establishes a future
employment need within the District over the plan period.
8.1.3 The study sets out a range of scenarios: ‘Past Land Take-up’  looking at past employment
development within the District and taking this forward across the plan period; ‘Labour Demand
Forecasting’  which looks at econometrics based on the East of England model and projects
the likely jobs growth in different sectors forward across the plan period; ‘Labour Supply
Forecasting’  looks at the residential growth in the District and the resulting implications of
providing jobs over the plan period; and ‘Policy On Demand Forecasting’  which adjusts the
Demand Forecasting model with specific policy interventions such as Scottow Enterprise Zone
and the North Walsham Urban Extension. These scenarios give a range of employment land
need from 6.5 hectares under the ‘Labour Demand Forecasting’  scenario to 40 hectares under
the ‘Past Land Take-up’  scenario.
8.1.4 The conclusions of the study go on to set out that these scenarios underestimate what is
happening on the ground and that a higher quantum of employment land would be required to
ensure flexibility within the market and to ensure that any upturn in the market can be satisfied
over the plan period. As such the Council is proposing to designate a total of 272.07 hectares
of employment land inclusive of the 200.58 hectares which are already developed for employment
purposes.This will increase the supply of undeveloped employment land in the District to 71.49
hectares and provide an increased supply in each area of the District in order to provide for
choice and flexibility and to help meet the identified development and future needs.131 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8Policy E 1
Employment Land
For the period 2016-2036, a total of 272.07 hectares of land is designated/allocated and retained
for employment generating developments.
Employment creating developments will be approved on the following sites subject to compliance
with Policy E 2 'Employment Areas, Enterprise Zones & Former Airbases' . Proposals which
do not comply with Policy E2 will not be supported.
Total
Employment
LandNew
AllocationsExisting Employment
Areas (Including
Enterprise Zones*)
Undeveloped (Ha)Existing Employment
Areas (Including
Enterprise Zones*)
Already Developed (Ha)Location
118.98 11.43 14.56 92.99 Eastern Area Totals
12.03 0.34 11.69 Catfield
8.82 1.02 7.80 Hoveton
0.27 0.00 0.27 Ludham
0.43 0.00 0.43 Mundesley
67.63 9.43 13.2 45.00 North Walsham
26.40 0.00 26.40 Scottow*
3.40 2.00 0.00 1.40 Stalham
52.53 6.00 6.37 40.16 Central Area Totals
1.16 0.00 1.16 Corpusty & Saxthorpe
19.25 1.92 17.33 Cromer
19.96 6.00 4.45 9.51 Holt
3.95 0.00 3.95 Sheringham
8.08 0.00 8.08 Melton Constable
0.13 0.00 0.13 Roughton
100.56 0.00 33.13 67.43 Western Area Totals
0.09 0.00 0.09 Blakeney
60.06 9.49 50.57 Fakenham
8.57 8.57 0.00 Egmere*
3.04 0.00 3.04 Wells-next-the-Sea
28.80 15.07 13.73 Tattersett
272.07 17.43 54.06 200.58 Total Across DistrictProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 132
8Economy8.2 Employment Areas, Enterprise Zones & Former Airbases
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that designated employment land within the District is protected
for employment uses.
8.2.1 Employment uses are traditionally defined in the Use Classes Order as B2, General Industry,
B8, Storage and Distribution and E, Commercial, Business and Service. The diversification of
the economy and the decline in traditional manufacturing means that employment opportunities
now emanate from a wider range of uses. Not all Class E Uses are appropriate for location on
designated employment sites, however it is recognised that there are opportunities for some
employment generating, non-B class uses, to co-exist alongside the traditional B-class uses
on designated employment sites.There is a balancing act here: the cumulative impact of non-B
class uses can have an impact upon the functionality of more traditional B class uses.
8.2.2 The policy allows for mixed use developments to reflect the level of flexibility set out within the
NPPF . Mixed use developments may include elements of development that do not fall within
the B2 and B8 Use Classes such as trade counters and potentially care/nursing homes, all of
which create job opportunity. Proposals for Main Town Centre Uses (as defined in the glossary
of the NPPF) will not be supported on designated employment land unless it is first demonstrated
that no suitable Town Centre, or edge of centre, sites are available through an appropriate and
proportionate sequential test.
8.2.3 Within North Norfolk there are two Enterprise Zones: Scottow Enterprise Park and Egmere
Business Zone. Scottow Enterprise Park is a 26 hectare ex-RAF site on the northern edge of
the Greater Norwich urban zone. The site provides a unique offering for grow-on space, with
a private high voltage renewable electricity network it promises to be a strategic business
location across the East and the UK. Egmere Business Zone is a 7.4 hectare site situated to
the south of port facilities at Wells-next-the-Sea, which has been established to support
investment associated with the growing offshore renewable energy sector off the North Norfolk
Coast. Egmere Business Zone is subject to a Local Development Order (LDO) which introduces
simplified planning on the site and sets out the type of development that is dealt with under
Permitted Development Rights.
8.2.4 The District contains four former defence establishments which include large areas of brownfield
land: Coltishall Airbase, Neatishead (part), Sculthorpe Airbase (part) and West Raynham.
Sculthorpe, West Raynham and Coltishall provide significant levels of existing housing but lack
the key services and facilities which would make them suitable locations for new housing
development. Due to the more isolated location of these sites, any further significant residential
development would lead to increased car journeys and would not be in conformity with the
settlement hierarchy and approach to sustainable development advocated in this Plan. However,
these locations represent an under-used resource within the District and the Council will support
their re-use for appropriate employment generating uses.The Policies Map defines the 'technical
area' for each site, indicating where development will be focused. The non-technical areas
(such as former airfields) are designated as Countryside Policy Area. Sculthorpe Airbase, being
best served by the highway network, is considered to offer opportunities for employment uses
which would, for environmental or operational reasons, would not be acceptable on designated
Employment Areas within settlements.133 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8Policy E 2
Employment Areas, Enterprise Zones & Former Airbases
1. Land within designated Employment Areas , Enterprise Zones, Employment Allocations
or Mixed Use Allocations, as identified on the Policies Maps, will be protected for employment
use.
2. New employment development which falls within Use Classes E(g), B2 and B8, will be permitted
on designated and allocated employment areas where all of the following criteria are met:
a. the proposed use does not undermine the functionality of the wider employment area;
b. the scale and appearance of the development is compatible with the character of its
surroundings,
c. there are no significant detrimental health impacts as demonstrated through a Health
Impact Assessment;
d. there are no significant amenity impacts on occupiers of nearby dwellings or users of
adjacent buildings  by virtue of increased levels of noise, odour, emissions or dust and
impacts on light;
e. the traffic generated does not have a severe adverse impact on local amenity, highway
safety or the operation of the highway network;
f. in the case of Main Town Centre Uses it is first demonstrated that no alternative
sequentially preferable site is available.
3. Development proposals for employment generating uses on Former Airbases will be permitted
where they relate to the re-use of existing buildings or development of replacement buildings
within the ' Airbase Technical Areas ', as identified on the Policies Maps provided that there
is no overall increase in gross floor space of the existing permanent buildings.
8.3 Employment Development Outside of Employment Areas
The purpose of this policy  is to provide opportunities for businesses situated outside of designated
Employment Areas with the potential to expand and thrive and to recognise the importance of employment
outside the designated Employment Areas to the wider economy by requiring such uses to be retained,
where possible.
8.3.1 The majority of new employment development will be guided towards the sites that are
designated in this Plan as Employment Areas. These sites represent clusters of uses in the
most sustainable locations. However, in a rural District such as North Norfolk, smaller areas of
employment will exist across the District resulting from historic land uses. These businesses
are important to the rural economy, providing local opportunities for rural communities to live
and work in close proximity.
8.3.2 Any development proposals for a change of use from an employment use to a non-employment
use will need to be justified. These employment sites are important for the rural economy and
any proposal resulting in the loss of jobs will have to demonstrate that the site is no longer
viable for employment uses and/or that the loss of the employment would not have a detrimental
impact upon the local economy.
8.3.3 Proposals for the expansion of existing businesses, will generally be supported for businesses
that are based on agriculture, forestry or other industries where there may be sustainability
advantages to being located in close proximity to the market they serve. The demonstration ofProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 134
8Economysustainability advantages should include evidence of reduced need to travel, re-use of previously
developed land or existing buildings, and enhanced opportunities for rural communities to
access employment in their locality. This should be presented in the form of a Sustainability
Statement accompanying an application.
8.3.4 Proposals that relate to the expansion of tourist accommodation or tourist attractions are covered
by policies elsewhere in the plan.
8.3.5 There may be some cases where an industry and/or business would be detrimental to local
amenity if located in a designated Employment Area or nearby a built up area.The Council has
allocated employment land at Tattersett for these types of uses. This employment land should
be investigated in the first instance for these types of uses.
8.3.6 In order to ensure that development in rural areas is sustainable, proposals will be expected
to make best use of previously developed sites. Developments that relate to the replacement
of rural buildings should comply with the North Norfolk Design Guide and show how the
provisions of the Guide have been met.
8.3.7 Bacton Gas Terminal is one of the largest gas terminal complexes in the UK. The pipeline can
import up to 23.5 billion cubic metres of gas per annum, enough to supply 15 million homes. It
is a major local employer and occupies a large site which has an impact on the surrounding
area. Any future development on the site should normally be contained within the existing site
boundaries in order to limit the impact on the surrounding countryside.
Policy E 3
Employment Development Outside of Employment Areas
1. New employment development outside of designated Employment Areas , Enterprise
Zones, Employment Allocations  or Mixed Use Allocations  will only be permitted where it
can be demonstrated that:
a. there is no suitable and available land on designated or allocated employment areas;
and
b. there are specific reasons for the development not being located on designated or
allocated employment areas, including, but not limited to:
i. the expansion of an existing business;
ii. businesses that are based on agriculture, forestry or other industry where there are
sustainability advantages to being located in close proximity to the market they
serve;
iii. industries and/or businesses which would be detrimental to local amenity if located
in settlements, including on designated or allocated employment areas; and,
c. the development would not adversely affect highway safety.
2. Conversion and redevelopment, or the change of use of premises providing twenty or more
jobs to non-employment uses, will only be permitted where:135 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8a. the loss of land or buildings would not adversely affect the economic growth and
employment opportunities in the area that the site or building would likely serve; and,
b. it is demonstrated that the site is no longer suitable, available and/or economically viable,
including evidence of agreed (with the LPA) marketing for a period of at least 12
months.(102)
3. Development at Bacton Gas Terminal that is ancillary to the terminal use will be supported
within the defined area as shown on the Policies Map.
8.4 Retail & Town Centre Development
The purpose of this policy  is to maintain and enhance the vitality, viability and sustainability of the
District’ s town centres.
8.4.1 The policy seeks to enhance local provision within town centres and encourage local sustainable
shopping patterns by addressing high levels of expenditure leakage to outside areas and
encouraging retail and investment into higher order towns through the use of the sequential
test and the setting of locally derived impact test thresholds.
8.4.2 The District has a well-established shopping hierarchy with large town centres in Cromer,
Fakenham and North Walsham providing a significant proportion of shopping.These towns are
geographically spread across the District, are the main centres of population and focus for
residential development, have better quality pubic transport, the critical mass to encourage joint
shopping trips, and opportunities for development. They are therefore well placed to meet the
shopping and service needs of a significant proportion of North Norfolk's population and visitors
to the area .
8.4.3 Smaller town centres complement the larger town centres by providing for convenience food
shopping and lower order day to day comparison shopping facilities and other services.
8.4.4 Holt, Sheringham, Hoveton, Stalham and Wells-next-the Sea serve smaller catchments and to
varying degrees have developed a particular niche market role. They are partly dependent
upon the seasonal influx of tourists, and retain their locally distinctive small shop character.
Disproportionately large scale development in these smaller towns may have an adverse impact
on their character and thus diminish their attractiveness as tourist destinations. Furthermore,
such developments may encourage unnecessary car journeys from the larger towns.
Consequently, it is considered that developments here should be smaller in scale and should
be designed to meet identified needs in the town and its immediate surroundings. Functionally,
the central location of Holt, Sheringham and Cromer in the District means that they often
complement each other and the primary catchment areas of these towns overlap with residents
utilising the retail opportunities for both comparison and convenience in all three centres.
8.4.5 Development of additional retail floorspace outside of the town centres will normally be resisted,
particularly where vacancy rates are high and opportunities exist within and close to town
centres to accommodate retail development. The role of Local Service Centres will be
maintained, by responding positively to appropriate small scale growth opportunities through
conversion and extension, and through environmental improvements and seeking to restrict
the loss of services, whilst also supporting development to preserve and enhance the settlement’ s
vitality and viability. The diversification and broadening of the economic base is supported. The
approach recognises the importance of village shops to rural communities and supports
proposals for the conversion or extension of shops that are designed to improve their viability.
102 To accord with best practice guidance published by the LPA.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 136
8Economy8.4.6 A broad range of national permitted development rights now exists in relation to town centre
development. Some permitted development rights allow the change of use from shops and
financial institutions without any application process while other permitted development rights
now allow for a change of use subject to prior approval but on specific planning matters only:
In the towns residential development in the form of change of use will be supported in Primary
Shopping Areas where it is provided above ground floor level and does not result in the loss of
a retail use at street level.
8.4.7 Parts of Hoveton town centre spans Local Authority boundaries and falls under the Broads
Authority Administrative Area.The Local Planning Authorities have jointly agreed their respective
approaches to the shared town centre and any proposal will need to be considered in the context
of the whole town centre and policies contained in the relevant Development Plan.
8.4.8 The 2017 North Norfolk Retail & Main Town Centres Uses Study (Retail Study) undertook a
qualitative and quantitative assessment of the Districts Town centres and established the base
line position with regards expenditure growth available to support new retail floor space across
the district. These projections will be updated through the Annual Monitoring Report.
Food & Beverage
(Sqm Gross)Comparison Goods
(Sqm Gross)Convenience Goods
(Sqm Gross)Town
253 1,182 0 Cromer
228 1,042 0 Fakenham
196 297 0 Holt
161 559 1,124 North Walsham
88 342 0 Hoveton/Wroxham(1)
268 457 588 Sheringham
53 137 323 Stalham
96 84 11 Wells-next-the-Sea
433 268 0 Other areas of North Norfolk
Table 6 Projected Retail Floorspace Requirement 2016-36
1. Figures for Hoveton (North Norfolk district) and Wroxham (Broads Authority) are combined.
8.4.9 Locally derived impact thresholds address the fragility of the Districts town centres and the
disproportionate nature of the default national threshold contained in the NPPF . Collectively,
the impacts of small-scale development proposals needs to be considered. Consequently,
proposals will need to demonstrate their impacts on existing, committed and planned public
and private investment in one or more centres and the wider functional catchment area (as
applicable to the scale and nature of the proposal), as well as town centre vitality and viability,
and local consumer choice in the short and  medium term 5- 10 yrs. Given the functional links
and overlapping catchment areas of Holt, Sheringham and Cromer, any proposal requiring an
impact assessment in these wider areas will need to consider the impacts on all three centres.137 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8Policy E 4
Retail & Town Centre Development
1. Support will be given for maintaining and enhancing the vitality and viability of the following
hierarchy of town centre and local centres:
a. Proposals for retail and other town centre development of a scale appropriate to the retail
hierarchy will be supported provided that development respects the character of the
centre, including its special architectural and historic interest, and assists in maintaining
its existing retail function;
b. Proposals for convenience and comparison goods provision of an appropriate scale in
Large Town Centres  will be considered favourably, provided that proposals reflect the
identified capacity to support growth as established in the Retail & Town Centre Study
and other appropriate evidence, and seeks to enhance and broaden the retail offer.
2. Site selection for retail and other town centre uses should follow national policies and guidance.
Town Centre  boundaries & Primary Shopping Areas are defined on the Policies Map.
Retail Hieraarchy Settlement
Large Town Centres - serves the District and beyond
and are the main focus for retail and leisure
development.Cromer, Fakenham, North Walsham
Medium Town Centre & Tourist Centres - provide a
range of services for local residents, their rural
Hinterland, and tourists.Holt, Hoveton, Sheringham, Stalham, Wells-next-the
Sea
Local Centres – provide for basic or everyday local
needs and for their immediate rural catchment.Growth Villages
3. Development proposals for retail development, which are located between the Primary
Shopping Area (PSA) and the Town Centre  boundary will be supported only where it is
demonstrated that the proposal cannot be suitably accommodated within the PSA and will
bring positive economic regeneration benefits.
4. Support for out-of-centre development will be dependent on how it reflects:
1. the capacity available to support the proposal as identified in the Retail Study and
subsequent permissions; and,
2. how it seeks to enhance expenditure retention and in relation to the assessment of
impacts on the town centre(103) and wider retail catchments, and is in accordance with
the locally derived impact thresholds below.
Impact Threshold Settlement
1,000sqm gross and over Cromer, Fakenham
500sqm gross and over North Walsham, Hoveton, Holt, Sheringham
250sqm gross and over Stalham, Wells-next-the-Sea
103 Impacts to consider include those on  existing, committed and planned public and private investment in a centre(s) and the wider
functional catchment area (as applicable to the scale and nature of the proposal)  as well as town centre(s) vitality and viability,
local consumer choice in the short and  medium term 5- 10 yrs.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 138
8Economy5. Retail and Main Town Centre Use proposals in Hoveton/Wroxham will be considered in the
context of the entire town centre and the policies of the relevant Broads Authority Development
Plan.
6. Proposals for residential development within Primary Shopping Areas  will be considered
favourably provided that they are above ground floor level. Such proposals should include a
separate and secure access, preferably to the rear of the property, which does not result in
a net loss of ground floor retail space.
7. Proposals should respect their surroundings and contribute positively to the visual amenity
of their locality providing public realm improvements and wider public benefit, such as:
a. enhanced accessibility and connection between urban spaces;
b. improvements to streetscape, lighting, signage, paving, street furniture, and public art;
c. improvements to the pedestrian and cycle environment;
d. complementary surfacing and hard landscaping materials;
e. incorporate tree planting and green infrastructure, wherever possible;
f. innovative design and improvements in local design quality that help to develop a strong
local identity and sense of place in accordance with the North Norfolk Design Guide.
8. Outside of identified town centres, in Growth Villages, proposals for the conversion or extension
of shops that are designed to improve their viability will be supported in principle.
9. In the designated Countryside Policy Area proposals for small scale specialist retail services
will be supported in principle only where it can be demonstrated that the proposal is to perform
a wholly ancillary role to an existing or planned use and is of an appropriate and proportionate
small scale.
8.5 Signage & Shopfronts
The purpose of this policy is to seek to avoid the proliferation of advertisements in sensitive locations,
such as in Conservation Areas and rural locations or locations which have high visual amenity, where
it is considered that the amenity of the locality will be impaired and to ensure new and replacement
shopfronts are well designed to reflect the character of the surrounding area and enhance the visual
amenity of the local area.
Policy E 5
Signage & Shopfronts
1. Advertisements and signs (illuminated & non-illuminated) should be:
a. appropriate and relevant to the business or premises for which they have been created;
b. sensitively designed and located having regard to the character of the building on which
they are to be displayed reflecting the general characteristics of the locality and conforming
with the design principles contained in the North Norfolk Design Guide.
2. The size, scale, material, colour scheme and any means of illumination selected should be
sensitive and appropriate to the local area and wider amenity. In areas of historic value, such
as Conservation Areas , particular regard should be had to any impact of the proposal on139 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8the character and appearance of the area. Proposals which obscure features of architectural
or historical interest, or are uncharacteristic of a buildings design, will not be permitted.
3. The creation of new shopfronts, or the replacement / alteration of an existing frontage should
be well designed to reflect the character of the surrounding area and seek, where possible,
to enhance the visual amenity of the local area. Proposals should have regard to:
a. the existing character of the area;
b. the suitability of the overall form, scale and architectural detail in relation to the overall
appearance of the building;
c. the suitability of materials in relation to the overall appearance of the building; and,
d. any locally produced best practice guidance.
8.6 New Tourist Accommodation, Static Caravans & Holiday Lodges, &
Extensions
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that new-build tourist accommodation, static holiday caravans
and holiday lodges are located in appropriate locations and to allow flexibility for existing businesses
within the countryside the opportunity to expand where appropriate.
8.6.1 Across North Norfolk, there is a broad range of tourist accommodation available including
self-catering cottages, guest houses and hotels as well as static holiday caravans and holiday
lodges. Collectively, they create a diverse choice of places for tourists to stay. The provision
of a diverse range of tourist accommodation is desirable: tourists visiting the area can have
positive impact on the economy.
8.6.2 The preferred location for new-build tourist accommodation, static holiday caravans and holiday
lodges is within the boundary of a designated settlement. This is to enable visitors to access a
range of services by a choice of travel modes (including on foot). Such development will not
normally be permitted in the Countryside in order to protect the area from new-build
accommodation, static holiday caravans and holiday lodges being built across the District.This
would not prevent the expansion of existing businesses, or the re-use of existing buildings.
8.6.3 The presumption is that new proposals should not be located within the Coastal Change
Management Area (CCMA). However, where new build tourist accommodation is proposed
within a designated CCMA the application is expected to be supported by evidence to
demonstrate adequate warning and evacuation arrangements.This is to be demonstrate through
a Coastal Erosion Vulnerability Assessment (CEVA).
8.6.4 Static caravan sites can have a significant impact on the landscape and this is particularly felt
in the main resort areas of Cromer, Mundesley and Sheringham where a series of adjoining
sites are prominent in an otherwise largely undeveloped coast. The Council has an aspiration
to relocate these sites away from the cliff-tops, and therefore, as an exception to the general
presumption against new static caravan sites, they may be permitted where they directly result
in the removal of an existing cliff-top caravan site to a site with a lesser landscape impact or
away from an area at risk of erosion or flooding. On occasion, it may be appropriate for an
existing site within the North Norfolk Coast AONB to relocate to another site in the AONB that
has less impact than the current site. In these cases the direct and indirect impact of the proposal
must be carefully considered (the AONB Tourism Impact Analysis report found that tourism
growth must be sufficiently controlled and managed to mitigate any negative impacts).
8.6.5 The replacement of static caravan sites with lodge-style developments will be permitted whereProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 140
8Economyit improves the appearance and landscaping of the site or relocates a prominent or at-risk static
caravan site. However, within the cliff-top zone the priority is to relocate these existing sites
rather than consolidate their use. As with all development, proposals for any accommodation
will only be allowed after it has been demonstrated that no adverse impact on the integrity of
Natura 2000 Sites will result.
8.6.6 Hotel accommodation is defined as a Main Town Centre use and will usually need to comply
with Policy E 4 'Retail & Town Centre Development'. Hotel accommodation may be permitted
within employment areas, in line with Policy E 2 'Employment Areas, Enterprise Zones &
Former Airbases'  However, this will not permit ancillary development such as self-catering
units.
8.6.7 The extension to existing tourist accommodation section relates purely to extensions to these
specific types of tourist accommodation. Expansions to tourist attractions and expansions to
employment generating uses are set out within other policies within the plan.
8.6.8 Proposals that are not for holiday accommodation will be treated as permanent dwellings and
determined under relevant policies of this Plan. Development permitted under this policy will
be limited by condition to holiday use only.
Policy E 6
New Tourist Accommodation, Static Caravans & Holiday Lodges, & Extensions to Existing
Sites
1. Proposals for new tourist accommodation, static holiday caravans and holiday lodges(1) will
be supported where:
a. the site is within the boundary of a Selected Settlement ; or,
b. the proposal is for a replacement static caravan site or holiday lodge accommodation
which would result in the removal of an existing clifftop static caravan site or the
relocation of existing provision which is within the Coastal Change Management Area
or Environment Agency Flood Risk Zone 3 ;(2) and,
c. the proposal demonstrates measurable biodiversity net-gains; and,
d. the proposal would not have a significant detrimental impact upon:
i. the defined special qualities of the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ;
ii. the key characteristics and valued features of the defined Landscape Type;
iii. residential amenity; and,
iv. the safety and operation of the local highway network.
2. Where the development is for a hotel, this should demonstrate compliance with the sequential
approach in accordance with national retail policy and Policy E 4 'Retail & Town Centre
Development' .
3. Business expansion and extensions to existing tourist accommodation, static caravans and
holiday lodges will be supported where:
a. the proposal demonstrates measurable biodiversity net-gains; and, 
b. the proposal would not have an adverse impact upon:
i. the defined special qualities of the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ;
ii. the key characteristics and valued features of the defined Landscape;
iii. residential amenity; and,141 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8iv. the safety and operation of the local highway network.
4. All proposals within a designated Coastal Change Management Area  shall demonstrate
through a Coastal Erosion Vulnerability Assessment that the proposal will not result in an
increased risk to life or to property.
1. Including buildings such as cabins and guest houses.
2. Taking into account the equivalent risk from all sources of flooding.
8.7 Touring Caravan & Camping Sites
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure that the use of land for touring caravan and camping sites is
located in appropriate locations.
8.7.1 Across North Norfolk, there is a wide variety of accommodation available to tourists including
(but not limited to) touring caravan sites, camp sites and glamping sites for year-round and
seasonal uses.These sites can provide a range of seasonal, temporary tourist accommodation,
differing in size and location. Such accommodation types are valuable in adding to the diverse
choice of places for tourists to stay.
8.7.2 The use of land for touring caravan and camp sites has a lower impact than new-build
accommodation as they are not permanently occupied and in winter months there may be little
evidence of activity. However in summer months they can be intrusive in the landscape and
may add to visitor pressure on particular areas if not controlled. As far as seasonal or temporary
tourist accommodation is concerned, therefore, the policy approach taken will very much reflect
the degree of protection of the area of land on which the proposal is being made, landscape
character and visual impact, as well as the effects on infrastructure and communities are key
considerations. Proposals which do not require permanent structures to remain on site are
likely to be considered to be more acceptable.
8.7.3 Proposals must have regard to national guidance and relevant policies within this Local Plan
including the sequential and exception tests as set out in Policy CC 7 'Flood Risk & Surface
Water Drainage' .
8.7.4 Where proposals for touring caravans and camping sites are proposed within a designated
Coastal Change Management Area the application is expected to be supported by evidence
to demonstrate adequate warning and evacuation arrangements. This is to be demonstrated
through a Coastal Erosion Vulnerability Assessment.
Policy E 7
Touring Caravan & Camping Sites
1. The use of land(1) for touring caravan and camping sites(2) will be supported where:
a. the site is within the boundary of a Selected Settlement ; or,
b. the proposal is for the expansion of a site already in use for touring and camping; or,Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 142
8Economyc. the site lies outside of the boundary of a Selected Settlement  but does not lie within
the AONB , Heritage Coast , or Undeveloped Coast; and,
d. complies with Policy CC 7 'Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage' and national policy
including where appropriate the sequential and exceptions tests.
2. All proposals within a designated Coastal Change Management Area  shall demonstrate
through a Coastal Erosion Vulnerability Assessment that the proposal will not result in an
increased risk to life or to property.
3. In all cases proposals must demonstrate measurable biodiversity net-gains; and that the
proposal would not have a significantly detrimental impact upon: The key characteristics
and valued features of the defined Landscape Type; residential amenity; and the safety and
operation of the local highway network.
1. The making of any material change to the use of land or the use of buildings (adapted from Section 55 of the Town and Country
Planning Act, 1990).
2. Including (but not limited to) touring caravan, camping and ‘glamping’  sites, including those used to provide yurts, pods, tepees
and shepherds huts’
8.8 New Tourist Attractions & Extensions
The purpose of this policy is to ensure that tourist attractions that broaden the tourism opportunities
across the District and extend the tourist season are encouraged in appropriate locations.
8.8.1 It is recognised that tourism development differs from other forms of economic development in
that it is sometimes preferable for attractions to be located outside of settlement boundaries.
8.8.2 Therefore, whilst being within the boundaries of designated settlements is the preferred location
for new build tourist attractions, attractions that broaden the tourist opportunities across the
District and extend the tourist season will be welcomed in some instances.
8.8.3 Those tourist attractions defined as Main Town Centre uses (includes theatres, museums,
galleries and concert halls and conference facilities) will need to comply with Policy E 4 'Retail
& Town Centre Development' .
8.8.4 In the case of proposals in designated Countryside which do not involve the re-use of existing
buildings, additional evidence will be required to demonstrate that there are no suitable existing
buildings for re-use within the locality. This will be determined upon the basis of the type of
application being made and pre-application advice should be sought to agree the scope of the
sequential approach with the Local Planning Authority.
8.8.5 As with the use of land for accommodation, the policy approach taken will very much reflect
the degree of protection of the area of land on which the proposal is being made, with landscape
character and visual impact, as well as the effects on infrastructure and communities being key
considerations.
8.8.6 The extension to existing tourist attractions section relates purely to extensions to these specific
types of tourist attractions. Expansions to tourist accommodation and expansions to employment
generating uses are set out within other policies in the Plan.143 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8Policy E 8
New Tourist Attractions & Extensions
1. The Council will support proposals for new build tourist attractions(1) and extensions to
existing attractions across the District. Proposals will be supported where:
a. the site is not within the designated AONB, Heritage Coast, or Undeveloped Coast;(2)
b. it has been demonstrated that there are no suitable buildings for re-use in the locality;
2. In all cases, proposals must demonstrate measurable biodiversity net-gains; and that the
proposal would not have a significantly detrimental impact upon: The key characteristics
and valued features of the defined Landscape Type; residential amenity; and the safety and
operation of the local highway network.
1. For recreational, cultural and leisure uses.
2. Unless it can be demonstrated that the location is integral to the development.
8.9 Retaining an Adequate Supply & Mix of Tourist Accommodation
The purpose of this policy  is to retain a mix of all types of tourist accommodation.
8.9.1 The existing stock of hotels, guesthouses, bed and breakfasts, self-catering accommodation,
mobile homes and caravans in the District plays a critically important role in supporting the
District’ s tourism economy.
8.9.2 In many cases, this accommodation is in locations where the policies of this Plan would normally
allow buildings to convert to other uses, including permanent residential accommodation.
Change of use to permanent residential accommodation can help to address the need for new
homes, make good use of existing buildings, and reduce the need to build elsewhere but the
loss of holiday accommodation may reduce choice, have an adverse economic impact, and
may in the longer- term increase the pressure for replacement holiday buildings. It is therefore
important to ensure that the supply, in terms of quantity, type and distribution of holiday
accommodation is sufficient to meet likely demands.
8.9.3 Some larger holiday complexes also provide other local facilities and services many of which
are available for use by local communities such as public bars, convenience shops, sport and
recreational facilities and meeting rooms. These may be the only such services available for
the local community and where this is the case they should be retained in accordance with
Policy HC 3 'Provision & Retention of Local Facilities' .
8.9.4 The intention of this policy is to ensure that where a building is currently being used for holiday
purposes it is not converted to permanent residential use unless it is clear that there is an
adequate supply of similar accommodation nearby. Exceptionally planning permission may be
granted where it is clearly demonstrated that there is no need for the accommodation determined
by viability assessment and the completion of an agreed marketing strategy. Applicants will be
expected to clearly justify applications for change of use.
8.9.5 The policy applies to all types of built holiday accommodation such as hotels, guest houses
and self-catering holiday lets but is not applicable to caravans, mobile homes, lodges, yurts
and camping sites, located within the defined Countryside Policy Area, which should be retained
in holiday use.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 144
8EconomyPolicy E 9
Retaining an Adequate Supply & Mix of Tourist Accommodation
Development proposals that would result in the change of use or redevelopment of buildings
currently, or last used, for tourist accommodation will be supported subject to:
1. The proposal making provision for replacement accommodation of a similar scale and type
elsewhere in the vicinity and is made available prior to commencement of use of the
replacement development; or,
2. An independent viability assessment demonstrating that the use is no longer viable and
that all reasonable efforts have been made to sell or let the property at a realistic price in
accordance with a marketing strategy(1) which has first been agreed with the Local Planning
Authority.
1. To accord with best practice guidance published by the LPA145 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Economy 8Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 146
8Economy9 Places & Sites
9.1 Introduction
9.1.1 Each of the settlements in North Norfolk have distinct individual characteristics in terms of their
existing roles, character, needs, and their capacity to accommodate additional development.
Based on these, the Council has developed proposals for the future of each town and the larger
villages in the District. These aim to ensure that identified needs for new homes, jobs, open
spaces and supporting infrastructure are delivered in ways that are consistent with protecting
the unique role and character of each settlement. The distribution of housing and employment
growth accords with the Spatial Strategy of this Plan (Policy SS 1 'Spatial Strategy'), the ability
to provide essential utilities and infrastructure to serve new development, and the need to
safeguard local heritage and sensitive landscapes.
9.1.2 The evidence base prepared to support this Plan has identified the need for new homes,
employment, and other needs over the period up to 2036 together with the  infrastructure that
is necessary to make new development acceptable. Policy HOU 1 'Delivering Sufficient
Homes'  and Policy E 1 'Employment Land'  set out the scale of new development required
to meet these needs. They establish the proposed quantum and broad distribution of new
development within the District, with a focus on those settlements at the higher levels of the
Settlement Hierarchy. Development in these locations will deliver the required growth whilst
limiting unnecessary journeys, reduce car usage and associated carbon emissions, make the
most efficient use of existing infrastructure and services, and minimise the impacts of new
development on the character of the wider countryside.Whilst some of the required growth can
be provided through a process of redevelopment, infilling within built up areas and changes of
use of existing buildings, delivering the scale of growth that is needed requires the identification
of new development sites.
9.1.3 This section of the Plan allocates new sites for future development and includes a site-specific
policy for each of the allocated sites for either housing, employment, or mixed uses. In order
to secure planning permission proposals will need to comply with this site-specific policy and
with the other policies of this Plan.  In addition, the large strategic allocation at North Walsham
West will be developed comprehensively in accordance with a separate Development Brief,
which will be approved as a Supplementary Planning Document to guide the creation of a high
quality sustainable urban extension to the town. This Brief must be prepared and approved by
the Planning Authority prior to the commencement of development.
Settlement Boundaries, Land Use Designations and New Development Sites (Allocations)
9.1.4 In each of the settlements where development is proposed, a Settlement Boundary has been
defined. These boundaries are shown on the Policies Map and distinguish between areas of
developed land which are already largely built up in character from the surrounding undeveloped
areas. Land which is located outside of defined settlement boundaries in the Local Plan, and
also in any adopted Neighbourhood Plans, is designated as a Countryside Policy Area and
acceptable developments in this area are limited to specific types provided for in various policies
of this Plan.
9.1.5 Areas of land which lie within the defined boundaries of the Selected Settlements are identified
as one of a number of Policy Area Designations, with each of these designations subject to
one or more policies in this Plan which determine the type of development which is allowed.
9.1.6 These are:147 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Places & Sites 9Residential Areas  - locations which are principally in use for residential purposes
where residential and other compatible non-residential uses would be permitted in
accordance with Policy SS 1 'Spatial Strategy' .
Employment Areas  - locations specifically reserved for employment
generating developments in accordance with Policy E 1 'Employment Land' and Policy
E 2 'Employment Areas, Enterprise Zones & Former Airbases'. Within such areas the
policies of this Plan do not generally support uses which do not create local employment
opportunities.
Town Centre Areas and Primary Shopping Areas - areas where main town centre uses
are directed in accordance with Policy E 4 'Retail & Town Centre Development' .
Open Land Areas, Local Green Spaces and Formal Education & Recreation Areas -
areas of functionally, or visually, important open space which are subject to Policy HC
2 'Provision & Retention of Open Spaces' .
Public Car Parks  - centrally located public car parks which should be retained
unless replaced with equivalent or better provision in accordance with Policy HC 7 'Parking
Provision' .
Sustainable Transport  - sites reserved for potential future rail use in accordance
with Policy HC 8 'Safeguarding Land for Sustainable Transport' .
Health & Social Care Campuses  - areas specifically safeguarded for health related uses
where Policy HC 3 'Provision & Retention of Local Facilities'  would be applied.
9.1.7 Each of these land use designations and suggested allocations may also be overlain with one
or more subject based Policy Areas. For example, many of the District's Town Centres are
also Conservation Areas , they may include Listed Buildings , parts might lie within areas of
Flood Risk, and significant parts of the District lie within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty . In such cases, the applicable topic based policies of this Plan would also be
applied when considering development proposals.
9.1.8 These land use Designations  and topic based Policy Areas  together with the development
Site Allocations  are shown on the Policies Map .
9.2 Site Allocations
The purpose of this policy  is to ensure that sufficient development land is available in the District to
meet all likely future development needs in locations that comply with the Settlement Hierarchy. Policy
DS1 allocates a range of available, suitable and deliverable sites for homes, employment, open space
and other uses.
9.2.1 Development on each of the sites will be subject to compliance with both the site-specific policies
and the general policies of this Plan. Applicants seeking planning permission should ensure
they are in a position to develop sites in a comprehensive manner, deliver all aspects of the
allocated uses, provide all necessary supporting infrastructure and comply in full with the policies
of this Plan. Applicants should ensure that the prices paid for land would enable the delivery
of proposals that fully accord with the policies of this Plan in a viable way.
9.2.2 The sites allocated for development are the most suitable when considered against the
alternatives appraised through a site assessment process and Sustainability Appraisal which
was undertaken as part of preparing this Plan. They are all available for development, have a
realistic prospect of delivering the required growth within the time frame covered by the Plan,
and subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan are suitable for the proposed
development.  Sufficient sites have been identified to ensure that the housing targets for both
market and affordable homes set in this Plan can be addressed.
9.2.3 Some of the sites proposed for development will be mixed use schemes which will require on
site open space, other uses and supporting infrastructure provision. Where mixed uses areProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 148
9Places & Sitesproposed the policies for each site require comprehensive phased delivery and applicants
should ensure they are able to deliver all aspects of the proposed development in a timely
fashion as required by the applicable policy.
9.2.4 In establishing the capacity for homes on each site a density of approximately 30 (villages) or
40(towns) dwellings per hectare has been used as a starting point. Allowance has been made
to ensure each site can deliver the range of uses required, and where it is considered that sites
may not be suitable for this density of development, perhaps because of local character
considerations, an adjustment has been made.The Council will expect development proposals
to make efficient use of developable land with the aim of accommodating the maximum amount
of development that is consistent with protecting the character of the area and in ways that
comply with the policies of this Plan. Dwelling numbers included in the policies are expressed
as approximates, do not include any allowance for specialist elderly care units required by Policy
HOU 2 'Delivering the Right Mix of Homes', and should not be taken to mean that the number
of dwellings indicated will always be acceptable. How many dwellings can be accommodated
in a satisfactory way on any given site will be determined at planning application stage based
on the merits of individual proposals and how they comply with the policies of this plan.
9.2.5 Each of the site allocation policies identifies a minimum quantity of open space to be provided
on the site. This is derived by applying an open space calculator to the remaining developable
area after deducting land required for other uses and assumes the site will be developed at a
density of either 30 or 40 units per hectare with a mix of dwellings which accords with Policy
HOU2. As with dwelling numbers the precise quantum of open space provided will be determined
at planning application stage taking account of the specifics of the development proposal.
Applicants should assume that at least the stated minimum will be required and should discuss
proposals with the Planning Authority at the earliest opportunity. For the purposes of the policy,
open space includes play spaces and pitches, allotments, parks and natural green space with
public access but excludes landscape buffers, SUDs drainage systems and small incidental
areas of green space with no recreational function.
9.2.6 On larger sites, the policies of this Plan require the delivery of specialist elderly persons
accommodation as part of the development.The requirement is to provide the accommodation
rather than reserve land for it's future provision. The type and tenure of this provision will be
determined at the time of application in accordance with Policy HOU2. Phasing obligations will
be attached to planning permissions to ensure that this accommodation is provided at an agreed
point before the development is completed.
9.2.7 All allocated sites are subject to requirements to provide a proportion of affordable homes and,
on larger sites, a contribution towards meeting the need for custom and self build plots in
accordance with Policy HOU2.
9.2.8 In order to meet the legal requirements of the Habitat Regulations all site allocations are subject
to a requirement to contribute towards the Norfolk Green Infrastructure and Recreational
Avoidance Mitigation Strategy which has been agreed by all Norfolk Authorities in order to avoid
adverse impacts on designated wildlife sites arising from increased visitors to the designated
sites.
9.2.9 In preparing this Plan the Council has consulted infrastructure and utility providers to ensure
that adequate capacity is available, or can be made available, to support the proposed
development. This may change during the plan period and applicants are encouraged to have
early discussions with providers to ensure that supporting infrastructure is available at the time
of application. All proposals should provide, or contribute towards, improvements to the physical
and social infrastructure which is necessary to make the development acceptable in land use
terms in accordance with Policy HC 4 'Infrastructure Provision, Developer Contributions
& Viability' .149 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Places & Sites 9Policy DS 1
Development Site Allocations
Planning permission will be granted for development on the following  Allocated Sites  subject to
compliance with the site specific and general policies of this Plan:
Allocation Details Site
ReferenceSite Name Settlement
Approx 30 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.BLA04/A Land East of Langham
RoadBlakeney
Approx 25 dwellings, open space, school
parking and supporting infrastructure.BRI01 Land East of Astley
Primary SchoolBriston
Approx 40 dwellings, school parking, open
space and supporting infrastructure.BRI02 Land West of Astley
Primary SchoolBriston
Approx 22 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.C07/2 Land at Cromer High
StationCromer
Approx 150 dwellings, 60 units of elderly
care accommodation, open space and
supporting infrastructure.C16 Former Golf Practice
Ground, Overstrand RoadCromer
Approx 400 dwellings, sports facilities, open C22/2 Land West of Pine Tree
FarmCromer
space, 100 units of elderly care
accommodation and supporting
infrastructure.
Approx 560 dwellings, open space, 100 units
of elderly care accommodation and
supporting infrastructure.F01/B Land North of Rudham
Stile LaneFakenham
Approx 70 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.F02 Land Adjacent Petrol
Filling StationFakenham
Approx 65 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.F03 Land at Junction of A148
& B1146Fakenham
Approx 55 dwellings, new public park and
supporting infrastructure.F10 Land South of Barons
CloseFakenham
Approx 27 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.H17 Land North of Valley Lane Holt
Approx 180  dwellings, 60 units of elderly
care accommodation,open space and
supporting infrastructure.H20 Land at Heath Farm Holt
Employment land. H27/1 Land at Heath Farm Holt
Approx 120 dwellings, 60 units of elderly
care accommodation open space and
supporting infrastructure.HV01/B Land East of Tunstead
RoadHoveton
Approx 20 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.LUD01/A Land South of School
RoadLudham
Approx 15 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.LUD06/A Land at Eastern End of
Grange RoadLudhamProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 150
9Places & SitesAllocation Details Site
ReferenceSite Name Settlement
Approximately 350 dwellings, 100 units of NW01/B Land at Norwich Road &
Nursery DriveNorth Walsham
elderly care accommodation, open space,
retention of existing commercial uses and
supporting infrastructure.
Sustainable Urban Extension comprising NW62/A Land West of North
WalshamNorth Walsham
approx. 1,800 dwellings, 460 units of elderly
care accommodation, employment land,
neighbourhood centre, primary school,
health facilities, open spaces, and
supporting infrastructure.
Employment land. NW52 Land East of Bradfield
RoadNorth Walsham
Approx 30 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.MUN03/B Land off Cromer Road &
Church LaneMundesley
Approx 45 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.SH04 Land Adjoining Seaview
CrescentSheringham
Approx 40 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.SH07 Former Allotments,
Weybourne Road,
Adjacent to 'The Reef'Sheringham
Approx 48 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.SH18/1B Land South of Butts Lane Sheringham
Approx 70 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.ST19/A Land Adjacent Ingham
RoadStalham
Approx 80 dwellings, employment land, open
space and supporting infrastructure.ST23/2 Land North of Y armouth
Road, East of Broadbeach
GardensStalham
Employment land. E7 Tattersett Business Park Tattersett
Approx 20 dwellings and supporting
infrastructure.W01/1 Land South of Ashburton
CloseWells-next-the-Sea
Approx 50 dwellings, open space and
supporting infrastructure.W07/1 Land Adjacent Holkham
RoadWells-next-the-Sea
Table 7 Development Site Allocations151 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Places & Sites 9Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 152
9Places & Sites10 Cromer
Cromer is identified as a Large Growth Town in the proposed Settlement Hierarchy.This means
it has been identified as one of three towns, the others being North Walsham and Fakenham,
where relatively large scale growth is proposed.
10.0.1 The town functions as the District's main administrative centre, is a popular tourist destination
on the Norfolk Coast, and is centrally located in the District on the principal road network and
railway line to Norwich. Cromer hosts the district hospital, council offices and provides an
extensive range of shops, leisure and cultural facilities for the surrounding central part of the
District. It is an appealing seaside town and a popular tourist destination throughout the year
which helps support the local economy. It functions as one of a cluster of three towns, together
with Holt and Sheringham which are identified in this Plan as performing complementary roles
in respect of housing, employment and retail functions in the central part of North Norfolk.
10.0.2 Cromer has significant landscape constraints which surround the town and limit it's potential
to accommodate large scale growth.To the north is the North Sea, whilst most of the surrounding
landscape falls within the designated Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB).
Those areas which are not formally designated are nevertheless attractive and important to the
landscape setting of the town, or serve as important visual gaps between settlements. Within
the AONB the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) states that great weight should be
given to conserving and enhancing scenic beauty and that major developments should be
avoided other than in exceptional circumstances, and where it can be demonstrated that
development is in the wider public interest.
10.0.3 In terms of its function as a centre for housing, employment, retail, health, public administration
and its extensive range of day to day services, Cromer could support relatively high levels of
growth. However, its functional sustainability needs to be balanced against the importance of
the national landscape designation which surrounds the town and contributes towards its
attractiveness as a place to live and visit. For this reason this Plan does not propose the same
scale of growth in Cromer as the other two identified Large Growth Towns, North Walsham and
Fakenham, which are not subject to the same constraints. However in order to contribute
towards addressing local housing needs and provide enhanced outdoor sports facilities in the
town, the Plan allocates three development sites which collectively would be suitable for around
570 dwellings, together with 160 units of specialist elderly persons accommodation, and new
sports facilities. The location of these sites has been carefully considered in order to mitigate
the potential impacts on designated landscapes and important visual gaps between settlements,
relate new development to the main transport network and provide convenient access to existing
facilities.
10.0.4 The majority of the designated employment land on Cromer Industrial Estate is developed.The
town is a net importer of employees, and it draws its workforce from a relatively large catchment
area including the towns of Holt and Sheringham and the surrounding rural area. For employment
opportunities it is not dependent on industrial development with a comparatively large and
diverse range of jobs in retail, tourism, health and the public administration sectors. The town
has very little in the way of available industrial land and most new industrial developments have
taken place via either the re-use, or redevelopment, of existing sites. For employment purposes
Cromer, Sheringham and Holt function as a cluster with employees travelling between the towns
to access employment opportunities. Due to the environmental constraints and lack of suitable
sites in the town which are suitable for industrial development this Plan proposes that additional
employment land is located at Holt to serve the combined needs of Sheringham, Holt, Cromer
and the adjacent rural areas.
10.0.5 Cromer has the second largest retail provision in terms of sales floor space in the District and
in this Plan is classed as having a Large Town Centre (defined on the Policies Map) in the retail153 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Cromer 10hierarchy. The town centre offers a broad choice of shops and services that serve residents,
tourists and a relatively large rural catchment area. It has a reasonably high proportion of
comparison goods shops, including a small selection of national multiples. Shop vacancy rates
are typically below national averages, vacancy periods tend to be relatively short and despite
national pressures there remains a good mix of uses providing for most day to day needs. A
small Retail Park adds to the range of goods available.The towns of Cromer, Holt, & Sheringham
have overlapping retail catchment areas and function in a complementary way with shoppers
travelling between the towns to access the range of shops and services provided. New large
out of town retail developments have the potential to damage the vitality and viability of the
Town Centre by drawing shoppers away from the centre. Policy E4 of this Plan seeks to mitigate
the risks of this by requiring that all out of centre proposals for more than a 1,000 sqm of retail
floor space are supported by Impact Assessments and priority is given to the development of
town centre sites where suitable land is available .There is a small identified need for comparison
goods shopping and to a lesser extent food/beverage floor space. Re-use of vacant shop units
could reasonably accommodate some of this need. Large scale development site opportunities
are limited within the Town Centre where development is likely to be limited to small scale infills
and extensions. Given that future demand is likely to be modest this Plan does not propose to
allocate specific sites for retail development.
10.0.6 There is very little previously developed (brownfield) land in Cromer. As with other settlements it
is expected that a process of re-development, infill developments, and changes of use will
continue to provide a supply of new homes and other uses, but these opportunities are relatively
modest and will not address the identified need for new homes in particular. New greenfield
allocations are therefore necessary in order to deliver the required growth and some of these
sites will need to be located outside of the parish boundary of Cromer in the adjacent parishes
as no suitable sites are available with Cromer parish. The suggested scale and location of
development has sought to balance the need for growth with protecting the nationally important
landscape setting of the town.
10.0.7 In summary, the main considerations which influence the suggested location of development
sites are the need to:
Minimise the impact of development proposals on the designated Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty and the landscape more generally by giving priority, where suitable sites
are available, to those sites which are not designated, minimising landscape impacts and
protecting gaps between settlements.
Retain existing green spaces within the town boundary where they are either functionally
or visually important.
Provide a large level site suitable for outdoor sport in an area well related to the town which
is accessible by walking and public transport.
Locate developments where they are, or can be connected, to key services and the town
centre preferably be walking, cycling or public transport or via better quality roads.
Avoid locations which are detached from the town and not well related to existing built up
areas.
Ensure a choice of sites are available to improve the prospects of delivery.
Avoid locations which would result in unacceptable impacts on the highway network.
Infrastructure
10.0.8 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information from
infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Where site specific requirements have been
identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in each of the site allocation policies.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 154
10CromerAnglian Water identified that off-site mains water supply reinforcement will be required in
certain locations and that for new development of over 10 dwellings some enhancement
to the foul sewerage network capacity will be required.
Cromer is not identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment as being at risk from fluvial
or tidal flooding but  are some risks of surface water flooding predominantly due to water
ponding on roads and open spaces.
The Health Authority indicates that there is likely to be sufficient capacity in health services
to support the proposed growth.
The Highway Authority indicates that localised highway network improvements associated
with each of the proposals will be required.
There is a general need to improve open space provision including new allotments together
with improved access to the countryside.
The Education Authority indicates that there is likely to be sufficient capacity in local schools
to accommodate the proposed development.
By the end of the Plan period there is likely to be limited capacity at the electricity sub-station
which may require some upgrades before development can proceed.
10.0.9 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting
physical infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified
shortages in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.
Site Allocations
10.0.10 Three sites are allocated for development to the east of Cromer collectively suitable for around
560 dwellings, 160 specialist elderly persons units, new sports pitches and associated facilities,
open space and supporting infrastructure.These allocations are shown together on the following
map, and in more detail within the individual site sections that follow.155 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Cromer 10Allocations in Cromer
C22/2C16
C07/2© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 1 Allocations in CromerProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 156
10Cromer10.1 Residential: Land at Cromer High Station, Norwich Road (C07/2)
The following site is allocated for approximately 22 dwellings, public open space and associated
on and off-site infrastructure:
CroftnestRosehillThe
2822
Garage
CornerLong
6El Sub Sta
HILLSIDE
RIDGE WAY
91241
3922
Rimington
Turning PointCromer
KenviaMalmar2426aTheThe Farmhouse
The
Close
Dismantled RailwayNORW
ICH ROAD
TCB (dis)FB
Amethyst
Falls38
Works
Janbry
2734
Colwyn
El Sub Sta1WoodviewWHITE HOUSE
Mast62.6m
14
6Hillcrest
Briar Hill32Shelter
2The
546PooneilsWestview(PW)
CLOSE
65.3m
827
Norepps36
Mellers31
29aGrantley House
SubStable
1Cromer
FINCH CLOSE
STEVENS ROAD
207101
42
Hilltop
ThanetSuncroft
Sunnyridge2347
Back
Barn
Maple Wood
AldisESTATE
FarleighsThe Haven
15262926b StaThe
BarnTunnel (dis)
LBLawns
Drum-Na-Cairn
Oakwood331Works113DooneilsEl
YellowgatesDairy
4(PW)
Dalnamara
CornerChristian Fellowship
Gurney's WoodED & Ward Bdy
NIGHTINGALE
C22/2C07/2© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land at Cromer High Station, Norwich Road (C07/2)
Description
10.1.1 This site is already allocated for residential development in the current adopted Plan but has
not been developed. It is located behind existing development along Norwich Road and consists
of an area of grassland/ scrub with mature woodland to the east. It is adjacent to existing
employment uses including several small business premises and is well related to the built area
of Cromer. The area is not prominent in the landscape due to the varying land levels and is
screened from view by existing development.
10.1.2 The existing access onto Norwich Road suffers from poor visibility, particularly to the south.
Junction improvements to Norwich Road will therefore need to be made as part of any
development proposal. There is currently a bus stop located near the site entrance which may
need to be relocated to deliver the required access improvements.
Constraints
10.1.3 Development proposals will have to take into account:
The site should be investigated to identify the previous site uses and potential contaminants
that might be expected in order to fully assess any risks. If this identifies that contamination
may be a problem then a full site investigation should be completed and an appropriate
remediation scheme developed.157 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Cromer 10There have been various prehistoric archaeological finds on this site and further
archaeological work may be necessary prior to any development taking place. The site
may also be of geological importance or interest and may require geodiversity investigation.
Anglian Water advise that enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be
required before development can proceed.
The Highway Authority has identified the need for localised highway improvements to
ensure that safe and convenient access is provided.
Deliverability
10.1.4 The site is in single ownership and is being marketed for residential development. It is suitable
and available for development and there are limited constraints. Development should be
achievable within the plan period.
Policy C07/2
Land at Cromer High Station, Norwich Road
Land amounting to approximately 0.8 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
development of approximately 22 dwellings, public open space and associated on and off site
infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access including alterations at the Station Road
junction with the A149, to increase separation between the junctions and to reduce the speed
of vehicles joining the A149 southbound;
2. Provision of waiting restrictions to the south of the vehicular access to ensure visibility does
not become obscured;
3. The northbound bus stop on the A149 should be improved with the addition of a bus shelter;
4. Retention and enhancement of the existing landscaping to the boundaries of the site;
5. Provision of a landscaped buffer between the adjacent business uses and residential
properties;
6. The submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan to
demonstrate that greenfield run off rates from the site are not increased;
7. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Drainage Strategy providing details
of any enhancements and setting out how additional foul flows will be accommodated within
the foul sewerage network and delivered prior to occupation of any dwellings;
8. The submission, approval and implementation of a scheme of archaeological
investigation/mitigation;
9. The submission, approval and implementation of a scheme of land contamination
investigation/mitigation; and,
10. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 158
10Cromer10.2 Residential: Former Golf Practice Ground, Overstrand Road (C16)
The following site is allocated for development of approximately 150 dwellings, specialist elderly
care accommodation, public open space and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
24452142
Club
8Conifers
132
2a
Greenkeepers
70Antonia VillaHouse18b
16
CornerHarbord House
SmallhopesLB
(Telecommunication)59.4m
53.9m45.6m46.6mPath (um)2
386213
236HouseTrent267 to 12CourtFearns
11
The Pines
HillDef
ED & Ward Bdy
LYNEWOOD ROADQUEENS ROAD
Path (um)Trough
3355565
13025
11
Bowling Green10
14The133
134a
1342
The WarrenPresbytery24
The Cottage
70
HillsideHouseDick's Close Hill
OVERSTRAND ROAD
Path (um)LB
31105
97St Margaret's
House
RoydstoneClement
Scott41
1
69143141
The Coach House
14a
El Sub StaFearns ParkROAD
STATION
1
5234
130a6
3129
Hillside
13615
1 to 69The Stables
Glaven20Club
Hall
ProvidencePond
Und
RailwayPARK ROAD
NORTHREPPS
TrackPath (um)
LB40.4m
40.1m4
36a23
541 to 45
Court
Poppy
Houseof Our
FieldsideTemerloh
TankEl Sub Sta
CROMER ROADPARK LANE
LINKS AVENUETank
57.6m
14
261
34a114
140117
House
GreystonesCourt
CottageLady of Refuge
14718a
222b
Chaffinch CottageGolf Links
Ponds
DismantledMast4151101St Anthony10AmyMews11128Catholic Church
Bullfinch Cottage
1 to 14
CARRINGTON ROAD
ROAD
Path (um)47.9m46.9m
C16© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Description
10.2.1 This is undeveloped land to the east of Cromer. It is bordered by existing residential development
on the western side. The site is approximately 1km from the town centre and there are good
pedestrian links available. The site is within walking distance of Roughton Road train station
and there is a bus stop located close to the site with a bus service available. Access to the site
could be provided from Overstrand Road or Northrepps Roads.
10.2.2 The site is within the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), is visually prominent from
areas close to the site, but is not intrusive in the wider landscape. The area is located within
the Coastal Shelf as defined in the LCA, the strategy seeks to ensure that any new development
is well integrated into the landscape and does not form a harsh edge.Whilst development would
be visible from Overstrand Road and Northrepps Road, the impact would be mitigated by
retaining existing hedges and trees around the site, incorporating significant internal open space
and tree planting within the site, and introducing a landscape buffer to the northern and western
boundaries. Such landscaping should aim to break up views of the new development. The site
is large enough to accommodate the proposed number of dwellings and to achieve substantial
amounts of landscaping and open space.
10.2.3 The hedgerow and woodland around the site provide biodiversity benefit and should be further
enhanced through additional planting.
10.2.4 It is important that careful attention is given to the site layout, building heights and materials in
order to minimise the visual impact of development. Development should conserve and enhance159 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Cromer 10the individual character of Cromer responding to the historic built form and traditional vernacular
style and materials, with reference to the Design Guide. It is important that new development
on this site is well integrated into the landscape and does not form a harsh edge.
Constraints
10.2.5 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Anglian Water advised that enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be
required before development can proceed.
Deliverability
10.2.6 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy C16
Former Golf Practice Ground, Overstrand Road
Land amounting to approximately 6.4 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
development of approximately 150 dwellings, elderly care accommodation, public open space and
associated on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Careful attention to site layout, building heights and materials in order to minimise the visual
impact of the development on the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty;
2. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access  from Overstrand Road or Northrepps Road
to include associated improvements, carriageway realignment and widening to a minimum of
5.5m, and provision of a frontage footway at the Northrepps Road access;
3. The submission, approval and implementation of a Transport Impact Assessment to assess
the impact of the development on the strategic road network and identify areas where mitigation
may be required and propose appropriate schemes;
4. On site delivery of not less than 1.31 hectares  of multi-functional open space together with
measures for its on-going maintenance;
5. Retention and enhancement of hedgerows and trees around the site, including the protection
of existing woodland within the site and the provision of a landscaped buffer along the northern
and western boundaries;
6. The submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan ensuring
that there is no adverse effects on European sites and greenfield run off rates are not
increased;
7. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Drainage Strategy, details of any
enhancements and setting out how additional foul flows will be accommodated within the foul
sewerage network;
8. Enhancement to sewerage infrastructure should be undertaken prior to the first occupation
of any dwelling to prevent detriment to the environment and comply with Water Framework
Directive obligations;
9. Delivery of comprehensive development in accordance with agreed phasing which ensures
delivery of all aspects of the allocated uses including not less than 60 units of specialist elderly
persons accommodation; and,
10. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 160
10CromerThe site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority.161 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Cromer 1010.3 Mixed-Use: Land West of Pine Tree Farm (C22/2)
The following site is allocated for development of approximately 400 dwellings, specialist elderly
persons accommodation, sport and recreational facilities and associated on and off-site
infrastructure:
67Rhobert2
13
79
Sta
55
248
229301640
18
LeybourneCro
ftnestRosehill
DilkushaThe
2822227aGarage
CornerLong
6
Beech
36
ThePipeEl Sub Sta
Beckett'sWard BdyDef
HILLSIDE
RIDGE WAY
HILLSLB
66.1m
Drain
68Pond
69.8m228
27209209a
96
238
91241
3922
36
Kelvin
1831
Rimington
Turning PoiCromer
KenviaMalmar24206a26aTheTheFarmhouse
TheRoughton Road Station
Woodmans
BarnCloseSite
Dismantled RailwayMP 11.75
NORW
ICH ROADHILLS
BURNT
Path (um)
MastTCB (dis)FB
TCB (dis)57.1m
Amethyst
Falls1112
Sub52 43
2331
Gerwyn
Littlehome38
32Works
Janbry
27328
4227
61Colwyn
El Sub Sta
12
40
The Cart Shed
118 to 23Woodview
5
Hills
Roughton
RingTriangularBurnt Hills Wood
Def
1.22m RHWHITEHOUSE
THE AVENUEMast62.6m
66.5m
MP
199
Sub Sta
El Sub StaEl Sub Sta39203a14
30a
77
14
2775
653
Peaceholme
OstendHillcrest
Briar Hill
52
32
MaudvilleShelter63
2The
546PooneilsWestview(PW) El
Pond
PondRHCLOSE
A 149HOLWAYCLOSE65.3m
3
Valbar2051141212
201
64
534
2
20713
8272028
ChoseleyNorepps361
Mellers19
31
29aGrantley House
55
Capri65SubStable
127WoodCromer
PlantationWard BdyDefFINCH CLOSE
STEVENS ROADCOMPIT
20
Dorne
Track
249
20867681
104
226
710
41
1320
42
38Hilltop
Thanet67Suncroft
Sunnyridge
52
2347
2Back
Barn
Maple Wood
The GranaryAldisElectricity
DistributionOak Hill Wood
CFBPESTATE
CHRISTOPHERS CLOSELB53.6m
Treetops
Def20340
8412302192393221
FarleighsThe Haven
15
7
Sandymount
59262926b StaThe
Barn5032
The PaddocksBarnsDefTunnel (dis)
BURNT HILLS
LB
(Telecommunication)Lawns
Belle Vue
23.25
81El25
20020
25El1a
15
44
1
19
Peacehaven
JafeicaDrum-Na-Cairn
Oakwood331
GrayswoodWorks113DooneilsEl
YellowgatesDairy
4Go-Kart Track(PW)
17Dalnamara
CornerBurntChristian Fellowship
Gurney's Wood
Hurricane WoodSub Sta
ED&WardBdy
NIGHTINGALE
RIDGE WAY
ROUGHTON ROAD
1
C22/2C07/2© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land West of Pine Tree Farm (C22/2)
Description
10.3.1 This is a greenfield site to the south of Cromer which borders residential development to the
north and the east. The area consists of two parcels of land which are in agricultural use with
woodland through the centre of the site and the rail line running along the north. The site is
within walking distance to the schools and there is a bus stop located close to the site which
provides a range of services.
10.3.2 The site is within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and is visible
from the south and the immediate surrounding area. Due to the topography of the site, the
surrounding development and landscaping the eastern section is not overly prominent in the
wider landscape.The impact of development in this area would be mitigated by retaining existing
hedges/ trees around the site, incorporating internal open space and tree planting within the
site, and introducing a landscaped buffer to the southern boundary. The site is adjacent to the
Grade II Listed Pine Tree Farmhouse along Norwich Road. The development layout and
landscaping should consider the impact on the listed building and wider landscape. The area
to the west of the woodland is located to the rear of existing residential development in Roughton
Road and will require  a significant landscape buffer along the southern boundary to mitigate
landscape impacts.
10.3.3 The existing woodland on the site provides biodiversity benefits and the site layout should retain
this area and include a landscaped buffer between development and the woodland.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 162
10Cromer10.3.4 The Highway Authority has indicated that safe access can be provided to Norwich Road. It is
desirable for this to be in the form of a roundabout to the south of the frontage. A new footbridge
should be provided over the railway line, or by a suitable alternative, enabling safe pedestrian
access to the facilities and schools in Cromer. The layout of the site should provide for direct
connections to this footpath network.
10.3.5 The evidence indicates a need for new sports pitch provision in Cromer (to replace Cabbell
Park). The development should provide a suitably located, level area for sports pitch provision,
parking and club house facilities.
Constraints
10.3.6 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Anglian Water advise that off-site water mains reinforcement will be required and
enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be required.
Sports pitches and facilities are required on part of the site.
A new roundabout access is required to Norwich Road.
Safe pedestrian routes to schools, health and town centre facilities should be provided
and this is likely to require a new footbridge over the railway line.
Deliverability
10.3.7 The site is suitable and available for development. The site is in multiple ownerships with the
owners working together to promote and deliver a comprehensive development in accordance
with the policies of this plan.
Policy C22/2
Land West of Pine Tree Farm, Norwich Road
Land amounting to 25.7 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for development of
approximately 400 dwellings, specialist elderly persons accommodation, sport and recreational
facilities and associated on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Provision of a new segregated cycle/pedestrian footway along the Norwich Road including a
dedicated footbridge (or suitable alternative) crossing over the railway;
2. Provision of two vehicle access points onto the A149 including the provision of a roundabout
at the southern access;
3. The submission, approval and implementation of a Transport Impact Assessment  to include
analysis of the impact the development would have upon the road network, identify areas
where mitigation may be required and provide solutions;
4. Careful attention to site layout, building heights and materials in order to minimise the visual
impact of the development on the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty;
5. On site delivery of not less than 4.9 hectares of multi-functional open space together with
measures for its on-going maintenance;
6. The delivery of not less than 5 hectares of land suitable for sports pitch provision and agreed
contributions towards delivery;
7. Provision of additional green infrastructure on the site which maximises connectivity between
the residential development and the open space. Biodiversity improvements and access
should be provided to Beckett’ s Plantation;163 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Cromer 108. Retention and enhancement of hedgerows and trees around and within the site, including the
protection of existing woodland within site and the provision of a landscaped buffer along the
southern boundaries;
9. The existing public footpath through the site should be retained and upgraded to a surfaced
route within in a green corridor and a new route should be provided from the site to connect
with Roughton Road;
10. The submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan ensuring
that there is no adverse effects on European sites and greenfield run off rates are not
increased;
11. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Drainage Strategy, details of any
enhancements and setting out how additional foul flows will be accommodated within the foul
sewerage network;
12. Enhancement to sewerage infrastructure should be undertaken prior to the first occupation
of any dwelling to prevent detriment to the environment and comply with Water Framework
Directive obligations;
13. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS);
14. Delivery of comprehensive development in accordance with agreed phasing which ensures
delivery of all aspects of the allocated uses including not less than 100 units of specialist
elderly persons accommodation; and,
15. Development should preserve and enhance the setting of the grade II listed Pine Tree
Farmhouse through careful layout, design and landscaping.
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 164
10Cromer11 Fakenham
Fakenham is classified as a Large Growth Town in the Settlement Hierarchy and together with
North Walsham and Cromer is expected to deliver a significant proportion of the new growth
that is required.
11.0.1 Fakenham is a market town situated on the River Wensum, about 25 miles north west of
Norwich, and 23 miles to the north east of King’ s Lynn. It is located on the junction of several
important local roads, including the A148 from King's Lynn to Cromer, the A1067 to Norwich
and the A1065 to Swaffham.  It had a population of 7,617 at the 2011 census, with 43.8% aged
65 and over. It has been a market town since 1250, particularly known for its corn, barley and
wheat trading, and in the 19th century it became noted for its printing. It has an attractive central
market place and square, medieval church, and weekly market. The racecourse to the south
of the town lies in the wildlife rich Wensum valley. The town acts as a local centre for
employment, retailing, health, higher education and other services meeting the needs of the
residents of the town and a relatively large rural hinterland.
11.0.2 To the south of Fakenham is the River Wensum, an internationally designated Site of Special
Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Special Area of Conservation (SAC). The Wensum has been
recognised as one of a national series of rivers of special interest as an example of an enriched,
calcareous lowland river. With a total of over 100 species of plants, a rich invertebrate fauna
and a relatively natural corridor, it is probably the best whole river of its type in nature
conservation terms, although short stretches of other similar rivers may show a slightly greater
diversity of species. The SAC is strictly protected under the EC Habitats Directive, forming part
of a European network (Natura 2000). The site makes a significant contribution to conserving
those habitats and species considered most in need of protection at a European level. Large
areas of land that abut the River Wensum SAC are designated as County Wildlife Sites - such
as Night Common, Hempton Common, Sculthorpe Moor & Meadows and the water meadows
to the south west of Oak Street.
11.0.3 In terms of its function as a centre for housing, employment, retail and extensive range of day
to day services, Fakenham could support relatively high levels of future growth.The 2008 Core
Strategy, made provision for a major urban expansion to the north of the town, including housing,
employment land, community facilities and open space. In 2011, the site (F01) was allocated
for 800-900 dwellings, a new primary school, approximately seven hectares of employment
land, and substantial areas of public open space. In 2016 Fakenham Development Brief was
published and an outline planning application for the site was submitted which was subsequently
granted in December 2020 for 950 dwellings and associated facilities. The Core Strategy
identified an area to the west of that application site as being able to accommodate further
development in the longer term and this area is now identified as an allocation in this Plan for
approximately 560 further new dwellings. Although the Council will not delay development it is
considered likely that some of this additional growth will happen beyond the period covered by
this Plan due to the availability of significant opportunities already approved but not yet built.
11.0.4 Fakenham employs approximately 4,573 employees, with around 1,400 of these within the
manufacturing sector and has the highest levels of self-containment in respect of travel to work
journeys of all towns in North Norfolk. A high proportion, approximately 65%, of those working
within the town live within the District. The town occupies the most accessible location in the
District in terms of access to the national road network and, as a result, has a strong
manufacturing base and presence of distribution companies. It is seen as an attractive location
for investment and over recent years  has seen one of the strongest take-up rates of employment
land within the District. The largest Employment Areas within the town, Fakenham Commerce
Park and Fakenham Industrial Estate, provide the opportunity for the recycling of employment
land with pockets of undeveloped land. Part of the recently granted permission for site
F01 provides for a further land for employment development.165 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Fakenham 1111.0.5 Fakenham has one of the larger town centres in the District which is focused around the historic
core of the Market Place and Corn Exchange. It is classed as a Large Town Centre in the retail
hierarchy  where new retail and town centre investment should be directed. The town centre
retains a high percentage of retail expenditure and has a good mix of convenience shops,
national multiples and financial and professional services, such as banking, estate agents and
solicitors. In terms of scale of development, the town centre would be vulnerable to the impacts
from large out- of- town retail growth  and a locally derived impact threshold of 1,000sqm is set
for retail and leisure development in Fakenham ( Policy E 4 'Retail & Town Centre
Development' ).
11.0.6 There is an identified need for comparison goods shopping and to a lesser extent food/beverage
floorspace. Recent re-development has seen some additional growth accommodated in former
vacant units. Future small scale growth can be accommodated through the take up of  vacant
units and the development of vacant land within the town centre, existing car parking (subject
to replacement), redevelopment opportunities around the auction building, bowling alley and
the adjacent vacant land on the edge of the town centre.The policies of this Plan would require
these town centre opportunities to be comprehensively explored before considering out-of-centre
developments.
11.0.7 The designated Town Centre Area which contains 130 Class A retail/service units, and the
Primary Shopping Area, concentrated around the market Place and Millers Walk, are detailed
on the Policies Map.
11.0.8 The main considerations which influence the suggested location of development sites are the
need to:
Avoiding development close to the nationally important river Wensum and it's associated
flood plain.
Making the best use of land located between the town and the A148 corridor to deliver
comprehensive developmen t.
Providing some smaller sites to extend choice and flexibility and improve delivery in the
short to medium term.
Making efficient use of infrastructure including the road, drainage and educational facilities
associated with previously allocated developments (F01).
Located developments where they are well related to existing built up areas and facilities
and avoid incursions into the wider countryside setting of the town.
Infrastructure
11.0.9 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
Anglian Water have identified that off-site mains water supply reinforcement will be required
in certain locations and that for new development of over 10 dwellings, it should be assumed
that some enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity is likely to be required.
The Highway Authority indicate that localised highway network improvements will be
required to support each of the development proposals. In particular the highway works
associated with site F01 will be necessary before any significant further development can
occur in this location.
The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment identifies the south of Fakenham as being at fluvial
flood risk stemming from the River Wensum, along with the risk of surface water flooding.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 166
11FakenhamThe rest of Fakenham has some risk of surface water flooding, predominantly from pockets
of water ponding on roads.
The Health Authority indicate that there is likely to be sufficient capacity in health services
to support the proposed growth.
There is limited available capacity in Primary Education.
There is a general need to improve open space provision to support the planned growth.
11.0.10 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting physical
infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified shortages
in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.
Site Allocations 
11.0.11 In order to meet the identified housing need  four sites are allocated for development to deliver
around 750 dwellings over the plan period including affordable homes, specialist elderly persons
accommodation, on site open spaces and contributions towards road, drainage and other
necessary infrastructure.
11.0.12 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow.167 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Fakenham 11Allocations in Fakenham
F01/B
F03
F02
F10 Open SpaceF10© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 2 Allocations in FakenhamProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 168
11Fakenham11.1 Residential: Land North of Rudham Stile Lane (F01/B)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 560 dwellings, elderly
persons' accommodation, public open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
42140a
36
1022219
14271411215493
8
4Bridge
ElSub
StaPondPondPond
1.22mRHCLOSE
SILVERLANDSRUDHAM STILE
RD
54.0m53.6m30
BRICK KILN ROAD333312211931
17Melvern
227162
19
12
1
AllotmentEl Sub Sta
1.22m
 RHWardBdyDef
PARKRUDHAMSTILELANE ELIZABETH GROVELANEWIGG
PECKOVER ROADMPTrackTank34
Fakenham Academy4710999227633167
9a10
31
11
132
22493
298290
20246416Beeches
GardensPond
1.22m
RH
DefNORTH PARK
NORTHNORTH57.7m13
42Path (um)
30150
Pavilion113
621512
201
9b162
FillingFieldLindum
111418
25121
1Pond
Def
NORTH PARK
CHARLESROADA148
ROAD
W
ESTCLOSEECKERSLEY DRIVE35 2
21
Station
1812143
1126
2411
172
18
147
151
140
1
160
2Westfield672
1370
101
2
57DefTRAP
LANE
PARK
SEPPINGSLANE55.2m
25(Rugby Pitch)2Sports
1
49
9
44a
1
2311017
967
43
77Works
19279134
ElSubStaAllotment Gardens
ElSubStaESS
EDINBURGH DRIVEWATER MOOR LANEARTHURCLOSE
CLOSETrack1
14
FARMDRIVE
12
131
108
6312
120722
107
5St Josephs
7
15
5548
33
79
857
1
38187Recreation Ground
Tank
2TheB 1105
AVENUEBARNORMAN
TRAP LANEPath
51.7m52.0mThe Stringer Ground
5511924
44b3514
157162
7210024
121
87
2
103
HousePond
1.22m
 RH
BRIDGE
A148A148
ROAD
TOLLLay-by
Rudham Stile Lane51.7m41
21
Willowfield
22F01/B
F03
F02© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land North of Rudham Stile Lane (F01/B)
Description
11.1.1 A large site which is predominantly in agricultural use but also includes the rugby club, sports
pitches and the sports centre. It forms part of the larger F01 site that is already allocated for
mixed use development in the current adopted Plan but has not been developed. The land to
the east of the site (F01A) is covered by a Development Brief which was approved in 2016.
Though distant from the town centre, the site is within walking distance of Fakenham High
School and College and can be well connected to key facilities by footpaths, cycle paths and
bus routes.
11.1.2 The site is level and lacks any specific topographical or landscape features that are worthy of
protection. It is important that a comprehensive landscaping scheme is prepared to minimise
impact of development on the surrounding countryside and provide a landscaped buffer to the
bypass. Areas of open space should also be provided to break up development. Development
could displace a number of existing uses, including the rugby club. If these uses can not be
retained in their location then they should be provided elsewhere. Safe and convenient vehicular
access can be achieved and accessibility to the town centre and other key facilities can be
improved.
11.1.3 The Highway Authority have confirmed that acceptable vehicle access can be achieved from
the proposed roundabout on Watermoor Lane associated with the adjacent F01A site.
Improvements will be required at Wells Road between the new roundabout and B1105 Barsham169 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Fakenham 11Rd, and will require the B1105 between the A148 and Fakenham Road being closed to traffic.
Development will  also need to assist with improvements required to the Shell (A148/A1065)
roundabout.
11.1.4 The site would need to link to the adjacent site (F01A) and follow the same highway principles
as set out in the Development Brief. There should be no vehicular access to the south, with
only pedestrian, cycling and public transport being permitted.
Constraints
11.1.5 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Anglian Water advise that development of the site will require enhancement to treatment
capacity in the Water Recycling Centre and might require some enhancement to the foul
sewerage network capacity before development can proceed. Early engagement with
Anglian Water is therefore essential to ensure there is adequate capacity in the system.
There are sewers and water mains crossing the site and diversion would be at the
developers' expense.
The site may have medieval finds and therefore archaeological work may be necessary
prior to any development taking place.The site may be of geological importance or interest
and may require geodiversity investigation.
Deliverability
11.1.6 This is a large site which is suitable and available for development. The majority of the site is
in two ownerships.This includes all key parcels of land required to allow the site to be accessed,
serviced and brought forward for development.
11.1.7 Piecemeal development of the site is unlikely to be acceptable prior to agreement of an overall
Master Plan , which will establish the broad principles of access, movement, mix of uses, layout,
built form, density of development and conceptual appearance. This will need to be agreed by
the Local Planning Authority before development can progress.
Policy F01/B
Land North of Rudham Stile Lane
Land amounting to 26.5 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 560 dwellings, elderly persons' accommodation, public open space,
and associated on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. The prior approval of a Master Plan to address access and sustainable transport, layout,
landscaping, phasing and conceptual appearance;
2. Prior approval of a comprehensive access strategy and Transport Assessment providing for
safe and convenient access to the A148 together with any necessary junction improvements
along the length of Fakenham by-pass including at the A148/B1105 and A148/A1065 junctions;
3. Provision of off-site mains water reinforcement;
4. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Water Drainage Strategy, including
any enhancements and that it is demonstrated that there is adequate capacity in the water
recycling centre;
5. Retention or replacement of existing sporting uses including the rugby club and sports centre;Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 170
11Fakenham6. On site delivery of not less than 7.53 hectares of multi-functional open space together with
measures for its on-going maintenance;
7. Submission, approval and implementation of the findings of a Health Impact Assessment;
8. Delivery of comprehensive development in accordance with agreed phasing which ensures
delivery of all aspects of the allocated uses including not less than 100 units of specialist
elderly persons accommodation; and,
9. Appropriate contributions will be secured towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk
Green Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).
10. Prior demonstration that there is adequate capacity in road, drainage and educational
infrastructure taking account of existing planned growth.171 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Fakenham 1111.2 Residential: Land Adjacent to Petrol Filling Station, Wells Road (F02)
The following site is allocated for approximately 70 dwellings, public open space and associated
on and off-site infrastructure:
30
6351
42102
6
7078a13808
348bOak Lodge1.22m RH
FF
CLARENDON
50.9m49.3m
147
3216
54
3
169
House41
2951b
Brambles
Ponds1.22m
RH
1.22m FWA1065PECKOVERROAD
ROADA148
Path
TCB 105
12
18
4
11
73111
2
24
The RahmansMalham Ho
Ponds1.22m RH
RH1.22m
 RH
DefDefROAD
EASTGATE
KINGSOakwood
20
Windy
1512
945Filling47a
48DefED & Ward BdyA148
LANE
ROAD
153912101Station3211
18
2
50451a
PondDefFWDef
DefCREAKE
SEPPINGS
OLIVIA CLOSEShelter
2149
49a2578
23
5344
Ridge249
Holly House
Garden
491
2351
OwlandESS
W
ELLS
ROADSANDY
SCULTHORPE5513
48a
3688
1170a
11673523
2El Sub Sta
PondFWBAR
LB
40.5m55
1Manse28
1711
72
2
611CemeteryA148
ROAD
TOLL
LB37.6m45aF03
F02© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land Adjacent to Petrol Filling Station, Wells Road (F02)
Description
11.2.1 Although adjacent to the built up area of Fakenham this site lies in Sculthorpe parish. It is a
greenfield site, comprising a paddock, which is well related to existing development with good
pedestrian access to the town centre and to the schools. Bus stops are located on Wells Road.
11.2.2 The site is well contained in the landscape and lacks any specific topographical or landscape
features which are worthy of protection. However, the area does currently act as a buffer
between the built-up area and the bypass (A1065). Landscaping around the site should be
provided to soften the impact of development especially along the western boundary.
11.2.3 Suitable access can be achieved to the site from Wells Road immediately adjacent to the Petrol
Filling Station access. This will require localised realignment of the carriageway to enable the
provision of safe access with appropriate visibility. Access to the Swaffam Road  (A1065) will
not be permitted.
Constraints
11.2.4 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Anglian Water advise that enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be
required before development can proceed.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 172
11FakenhamDeliverability
11.2.5 The site is suitable and available for development. There are no constraints on the site and
development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy F02
Land Adjacent to Petrol Filling Station, Wells Road
Land amounting to 2.4 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for approximately 70
dwellings, public open space and associated on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Delivery of a carefully designed development taking into account site layout, building heights,
topography;
2. Provision and retention of strong landscaping on the western boundary of the site, and the
retention and enhancement of landscape buffers along the eastern and southern boundaries
of the site;
3. Provision of highway access off Wells Road with improvements to the existing access into
the forecourt;
4. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Water Drainage Strategy including
any enhancements to the network capacity;
5. On site delivery of not less than 0.19 hectares of multi-functional open space together with
measures for its on-going maintenance; and,
6. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).173 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Fakenham 1111.3 Residential: Land at Junction of A148 and B1146 (F03)
The following site is allocated for development of approximately 65 dwellings, public open space
and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
School House
42
51102
62219
Oak LodgePond
1.22m RH
FFRD3312254
1196931
17
2551b1.22m
 RH
Def
A1065WIGG
PECKOVER ROADA 148MP
Fakenham Academy4710
27339a10
317311
2
1.22mRH1.22m
 RH
DefDefROAD
5020
621512
201
9b2
FillingField
ED & Ward BdyA 148A148
ROAD
ECKERSLEY DRIVE1
Station
1812
1126
241118
2
12
51aDefCREAKE
SEPPINGS
Shelter(Rugby Pitch)2Sports
123
53
49
9
44a
1
2317
9
ESS
ARTHURCLOSE
23
6312
887
7
5TankB1105
BARNORMAN
LB52.0mThe Stringer Ground
5511924
44b3514
11
72
El Sub StaCemetery1.22m
 RH
A148
ROAD
TOLLTrack
Rudham Stile LaneF01/B
F03
F02© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land at Junction of A148 and B1146 (F03)
Description
11.3.1 This is a greenfield site, comprising a paddock, which is well related to existing development
with good pedestrian access to the town centre and to the schools. Bus stops are located on
Wells Road.
11.3.2 The site is well contained in the landscape and lacks any specific topographical or landscape
features which are worthy of protection. However, the area does currently act as a buffer
between the built-up area and the bypass. Landscaping around the site should be provided to
soften the impact, especially along the western boundary. It is considered that residential
development, of an appropriate design, would have little overall impact on the character of this
part of Fakenham or its landscape setting.
11.3.3 Suitable access can be achieved to the site from Toll Bar. Improvements are required to the
Public Rights Of Way on Rudham Stile Lane
Constraints
11.3.4 Development proposals will have to take into account:Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 174
11FakenhamAnglian Water advised that enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be
required before development can proceed.
A small section of the site, in the south west corner, is located in a Gas Pipe Buffer  Zone.
Further investigation with AMEC is required to ensure that the pipeline would not be
adversely affected.
Deliverability
11.3.5 The site is suitable and available for development. There are no constraints on the site and
development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy F03
Land at Junction of A148 & B1146, Opposite Petrol Filling Station
Land amounting to 2.2 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for development of
approximately 65 dwellings, public open space and associated on and off-site infrastructure.
1. Landscaping buffers should be provided to soften the boundaries between the development
and the A148;
2. Retention of hedgerows and trees on the western and southern boundaries of the site;
3. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access to Toll Bar/Old Wells Road, including
carriageway widening to a minimum of 5.5m between the site access and C590 Creake Road;
4. Provision of footway at site frontage connecting directly with the existing facility at the south
side of Creake Road and to the existing footway at Toll Bar;
5. Improvements required to enable safe pedestrian route between the site and Fakenham High
School via Toll Bar/Old Wells Road and Rudham Stile Lane Public Right of Way;
6. Retention of land to be made available to facilitate a capacity improvement scheme at the
A148/ A1065 roundabout;
7. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Water Drainage Strategy including
any enhancements to the network capacity;
8. On site delivery of not less than 0.17 hectares of multi-functional open space together with
measures for its on-going maintenance; and,
9. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority175 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Fakenham 1111.4 Residential: Land South of Barons Close (F10)
The following site is allocated for development of approximately 55 dwellings, 2.6 hectares of
public open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
1518
1to411
3
3
1
PH
5Bank5
264
Pump
24
20b
Hall
5a
6
12
FakenhamBurial Ground
Drain
THE LAW
N
BridgesWalk
FB2716 to 26137
1633
1
73
18
283181
1
Club
14
26
1
Aldiss Community ParkDrain
Pond
CRRATCLIFFE ROAD
MASSEY COURT
Path(um)
Bridge
FB43.8m
River WensumESSs2
14 to 17
27
248
21
20
31
31
(1to9)74
22Station24Baron's41311
Common
PondDrainDrainDrainBARON'S
HALL
LANE
BARON'S
CLOSENORWICHSTREET
Path (um)Miller'sWalkCricketers Close
101
91
6
17to11
Farm
237
9a
24b
1Fire Sta
511
Car Park
Car Park
DrainPondDrain
Duffy's Yard19
1710(1
to12)
2521
1
2to461to71Fakenham
11PH
12926bPolice16
1110
Aldiss Community ParkDrainDrain
Drain
DefCATTLEMARKETSTREETOXBOROUGH LANE
ESSsCottage
15 2129
16
3a
14
79122Club23
HouseCourtOak22b
Play Area
DrainDrainHALLCLOSE
W
HITEHORSE STREET
Foot38.1m
6 to 920
14810
8337
Infant School
15
1521
43
34122
DrainDrain
PondTrack
FBTCB
17
1 to 10
122222
15to17
Baron's HallBaron's Meadow
19533
910
El Sub Sta
Drain
DrainPondDrain
Ward Bdy
Dismantled RailwayOLIVETWAY
FBF10 Open SpaceF10© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Public Open Space
Land South of Barons Close (F10)
Description
11.4.1 This is a greenfield site, on the southern edge of Fakenham, comprising grassland which slopes
down towards an area of wet grassland and the River Wensum. Part of the site is at risk of
flooding and this area has been proposed for public open space, shown in green.The remaining
land is proposed for residential development.
11.4.2 The site is well related to existing development and located close to the public footpath for
access of the town centre and is within walking distance of other key facilities including schools,
shops and recreational facilities.
11.4.3 The area is located within the River Valleys landscape character area, where there is scope
for enhancement in the vicinity of Fakenham, to integrate valley-side development by the use
of landscaping, in particular tree and hedgerow planting, to limit the visual influence
of development that does not conform to historic linear patterns.There are a number of mature
trees on the boundaries of the site, including a row subject to Tree Preservation Orders. Any
development should ensure that these are protected and retained.
11.4.4 Vehicular access should be via Baron’ s Hall Lane and pedestrian/cycle access to the town
centre should be available via Oxborough Lane. Pedestrian connection through the open space
should be provided, connecting to the existing Riverside Walk and the Aldiss Community Park
to the south-west.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 176
11FakenhamConstraints
11.4.5 Development proposals will have to take into account:
To the south of the site is the River Wensum which is a Site of Special Scientific Interest
(SSSI) and a Special Area of Conservation (SAC). Any development will need to consider
the relationship and impact on the environmental designations particularly the SSSI and
landscaping should be provided along the southern boundary.
Given the location adjacent to existing employment uses, it is possible that there is land
contamination. This will need to be investigated and, if necessary, an appropriate
remediation scheme developed.
The southern part of the site is identified as at greater risk of flooding and is therefore
unsuitable for residential development. This part is proposed to be allocated for public
open space and should be made available for a variety of open space uses increasing
public access to the River Wensum. Development will be subject to a satisfactory Flood
Risk Assessment demonstrating how flood risk from all sources of flooding to the
development itself and from the site to the surrounding area, will be managed.
Anglian Water advised that there are sewers crossing the site and if these need diverting
then it would be at the developers’  expense and that enhancements to the foul sewerage
network capacity may be required before development can proceed.
Deliverability
11.4.6 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy F10
Land South of Barons Close
Land amounting to 4.1 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for development of
approximately 55 dwellings, 2.6 hectares of public open space, and associated on and off-site
infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Retention and enhancement of landscaping around the site boundaries, and planting along
the western boundary;
2. Provision of a landscaped buffer to the south of the site to include ecological connectivity;
3. Provision of a convenient and safe vehicular and pedestrian access from Baron’ s Hall Lane,
including improvements to the restricted byway to the west of the site;
4. Retention of the footpath at the site entrance and its extension to provide direct links to the
town centre and new river side park;
5. No development shall be located in areas of flood risk, as demonstrated by a site-specific
Flood Risk Assessment;
6. Phased delivery of not less than 2.6 hectares of multi-functional open space together with
measures for its on-going maintenance;
7. Submission of adequate information in order to undertake a project Level Habitat Regulation
Assessment, HRA addressing hydrological issues, site design, layout, drainage and habitat
surveys;
8. The submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan, including
the provision of SUD’ s in accordance with best practice;177 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Fakenham 119. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Water Drainage Strategy including
any enhancements to the network capacity;
10. Enhancement to sewerage infrastructure should be undertaken prior to the first occupation
of any dwelling to prevent detriment to the environment and comply with the Water Framework
Directive obligations; and,
11. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning AuthorityProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 178
11Fakenham12 Holt
Holt is identified as a Small Growth Town in the settlement hierarchy. This means it has been
identified as one of five settlements where this Plan proposes relatively modest scale growth
over the Plan period (the others being Stalham, Wells, Hoveton and Sheringham).
The town acts as a local centre for retail, leisure and other services. It is one of a cluster of three towns,
together with Cromer and Sheringham that are identified in this Plan as performing complementary
functions in respect of housing, employment and retail. Holt is an attractive Georgian market town with
a vibrant shopping area based around the historic town centre which is designated as a Conservation
Area with a number of Listed Buildings. It is surrounded by a high quality landscape with the Norfolk
Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty to the north of the town, the Glaven Valley Conservation
Area to the west, and Holt Country Park to the south.The proposals in this Plan seek to strike a balance
between providing both residential and economic development opportunities whilst protecting the
landscape setting of the town, its character, and its role as a tourist and shopping destination whilst
also taking account of the scale of growth allocated in the current Plan, much of which has planning
permission, is currently under construction, or is yet to be commenced.
12.0.1 Gresham's independent school covers large areas of the town including many areas of green
space in the form of playing fields. These open areas make a significant contribution to the
overall character of the town and are designated as open land areas in the Plan to protect them
from future development.
12.0.2 Holt is a significant net importer of employees from the surrounding areas, with 42% of the
workforce living outside Holt. There is some inter-relationship between Holt, Sheringham and
Cromer in terms of the workforce with people travelling from one town to another to access
employment. A large mixed-use site at Heath Farm is currently being developed , which  provides
an additional access onto the A148 (Fakenham to Cromer Road) to serve the town's industrial
estate on Hempstead Road, around 300 dwellings and further employment land opportunities.
12.0.3 The town has established a reputation as a visitor destination and  shopping centre and jobs
in retailing constitute a significant proportion of total employment in the town. A range of shops
(including a small supermarket) and other services are available in the town centre which acts
as both a local service centre and a visitor destination. The town has a relatively low retention
of convenience expenditure with weekly and large food shopping taking place at Fakenham,
Sheringham and Cromer. Permission was granted for a small edge of centre convenience store
in January 2015 on a brown field site (Thaxters) and this would increase convenience goods
expenditure retention and help address "leakage". To date, following the demolition of the
former Thaxter's building this development has not yet been taken up. Large out-of-town retail
proposals could potentially damage the vitality of the town centre and this Plan requires that
any proposals over 500sqm floor area should be subject to town centre impact tests (see Policy
 E4 'Retail & Town Centres').
12.0.4 Once the existing retail permission is taken into account there is only predicted to be limited
expenditure growth over the Plan period to support additional retail growth in Holt. In the recent
past some development has taken place, with small scale retail re-development on the edge
of Albert Street car park.There is limited potential to accommodate growth in vacant units, and
limited opportunities in the historic core. Newly arising retail demand should be directed in the
first instance towards reducing any existing shop vacancies, then the defined Primary Shopping
Area, followed by the wider town centre, before considering out of centre locations.
12.0.5 There is very little previously developed land in and around Holt which inevitably means that
new locations for development are on the edge of town in countryside, greenfield, locations.
Whilst over the Plan period it is expected that a process of re-development, infill developments,
and changes of use will continue to provide a supply of new homes and other uses, these179 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Holt12opportunities are relatively modest and will not address the identified need for new homes in
particular. Even when existing permissions and sites under construction are taken into account,
new greenfield allocations are necessary in order to deliver the required growth.
12.0.6 There are a range of factors which influence the location of development in Holt, including,
environmental and landscape considerations and the need to take into account the infrastructure
in the town.
12.0.7 In summary, the main considerations which influence the location of development sites are the
need to:
minimise the impact of development proposals on the landscape around the town,
including the AONB to the north, and the two Conservation Areas that cover the historic
heart of the town, and the Glaven Valley to the south and west;
Retain existing green spaces within the town boundary where they are either functionally
or visually important;
locate developments where they are, or can be connected, to key services and the town
centre preferably by walking, cycling or public transport or via better quality roads;  avoid
locations that are detached from the town and not well related to existing built up areas;
ensure a choice of medium sized sites are available to improve the prospects of delivery;
and
avoid locations which would draw traffic through the town centre which at times is
congested.
Infrastructure
12.0.8 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
12.0.9 The highway network in the historic town centre is reasonably constrained with the road network
following the historic street pattern and there are concerns with some junctions and the impact
of parking, particularly at busy periods. Locating development to the north of the town would
draw further traffic through the town centre and worsen traffic congestion. The town does have
a bypass which splits the town in two and although there are pedestrian underpasses to link
the two parts of the community, there is a lack of connectivity across the bypass on the eastern
side of town. Holt is moderately served by public transport with regular services to Fakenham
and Cromer.
12.0.10 The Holt GP practice does not have capacity for the additional demand resulting from the
cumulative development growth in the area. Any proposed development will likely have an
impact on the NHS funding programme for the delivery of primary healthcare provision within
this area. NHS England would therefore expect these impacts to be fully assessed and mitigated
as part of any development proposal.
12.0.11 Holt does not have a secondary school and there is limited capacity at the existing primary
school in the town. The Education Authority has indicated that the scale of already planned
growth in the town will require additional primary school capacity and has also indicated that
the existing primary school, which operates from a split site, is not regarded as suitable for
school expansion. A replacement larger primary school with capacity to expand in future years
is the preferred approach and outline planning permission has been granted for a proposal
including land suitable for a new 2 form entry primary school. The precise date for delivery of
a new school remains to be determined as this would largely depend on future development
rates and the take up of new homes by families with primary school age children.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 180
12Holt12.0.12 Anglian Water identify that off-site mains water reinforcement may be required in certain areas
affected by new development, together with the possible need for enhancement of the foul
sewerage network capacity. Holt is not identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment as
being at risk from flooding.
12.0.13 In summary, the main infrastructure considerations are:
limited capacity in the primary school to support future growth and no public secondary
school;
connectivity to the town centre from residential development to the south of the A148;
the limitations of the road network in the town centre;
public transport provision and car parking;
lack of capacity at the GP practice;
off-site mains water reinforcement is required in certain areas;
enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity will be required;
medium pressure gas main to the south of the A148;
consideration of the sand and gravel minerals allocation is required at Land to the West
of Norwich Road, Lodge Farm, Holt (MIN71).
12.0.14 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting
physical infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified
shortages in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.
Site Allocations 
12.0.15 Two residential sites and one employment site are allocated in Holt.  Collectively, these sites
could deliver around 210 new homes including affordable homes, elder persons accommodation,
new employment land, open space and supporting infrastructure.
12.0.16 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow.181 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Holt12Allocations in Holt
H27/1H17H20© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 3 Allocations in HoltProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 182
12Holt12.1 Residential: Land North of Valley Lane (H17)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 27 dwellings, public
open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
7El
4
8
4
Secret301183339
37
31
Holt CommunityOBELISK
14Sub76
2
12
3
5to68
46
181
Car Park
Spring40
Sta
2aGarden9
The Old Stables5242
Market
SpringsPondObelisk
37383
39
2335
27
Pond
4
4aCobble Stones3615 to 17
1to1913
Cottage
VALLEY LANEPLAIN
NORW
ICH ROAD
6a41
2The Barn
Spout43
SpringLB
1The
Hall1
511
Meth ChGP
Posts
63.8mLodge
KerridgeCt
The Barn
8
16Valley Farm
16aCarpenters Cottages5
29
Holt
Issues62.1mPark
H17© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Residential: Land North of Valley Lane (H17)
Description
12.1.1 This is a small greenfield site to the west of Holt and partly used for grazing and there is an
existing field access off Pounds Close, that feeds onto the Norwich Road and is considered
suitable for highway access. It is well contained when viewed from the town and is adjacent to
existing residential areas. The site is very close to the town centre and the existing school site.
12.1.2 The northern portion of this site is within the River Glaven Valley landscape character type and
the southern portion is within the Wooded Glacial Ridge type. It also falls within the Holt
Conservation Area and is adjacent to the Glaven Valley Conservation Area. The site is visible
in the landscape when viewed from Spout Hills to the west. Consequently, it is important that
the new development gives careful attention to design, building heights and layout to take into
account the landscape and townscape setting. Spout Hills is a County Wildlife Site and
consideration should be given to bio-diversity enhancements and links through the site.
Constraints
12.1.3 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Proximity to the two Conservation Areas.
Consideration of the landscape impact, particularly when viewed from the west; potential
impact on the Spout Hills County Wildlife Site.
Enhancements to the sewerage network capacity is required183 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Holt12Deliverability
12.1.4 The site is considered suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There
are limited constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy H17
Land North of Valley Lane
Land amounting to 0.9 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 27 dwellings, public open space, and associated on and off-site
infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies in this Plan and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Carefully and sensitively designed development incorporating suitable open space and
landscaping will be required to preserve, and where opportunities arise, to enhance, the setting
of the Conservation Areas and Listed Buildings to the north;
2. Site layout, scale and massing  which incorporates suitable landscaping and buildings that
retain  a soft edge to the settlement from Spouts Hill;
3. Retention and enhancement of mature hedgerows and trees around the site;
4. Access to be provided from Pounds Close with an acceptable junction with the A148;
5. Improved pedestrian access across the site into the Spout Hill from the town;
6. The submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan ensuring
that there is no increase off site and safe access and egress;
7. The submission, approval and implementation of a Foul drainage Strategy, including any
enhancements and setting out how additional foul flows will be accommodated within the foul
sewerage network;
8. Enhancement to sewerage infrastructure should be undertaken prior to the first occupation
of any dwelling to prevent detriment to the environment and comply with the Water Framework
Directive;
9. On site delivery of not less than 0.07 hectares of public open space or the agreed payment
of an equivalent financial contribution for the extension or improvement of local open space
provision; and,
10. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 184
12Holt12.2 Residential: Land at Heath Farm (H20)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 180 dwellings, elderly
persons accommodation, public open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
AinsworthWoodside
KinmountHunters Lodge
2
Balfunning1
4112
64a3HOLLY CLOSE
ROBIN CLOSE8915Sewage311The Oaks3522524
30
137
10
7876
Coneywarren
CLOSE
MAGPIE CLOSEA1481TAW
NY OW
L W
AY
BARN OWL DRIVE27
222733aThe Wilderness
5b
38a
221
Depot
31
413Track
Mast
13
42
1125023Court
481a22
12
1
28Stone Lodge
24b
38
1417
4c11
1914
Heath FarmROBERTS CLOSE
GROVEORCHARD CLOSE
35a
21
18Heath Farm
4a1324c
A5a218
4
Nelson CourtEl Sub Sta
El Sub StaGROVE LANEROAD
NIGHTJAR ROAD21314720
39a493
7Oaklands
362715
68a
Heath Farm Cottage
FThe Belt
Drain
MEADOW
(Telecommunication)12
122132Ppg Sta39
62424a81728
66a
64Depot
Drain
GLAVEN ROADAINSWORTH ROADCLOSE725
535
750
1312725b25
1
66b3
66
Heath Farm Bungalow
WOODPECKER AVENUEBUZZARD W
AYBARRETT
A148
40
PARTRIDGE WAYKESTREL DRIVE
H27/1H20© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land at Heath Farm (H20)
Description
12.2.1 This is a large greenfield site to the north-east of Holt and would be an extension of the previous
allocation at Heath Farm. The site is level, predominately in arable agricultural use and lacks
any specific topographical or landscape features, apart from the mature hedgerows around the
site. The setting of this site has changed considerably in recent years with the ongoing
construction of the major mixed use development to the south east.
12.2.2 The site falls within the Wooded Glacial Ridge landscape character type in the LCA, which
suggests that any new residential development should be successfully integrated within the
existing settlements where it reinforces traditional character and vernacular. The site is not
within the AONB or a Conservation Area. It is reasonably contained in the landscape, but is
more prominent when viewed from the public footpath to the south east of the site. The site is
adjacent to the Grade II Listed Buildings at Heath Farm.The development layout and landscaping
should consider the impact on the Listed Buildings and wider landscape.The site is also adjacent
to a County Wildlife Site at Sandy Hill Plantation.
12.2.3 The main services for Holt are located in the town centre. However, some services are located
to the east of the town – including the sports pitches, doctor’ s surgery and Gresham’ s Schools.
Furthermore, a number of the bus services follow the Cromer Road and access to these bus
stops would provide enhanced public transport connectivity. Currently, access the north east
of town is via a circuitous route to the underpass at Hempstead Road/Pearson's Road over 1
km away from the site.185 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Holt1212.2.4 Vehicular access should be provided into the site off Nightjar Road from the roundabout on the
A148. The public footpath to the south east of the site provides a connection to Holt Country
Park to the south, and to Grove Lane to the north (across the A148). The development should
provide a safe pedestrian access across the A148 and connections, and enhancements, to the
public footpath.
Constraints
12.2.5 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Access to the site should be provided off the existing roundabout on the A148.
The lack of satisfactory pedestrian access across the A148 to Grove Lane and Cromer
Road.
The proximity of Listed Buildings to the north east of the site; enhancements to the sewage
network capacity is required; a medium pressure gas main which crosses the site.
Deliverability
12.2.6 The site is considered suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There
are limited constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the Plan period.
Policy H20
Land at Heath Farm
Land amounting to 7.1 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 180 dwellings, elderly persons accommodation, public open space,
and associated on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies within this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
1. Access being delivered off Nightjar Road and new A148 roundabout and delivery of footpath
connections to footpath FP9a;
2. Submission of a heritage impact assessment incorporating suitable open space and
landscaping to preserve and enhance the setting of the Listed Buildings at Heath Farm to the
south east of the site;
3. Submission of a Transport Assessment identifying sustainable traffic mitigation measures to
include; delivery of enhanced pedestrian access improvements across and along the A148
to facilitate pedestrian access to the medical centre, and bus stops on Cromer Road and the
east of the town;
4. That the existing Anglian Water Main is protected by easements and should not be built over
or located in private gardens where access for maintenance and repair could be restricted.
The existing water mains should be located in highways or public open space;
5. A layout of development which protects the alignment of the medium pressure gas main which
crosses the site;
6. Submission and approval of effective Surface Water Management Plan ensuring that there
is no increase in greenfield run off rates;
7. Submission of a Foul Drainage Strategy setting how additional foul flows will be accommodated
within the foul sewerage network and implemented prior to first occupation of any dwellings;
8. On-site provision of minimum of 1.55 ha open space;
9. Delivery of comprehensive development in accordance with agreed phasing which ensures
delivery of all aspects of the allocated uses including not less than 60 units of specialist elderly
persons accommodation;Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 186
12Holt10. Submission of adequate information in order to undertake a project Level Habitat Regulation
Assessment, HRA, addressing issues relating to hydrological issues, site design, layout,
drainage, supporting habitats and habitat survey, localised recreational impacts and provision
of suitable long term drainage maintenance strategy designed to mitigate impacts on European
sites, and
11. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority.187 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Holt1212.3 Employment: Land at Heath Farm (H27/1)
The following site is allocated for employment development:
12
Car Park
RiverGlavenPondTrack
15112
(dis)HEATH DRIVEMAGPIE CLOSE2227
5b
Depot
H
13
Mackey's HillMast
62.8m
2
1
El Sub Sta4c
1
18
4aA5a
Nelson Court
El Sub Sta
Workings
Track
1
D
A
Business CentreHempstead RoadF(Telecommunication)
63.7m12132
3
Mackey's HillGLAVEN ROAD
Track
725
535
The Firs
5
Sandy HillHEMPSTEAD ROADPARTRIDGEWAY
H27/1H20
© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land at Heath Farm (H27/1)
Description
12.3.1 This is a large greenfield site to the east of Holt located in the southern portion of a large arable
field that stretches from Hempstead Road to the edge of the Heath Farm buildings. The field
gently rises from south to north and has a tree belt which screens the field from the Hempstead
Road.
12.3.2 The site falls within the Wooded Glacial Ridge landscape character type in the LCA, which
suggests that any new development should be successfully integrated within the existing
settlements where it reinforces traditional character and vernacular. The site is not within the
AONB or a Conservation Area. The site is reasonably contained in the landscape, however,
inappropriately designed employment development could be prominent in the landscape
particularly when viewed from the public footpath to the west of the site and from the new
residential development. The development layout and landscaping should consider the impact
on the neighbouring residential development and the wider landscape.The site is also adjacent to
the Grade II Listed Buildings at Heath Farm. Consequently , the layout and landscaping of the
development should mitigate against the impact on the listed buildings.The site is also adjacent
to a County Wildlife Site at Sandy Hill Plantation.
12.3.3 Employment development on the land would, effectively, be an extension of the existing industrial
estate and is adjacent to the employment land that is part of the previous mixed use allocation
at Heath Farm.
12.3.4 Vehicular access should be provided into the site off Nightjar Road from the roundabout on theProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 188
12HoltA148. The public footpath (FP9a) to the west of the site provides a connection to Holt Country
Park to the south and to Grove Lane to the north (across the A148). The development should
provide enhancements to the public footpath - including the provision of a safe and priority
crossing point of the employment land access road for pedestrians and cyclists.
Constraints
12.3.5 Development proposals will have to take into account:
No vehicular access into the employment land from Hempstead Road.
Vehicular access to the site should be achieved off the existing roundabout on the A148.
The need to mitigate the landscape impact of employment development.
The proximity of Listed Buildings to the north east of the site.
Deliverability
12.3.6 The site is considered suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There
are limited constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy H27/1
Land at Heath Farm (Employment)
Land amounting to 6 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for employment
development.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan and the
following site specific requirements:
1. The layout and landscaping of the development will have to be sensitively designed in order
to preserve the significance of the listed buildings and their setting and, where opportunities
arise, enhance the setting of the Conservation Area;
2. Access being delivered off Nightjar Road and new A148 roundabout and no access from
Hempstead Road;
3. Submission of a Transport Assessment identifying traffic mitigation measures to include
enhanced pedestrian access improvements across and along the A148;
4. Contributions towards a new pedestrian/cycle crossing of the A148 and provisions of
enhancements to the public footpath - FP9a;
5. A marketing strategy to demonstrate how the site will be brought to the commercial market;
6. Submission and approval of effective Surface Water Management Plan ensuring that there
are no adverse effects on European sites and greenfield run off rates are not increased;
7. Provision of suitable long term drainage maintenance strategy which demonstrates that there
will be no adverse impacts on the Norfolk Valley Fens SAC;
8. Submission of adequate information in order to undertake a project Level Habitat Regulation
Assessment, HRA, addressing issues relating to hydrological issues, site design, layout,
drainage, supporting habitats and habitat survey, localised recreational impacts and provision
of suitable long term drainage maintenance strategy designed to mitigate impacts on European
sites, and
9. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future189 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Holt12development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning AuthorityProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 190
12Holt13 Hoveton
Hoveton is identified as a Small Growth Town in the settlement hierarchy, notwithstanding it is
a village.This means it has been identified, together with four towns: Holt, Sheringham, Stalham
and Wells-next-the-Sea, where a more limited amount of additional development could be
considered.
13.0.1 Hoveton and Wroxham are two large villages on either side of the River Bure; together they
form one of the most important boating and tourism centres of the Broads area. The area west
and south west of Station Road and Church Road is in the Broads Authority area and Wroxham
is within Broadland District. The significance of the boating industry to the local economy can
be gauged from the large number of boat hiring and building yards, particularly downstream of
Wroxham Bridge. The middle Bure, downstream of Wroxham Bridge, is administered by the
Broads Authority and is amongst the most heavily used stretches of the Broads waterway
system.
13.0.2 The land allocation for Hoveton seeks to deliver approximately 120 dwellings, including affordable
housing, accommodation for the elderly and other necessary infrastructure.
13.0.3 The commercial and shopping centre of the two conjoined villages is concentrated in Hoveton
where a small part of the town centre falls into the administrative area of the Broads Authority.
North Norfolk and the Broads Authority have defined a single town centre area and for retailing
proposals the town centre is to be taken as a whole  so that retail matters address the town
centre in its entirety. Hoveton has a relatively low provision of non-retail services, but a high
proportion of restaurants and cafes reflecting the settlements role as a tourist destination. Given
its role as a tourist centre and proximity to Norwich the town centre retains a low proportion of
convenience goods expenditure and is classed as a Medium Town Centre in the retail hierarchy.
13.0.4 In terms of scale of retail development, Hoveton would be vulnerable to impacts from large
scale growth (2,500sqm gross) and a locally derived impact threshold of 500sqm is set for retail
and leisure development (see Policy ECN 4 'Retail & Town Centres'), reflecting the smaller
scale of the town centre, the nature of existing retail premises other than Roys and the existing
floor space projections.
13.0.5 Whilst there are diverse employment opportunities in Hoveton, retailing and the boat building /
hiring industries are significant sectors.The two employment areas within Hoveton are Tunstead
Road and Stalham Road Industrial Estate. These sites provide the opportunity for small scale
development and redevelopment over the plan period.
13.0.6 There is very little previously developed land in and around Hoveton which inevitably means
that new locations for development are on the edge of the village in countryside locations.Whilst
over the plan period it is expected that a process of re-development, infill developments, and
change of use will continue to provide a supply of new homes and other uses, these opportunities
are relatively modest and will not address the identified need for new homes in particular.There
are a range of factors which influence the potential location of development in Hoveton including:
fluvial flood risk from the River Bure to the south, environmental and landscape considerations,
such as the presence of the Norfolk Broads that includes several environmental designations,
and the need to take into account the infrastructure requirements in the village. The suggested
scale and location of development in Hoveton has been informed by its location on The Broads
and balanced consideration of the impact of any development on the setting of Hoveton and
on the wider Broads landscape.
13.0.7 In summary, the main considerations which influence the suggested location of development
sites are:191 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Hoveton 13The need to minimise the impact of development proposals on the Norfolk Broads, The
River Bure and the landscape more generally.
Direct rail access into Norwich, North Walsham, Cromer & Sheringham.
Proximity to Wroxham and joint use of services.
Retaining existing green spaces within the boundary where they are either functionally or
visually important.
Locating developments where they are, or can be connected, to key services and the town
centre preferably by walking, cycling or public transport or via better quality roads; avoiding
locations which are detached from Hoveton and not well related to existing built up areas.
Minimising impacts on traffic circulation.
Infrastructure
13.0.8 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
Hoveton suffers from congestion in the village centre along the A1151 and across the river
bridge through Wroxham, particularly in holiday periods.
The education authority has confirmed that the primary and secondary schools have
capacity and scope for future expansion.
The GP practice may not have capacity for the additional demand resulting from the
cumulative development in the area. Any proposed development will likely have an impact
on the NHS funding programme for the delivery of primary healthcare provision within this
area. NHS England would therefore expect these impacts to be fully assessed and
mitigated.
The area immediately adjacent to the River Bure is identified in the Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment as being at risk associated with combination of fluvial and tidal influences
along the river Bure to the south of the settlement. Much of this area is zone 3.Tidal locking
has potential to increase levels in the River Bure at Hoveton. Predominantly isolated
surface water ponding on roads, gardens and open space is possible in Hoveton. Anglian
Water identified that there is need for a water catchment strategy in areas where
development is proposed. Development site-specific foul water drainage strategies must
complement or align with the overall catchment strategy. An acceptable foul water strategy
will be required for all substantive new development. An acceptable foul water drainage
strategy will involve appropriate / suitable mitigation measures to account for the new
development flows discharging foul water while the existing foul water sewerage network
is surcharged due to rainfall.
13.0.9 As development takes place it will need to be served by appropriate supporting physical
infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified shortages
in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 192
13HovetonAllocations in Hoveton
HV01/B© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation Broads Authority Area Settlement Boundary
Map 4 Allocations in Hoveton193 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Hoveton 1313.1 Residential: Land East of Tunstead Road (HV01/B)
The following site is allocated for approximately 120 dwellings, elderly persons accommodation,
open space and associated on-site and off-site infrastructure:
3
Nevin
1
7
52
57
3670a59
STALHAM ROADThe Pines
DodmansTraversHalfacre
13
84
Treedona
Highfield
31
23
125HovetonDILHAM DRIVETrack
El Sub StaOldHolmwood
South Acre
Fir TreesHigh Gables
The Acorns
114DRIVEALDERFEN WAY
TUNSTEAD LANEBARTON DRIVE
White House
333 Whitland1
2866
7
6
2
1
Ivydene
DRIVE
DRIVEDECOY DRIVE
Broadland High
PottingOldfield4355
The Spinney63919
428
4
74
Belmont House
223734ESS
SUMMER DRIVEDRIVEBELAUGHREEDHAM DRIVE
TWO SAINTS CLOSE
TrackPosts
Hoveton and Wroxham7
6113
4Longmynd1
3
2
BURNT FEN WAYRANWORTH DRIVE
The LilacsLeitholmGlenfield
OakleyWestburyHawthorns
20
Medical Centre11
5
2Uplands1
6
5772M
ALTHOUSECOCKSHOOT
HouseHeadmastersOrmiston Acadamy
ShedESSIonaHals Garth1226
1
64148
30
72
1
153
CROME
ThePlay AreaHV01/B© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land East of Tunstead Road (HV01/B)
Description
13.1.1 The site is situated on greenfield land, on the northern edge of Hoveton to the east of Tunstead
Road. The site is level, predominately in arable agricultural use and lacks any specific
topographical or landscape features, apart from the mature hedgerows that border  it. The
setting of this site has changed considerably in recent years with the development of the previous
HV03 allocation at Stalham Road developed by Persimmon Homes as 'Brook Park'. It is well
related to existing residential area including the recent development.
13.1.2 The site is located within walking distance of the key services including the rail station and the
High School which is around 1.2 km from the primary school. There is a surfaced cycle and
pedestrian path which links Tunstead Road and Stalham Road with bus services available on
both.
13.1.3 The hedgerow along the Tunstead Road frontage should be retained and a landscaping buffer
should be provided to soften the impact of development to the agricultural land to the north of
the site.
Constraints
13.1.4 Development proposals will have to take into account:Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 194
13HovetonA water catchment strategy is required including a foul water drainage strategy which must
complement or align with the overall catchment strategy. An acceptable foul water drainage
strategy will involve appropriate / suitable mitigation measures to account for the new
development flows discharging foul water while the existing foul water sewerage network
is surcharged due to rainfall.
Access to be provided off Tunstead Road with a through connection to Stalham Road.
A public footpath and cycle path crosses the site.
A water main crosses the site.
Deliverability
13.1.5 The site is considered suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There
are limited constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy HV01/B
Land East of Tunstead Road
Land amounting to 6.4 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for development of
approximately 120 dwellings, elderly persons accommodation, open space and associated on-site
and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies within this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
1. Delivery of a carefully designed residential development that will integrate into the surrounding
character;
2. Provision of highway access on Tunstead Road to provide a through connection for all vehicles
to the new Stalham Road roundabout;
3. Provision of pedestrian and cycle connections through the development which encourage 
walking and cycling into Hoveton and neighbouring areas, including green access corridors
to the open space and to the existing cycle path which runs through the south west of the
site;
4. Provision of a landscaping buffer  to the north of the site to soften the boundary between the
development and the agricultural land to the north;
5. Delivery of not less than 1.07 hectares of multi-functional open space together with measures
for its on- going maintenance;
6. Retention of existing trees and hedgerows around the site;
7. Provision of developer contributions to the measures identified in the Wroxham and Hoveton
Network Improvement Strategy Action Plan to help address existing transport constraints and
improvements to facilitate the growth needed;
8. Provision of a site-specific Water Catchment  and Foul Water Drainage Strategy prior to the
commencement of development and be aligned with a wider catchment strategy produced
by Anglian Water and ensure there is no adverse impact on the integrity of the Broads
SAC/SPA;
9. Enhancement to sewerage infrastructure should be undertaken prior to the first occupation
of any dwelling to prevent detriment to the environment and comply with Water Framework
Directive obligations;
10. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS); and,
11. Delivery of comprehensive development in accordance with agreed phasing which ensures
delivery of all aspects of the allocated uses including not less than 60 units of elderly persons
accommodation.195 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Hoveton 13The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 196
13Hoveton14 North Walsham
North Walsham is identified as a Large Growth Town in the Settlement Hierarchy and the strategy
proposes that the town can accommodate a high level of growth in the Plan period together with
the supporting infrastructure.
14.0.1 North Walsham is the largest town in the District with a recorded population of 12,634 at the
2011 census. The town offers a broad range of services and local employment. It has strong
links with Norwich, with the close proximity of the city encouraging relatively high levels of out
commuting for jobs and services. Two sites for mixed use allocation have been identified for
North Walsham which would be suitable for approximately 2,150 new dwellings and other uses
across the two sites. When added to potential small scale developments within the town this
Plan proposes that some 23% of all housing growth in the District is located in North Walsham
which by around 2040 would see the population of the town increase by approximately 5,000.
14.0.2 The town’ s industrial businesses are focused on manufacturing of machinery and equipment,
plastics products and metal fabrication. North Walsham has recorded a consistent level of
employment premises take-up and, along with Fakenham, is a primary industrial centre in North
Norfolk. North Walsham’ s industrial estates are reaching capacity and further employment land
is required to be available to the market in the short term to ensure continuity of the town’ s
growth.  Employment land is to be delivered on the two mixed use allocations and a new
employment allocation allows for a sustainable extension to the existing industrial estate.
14.0.3 North Walsham does not have the significant  landscape constraints that are present elsewhere
in the District. It is not in the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, close to the Broads, or in
proximity to any internationally designated wildlife sites.
14.0.4 Some reuse of previously developed land particularly to the north of Cromer Road and elsewhere
within the built up area of the town provides opportunities for development but significant new
greenfield allocations are  necessary in order to deliver the required scale of growth.
14.0.5 Although North Walsham is the largest town in the District and it serves the needs of a large
rural area it's town centre ranks only third in the District in terms of floorspace. There have
been recent closures of some retail and bank businesses although overall vacancy rates remain
relatively low in relation to national trends they are consistently the highest in the District at
between 10-17%. Expenditure rates, a measure of the proportion of available retail expenditure
which is spent locally, are relatively high for convenience shopping at 78% ,but are significantly
lower for comparison goods (28%) and food and beverage(14%). This reflects the limited range
of comparison goods shops locally and the strong draw of Norwich.
14.0.6 The evidence suggests that the scale of growth proposed in the town is likely to increase the
amount of retail expenditure available and notwithstanding recent shifts away from town centre
shopping would support the provision of new retail floorspace across all sectors.The continued
health and vitality of the town centre would be vulnerable to the impacts of any significant out
of centre retailing and this Plan requires that proposals for more than 500sqm consider town
centre sites first (Policy E4)  
14.0.7 North Walsham has a comparatively broad range of services and employment opportunities
and has good transport connections including road connections across the District. The town
has a main line rail station which provides direct rail access into Norwich, Hoveton & Wroxham,
Cromer and Sheringham.
14.0.8 The main considerations which influence the suggested location of development sites are:
the opportunity to deliver new infrastructure, in particular, a new link road around the west
of the town;197 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
North Walsham 14locating developments where they are, or can be connected, to key services and the town
centre preferably by walking, cycling or public transport or via better quality roads;
avoiding locations which are detached from the town and not well related to existing built
up areas;
avoiding increases in traffic passing thorough the town centre;
respecting the quality of the surrounding landscape, particularly to the north and east of
the town.
Infrastructure
14.0.9 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
14.0.10 The scale of growth identified in North Walsham will require significant investment in supporting
infrastructure and this will need to be provided as development proceeds.
The Education Authority has indicated that the high level of growth proposed in the town
will necessitate the provision of a new primary school.
The railway bridges on the western approaches to the town along the Cromer Road,
Aylsham Road & Norwich Road provide a challenge for large or heavy goods vehicles
travelling through the town and force the traffic through residential areas and along
unsuitable residential streets. A western ‘link road’  between the B1150 (Norwich Road),
the B1145 (Aylsham Road) and A149 (Cromer Road) would alleviate some of these issues.
Off site highway improvements to aid traffic circulation around the town and on the strategic
network, including at Coltishall will be required.
North Walsham is not identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment as being at risk
of fluvial flooding but there are a number of un-named drains with potential to present a
flood risk. There are longstanding surface water drainage capacity issues to the south
west of the town.
Anglian Water identify that off-site water mains reinforcement is required in certain parts
of the town and that enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity will be required.
The scale of growth envisaged in the town will require improvements in health service
provision.
14.0.11 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting
physical infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified
shortages in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.
Site Allocations 
14.0.12 Two sites for mixed use are allocated for approximately 2,150 new dwellings. Land at Cornish
way is allocated as an extension to the town's industrial estate.
14.0.13 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 198
14North WalshamAllocations in North Walsham
NW52
NW01/BNW62/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 5 Allocations in North Walsham199 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
North Walsham 1414.1 Mixed-Use: Land at Norwich Road & Nursery Drive (NW01/B)
The following site is allocated for a mixed-use development including approximately 350
dwellings, elderly persons accommodation the retention 2 hectares of existing employment land
and provision of 3.5 hectares of public open space and supporting infrastructure:
Pre School
211a227 16
556
8
14
10
261
5876
1827The
3639
37
25
40
27830
9420
1111
1212145
1220
Towers6
154
7a
Grange
25
116
20
16
1
HouseSmedley
237
El Sub StaSubSta
Scarborough HillB 1150RECREATION
SOUTH RISE
REDMAN ROAD
WRIGHTS
NURSERY DRIVEBIRDS ROADGRANGECOURT
Track
39.0m41.6m24ESS
Ppg StaE
8ESS11
841
Ollands71
125
31433471
2
1845
Scarborough53
50a
70
34
348
1Cornish4-6201
11 to 722
3
651
391
92(Nursing Home)Halvergate House
House
10
4349a1
2015
17HouseKevlin
3513
77Signal Post
MP 15.75WILKINSONWAYDRIVEHORNBEAM
ROADCLOSENORWICH ROADSKETTONVIEW
YOUNGMANS CLOSEWELLSBURTON CLOSE
42.0m
Pond
11Mill FieldHouse
16
39
45a117723142120
29
5Green
4853
6432
11
Deeping8
2055130b13Yard
146HouseTree311-22a
81
1
10233
21341
312
1
6817
25Club26
Broadlands116b1
17
37
18
2
9Works13
24
Nursery
StumpPond
ED & Ward BdySP
EWINGROAD
COUSENS CLOSEROAD
KIDASWAY
216Car 1323St Nicholas
214
445141
613111220
2121529
11528
42
9730
234
1
13056
1
276523
220
GarageStation
101to610
Jay2837
1
45Rose Lodge11
130a27Play Area
DUNCAN W
AYSPURDENSCRESCENTROAD
ROPER WAYTHIRLBY ROADWINDMILL
BAILEY ROADMILL ROAD
Lay-byTrackLB
44.0m41.4m41.1m36
22StaPark
C3
16
35
1
11
442544
15
41539913132136Wks
16
41
354019
Hill Farm7
1
355
22
22
1And District243-5
9131
21
Cherry30108
5
452a
ESS
KimberlyGrange Mews
5223345235101
12
Jecarn
2
2
50School1547El
ED
Bdy
ANGEL DRIVE
ELLINOR ROAD
CURRIE CLOSEBARROWSMEDLEY
A 149THECLOSE
KETTSROAD
SENDALL ROAD
Track
Tank
42.3m
41.4m25ParkA
2
12Amb Sta15
2113Builders35
66
12
292
6
Millfield Primary School6249
Mushroom Farm975265a
1
26
5
1
20House8131
5829
73
601315
4
25GIGLI CLOSE57Home for the
3115House39233256
32
1
37
13
75El Sub StaESS
CrossBalancing
Ward Bdy
MP 15.25LEGRICE CRESCENTB1150
DRIVE
SAMPSONRAYNA LOKE
FIELDLANEROAD
LONG
BAYES COURTBURTONAVENUE
LB
42.9m
39.2m41.0m42.5m
23ShelterOutfallBalancing
11
812
5185
1
463
6826
9549
2
8
82
2150
10
9
Southcroft
Lodge1
174442
1Field View56452218
39
1 to 7
105
ElderlyWar Merorial HospitalNorth Walsham
1310128a22266
16116a23
1The
49b52a
1
28
236
152317
53047
136214134El Sub Sta
MP 15.5LOKERECREATION
BROOKES BARTONCLOSE
NORWICHROADCLOSE
YARM
OUTH ROAD
YARMOUTH ROADFOUNDRY COURTDRIVELITESTERCLOSE
LB
LB
40.7m
30Business
F
D
6
15
4154
2031
19
14
325214226
1113810331112
22
2
Cangate12
3a
1
212 63050
3618
7125 30
The Paddock
3
2
14 29
Water
22128b3
Pumping
12
37
1
El Sub Sta4
13
64
2227
132ElSubSta
ESS
PondSB
BAKERCLOSEAVENUEWESTWICK
FENN CLOSEW
AYSPENSER
AVENUE
KEMP ROADDURRELL
PLUMBLY CLOSE42.9m414El
SubHornbeam
B
NW01/BNW62/A
© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land at Norwich Road & Nursery Drive (NW01/B)
Description
14.1.1 This is a mixed-use site on the Norwich Road to the south of North Walsham. The land is in
several ownerships and comprises green field parcels, existing businesses and land associated
with the garden centre.
14.1.2 This site is generally contained within the urban form of North Walsham with the southernmost
portion being an arable field that extends beyond the built up area.The northern half of the site
is already allocated for development in the adopted Development Plan.
14.1.3 The site is well related to the town centre and other facilities and is considered suitable for a
mixed-use allocation comprising residential, employment and public open space.
14.1.4 Development will deliver a section of road that will link the two previously developed parcels
(Persimmon Homes and Hopkins Homes) as well as the estate roads that will service all parts
of the site.
Constraints
14.1.5 Development proposals will have to take into account:
The need to provide a connecting road to enable the full capacity of the site to be realised.
 Retention of existing employment uses.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 200
14North WalshamThe location of the public open space and landscape impact considerations.
Off-site mains water reinforcement is required and enhancement to the foul sewerage
network capacity will be required.
A proportion of the land is a brownfield site and therefore an assessment will be required
identifying previous site uses and potential contaminants.
The site is subject to an Area based Tree Preservation Order.
Deliverability
14.1.6 The site is suitable and available for development.
14.1.7 There is a requirement to retain the uses associated with the existing businesses which provide
local employment and services. Evidence will be required to demonstrate that the existing
employment uses have been accommodated or have found suitable alternative premises before
any residential development can take place.
14.1.8 There are some physical constraints on the site, however, development should be achievable
within the plan period.
Policy NW01/B
Land at Norwich Road & Nursery Drive
Land amounting to 18.6 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for a mixed-use
development including approximately 350 dwellings, elderly persons accommodation, the retention
2 hectares of existing employment land and provision of 3.5 hectares of public open space and
supporting infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance  with relevant Policies of this Plan and
the following site specific requirements:
1. Delivery of an estate road providing a through highway connection with adjoining residential
developments to the north-east and south-west prior to occupation of no more than 150
dwellings;
2. Delivery of not less than 3.5 hectares of public open space;
3. The retention of the existing businesses on employment land of no less than 2 hectares;
4. Provision of a landscape buffer of no less than 6 metres between the development site and
the existing properties at Norwich Road and Nursery Drive;
5. Provision of pedestrian and cycle links to the railway station, town centre and local schools;
6. Submission and approval of effective surface water management ensuring that there is no
increase of surface water run-off off site;
7. That enhancement to sewerage infrastructure is undertaken ahead of occupation of dwellings
to prevent detriment to the environment and comply with Water Framework Directive
obligations;
8. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS); and,
9. Delivery of comprehensive development in accordance with agreed phasing which ensures
delivery of all aspects of the allocated uses including not less than 100 units of specialist
elderly persons accommodation.201 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
North Walsham 1414.2 Employment: Land East of Bradfield Road (NW52)
14.2.1 The following site is allocated for employment development:
BRADFIELD ROAD19Scrap YardThe BungalowKiln Farm
22.5m
33.4mGP
Grammar School Farm
DrainPath (um)
28.8mBrick Kilns
WaysideYardScrapBrick
LYNGATE ROAD
Brick Kiln BarnGP
26.9m
CopperfieldLYNGATE
Weighbridges32.9mNW52© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land East of Bradfield Road (NW52)
Description
14.2.2 This is a large greenfield site adjacent to the Cornish Way employment area to the north-west
of town. This site is allocated to allow for the extension of the employment area in order to
provide a continued supply of greenfield employment land in North Walsham over the plan
period.
14.2.3 In the 2018 revised Landscape Character Assessment the site is within the landscape type
characterised as ‘Low Plains Farmland’. The Low Plains Farmland type is characterised by a
flat or gently undulating open landscape with long, uninterrupted views, predominantly arable
land use and dispersed rural settlements, including the expanding market town of North
Walsham.
Constraints
14.2.4 Development proposals will have to take into account:
The existing designated employment land is currently accessed off the B1145 and HGV's
coming from the south, including Norwich, have to pass through residential area with
narrow streets in order to avoid low railway bridges.There are aspirations for a new highway
connection, for HGV’ s, from Cromer Road, over the railway, into the industrial estate at
Cornish Way in order to avoid the low bridges. Any development proposals should make
provision for such a scheme into the site layout and development proposals.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 202
14North WalshamEmployment development on this scale may have a detrimental impact on the landscape.
Therefore, screening and high quality landscaping is required.
Part of the site is designated (WAS 94) in the Norfolk Minerals and Waste Development
Framework as a site for waste management activities.
Deliverability
14.2.5 The site is in single ownership, is being promoted and is available for development and subject
to compliance with the policies of this plan is suitable for the proposed use.
Policy NW52
Land East of Bradfield Road
Land amounting to approximately 2.4 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
employment development, subject to:
1. Provision of acceptable highway access, including provision for a connection to a future access
road from Bradfield Road to Cornish Way including the safeguarding of land along Bradfield
Road for highway improvements;
2. New access road will be constructed to adoptable standard and existing Cornish Way brought
up to an adoptable standard;
3. Provision of comprehensive screen landscaping around the site;
4. Effective surface water management plan ensuring that there are no adverse effects and
greenfield run off rates are not increased; and,
5. Details of a foul drainage strategy setting how additional foul flows will be accommodated
within the foul sewerage network.203 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
North Walsham 1414.3 Mixed-Use: Land West of North Walsham (NW62/A)
The following site is allocated for approximately 1,800 dwellings, 7 hectares of employment land,
green infrastructure, community facilities and a road linking Norwich Road, Cromer Road and
the industrial estate:
NW52
NW01/BNW62/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Land West of North Walsham (NW62/A)
Description
14.3.1 North Walsham West covers a significant area of land that stretches from the railway line to
the north west of the town, across arable land - around the west of the town, to Norwich Road
to the south.The suggested development area covers a total of 108 hectares and would envelop
Link Road, Greens Road, Aylsham Road, Tungate Road and Skeyton Road.
14.3.2 In the 2018 Landscape Character Assessment the whole of the site is within the landscape
type characterised as ‘Low Plains Farmland’. The Low Plains Farmland Type is flat or gently
undulating open landscape with long, uninterrupted views, predominantly arable land use
and dispersed rural settlements.. It is not identified as a landscape type which is more sensitive
to the impacts of development and is not subject to any local or national landscape designations.
14.3.3 It is proposed that North Walsham West would deliver the following:
approximately 1,800 dwellings;
a western link road - linking Cromer Road  to Norwich Road and via Links Road to North
Walsham Industrial Estate;
7 hectares of serviced employment land;
a new primary school;Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 204
14North Walshamsignificant areas of landscaping and public open space;
other required infrastructure, improvements and mitigation including, but not limited to,
health services, drainage and power.
Constraints
14.3.4 Development proposals will need to take into account:
A Transport Assessment will be required that will explore the benefits of the western link
road and the impacts (with mitigation required) on the surrounding network including the
route to Norwich via Coltishall. The Transport Assessment should include an assessment
of walking and cycling routes and a comprehensive strategy to promote walking and cycling
and other modes of sustainable transport.
The site has a number of public rights of way running through it, including the Weaver's
Way. These will need to be retained and enhanced as part of any proposal.
There is limited surface water drainage capacity to the west of North Walsham. A
comprehensive SUDs scheme will be required.
Development of the scale proposed will require comprehensive infrastructure enhancements
including, but not limit to, education, health and community facilities.
Proposals will need to provide for the retention and potential expansion of North Walsham
Football Club.
Deliverability
14.3.5 The delivery of the site will be complex and may take a number of years to come to fruition.
The majority of the site is currently being promoted for development by a single consortium
comprising three separate land owners.
14.3.6 In 2021 the Planning Authority began work on the preparation of a Development Brief for the
site and consulted the local community and other stakeholders on an overarching Vision for
the development and a set of high level principles.The feedback has informed the policy below
and will provide the basis for the preparation of a detailed Development Brief for the site which
will be subject to further public consultation.The site (in part or whole) cannot be brought forward
without the prior adoption of a comprehensive Development Brief  and approval of a Design
Code  for the whole site.
Policy NW62/A
Land West of North Walsham
Land to the west of North Walsham to provide a mixed-use sustainable urban extension amounting
to 108 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for approximately 1,800 dwellings, 7
hectares of employment land, green infrastructure, community facilities and a road linking Norwich
Road, Cromer Road and the industrial estate.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies of this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
Development Brief & Design Code
1. Prior approval and adoption of a comprehensive Development Brief incorporating a site wide
Vision and Master Plan  demonstrating how the development will respond to the particular205 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
North Walsham 14characteristics of the site and detailing the delivery of all of the uses and infrastructure required
in this policy.
2. Prior approval of a site wide Design Code to compliment the Development Brief detailing the
design principles for all development and land uses.
Green infrastructure
3. Prior approval a Green Infrastructure Strategy detailing the delivery of the green infrastructure
including new areas of open spaces, play areas, sports pitches, strategic landscaping and
green corridors. The Green Infrastructure Strategy should complement principles in the Design
Code and Drainage Strategy.  Delivery of on-site green infrastructure should provide the
opportunity to contribute towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS);
4. Development proposals will provide the following specific green infrastructure:
i. at least 17.47 hectares of new public open space including a new ‘town park’  of at
least 2ha, new sports pitches of 2ha and a minimum of 2.4ha of allotments;
ii. a substantial area of strategic green infrastructure at a minimum of 10ha to the south
and western countryside edge of the development to create a new green edge of the
town;
iii. enhancement of the Weavers Way corridor acting as a green access spine through
the development including improving biodiversity along the corridor.  It will provide a
pedestrian & cycle crossing point across the link road that prioritises these uses over
vehicle traffic;
iv. a new green corridor which will traverse north to south through the development
providing an access and biodiversity corridor;
Environmental Mitigation
5. Prior approval of a Drainage Strategy detailing the delivery of sustainable drainage and flood
mitigation & storage measures that will be integral to the urban development and green
infrastructure, including using surface water runoff as a resource that to contributes to water
sensitive urban design (WSUD) and integrating the water cycle within the built and green
environment;
6. Proposals should protect and enhance heritage assets and their settings including designated
and non-designated heritage assets including the ‘Battlefield Site’. This should include a
design, layout and landscaping that protects and enhances the Listed Buildings at Bradmoor
Farm;
7. Landscape buffers and/or green corridors will be provided along the existing urban edge of
the town to protect the amenity of existing residential areas;
Sustainable Transport
8. Provision of a network of interconnected streets, squares, green corridors and public spaces
which prioritise moving around on foot and by cycle over the use of private motor vehicles;
9. Delivery of appropriate public transport measures on site providing facilities and regular
services to/from the town and key services;
10. Provision of off-site pedestrian and cycle route improvements to the town centre, key services
and railway station;
11. Delivery of a new road designed as an attractive main residential street through the
development with mixed-use frontage usages and segregated cycle paths and footways. This
new road should be suitable for HGV traffic (including high sided vehicles) and will connectProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 206
14North WalshamNorwich Road to Cromer Road and provide a suitable route over the railway for access to the
Lyngate/Folgate Rd industrial estate together with appropriate junctions.  It should  be delivered,
in full, at the earliest opportunity;
12. Off-site improvements to the highways and transport network including key junctions that
require intervention and mitigation;
13. Delivery of appropriate restrictions on the amount of private traffic (including HGV vehicles)
that can travel along the Aylsham Road and Skeyton Road;
Community Facilities & Employment
14. Provision of community facilities including a new 2 form entry primary school focused in a
broadly central location within the development, a local centre providing options for local
convenience retail and health services and other community uses;
15. Options for the enhancement of facilities at North Walsham Football Club should be considered
in line with local and national standards and guidance from Sport England and other sports
bodies;
16. Delivery of approximately 7 hectares of employment land located to the north of the allocation
site in the Cromer Road/Bradfield Road area, reflecting the prevailing character of the town
and recent development provided with direct access from the new link road and major road
network.
New Homes  
17. Delivery of approximately 1,800 homes built with a mix of dwelling types, sizes and tenures
in accordance with Policy HOU2 of this Plan. A range of densities and layouts will provide
variety within the scheme in line with the approved Design Code.207 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
North Walsham 14Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 208
14North Walsham15 Sheringham
Sheringham is identified as a Small Growth Town in the proposed Settlement Hierarchy.This
means it has been identified as one of four towns, together with Holt, Stalham and
Wells-next-the-Sea and the village of Hoveton, where a limited amount of additional development
is proposed.
15.0.1 Sheringham is a coastal market town with an attractive built and natural environment. Coupled
with the facilities the town possesses and the range of accommodation available, this makes
it a desirable place to live. The area is an increasingly popular location for people seeking to
retire to the area and for second-home ownership. It has a population of 7,359, with 36.6%
aged 65 and over. It is accessible by a variety of means of transport with rail links to Norwich
and beyond via the Bittern Line, is served by convenient peak-time bus services, and is well
located for the main road network.
15.0.2 Sheringham attracts visitors throughout the year on day-trips, short breaks and longer stays
and has a range of accommodation, from high quality hotels to budget self-catering. Tourism
is a major source of income and employment for the town.
15.0.3 There is very little previously developed (brownfield) land in Sheringham. Whilst over the plan
period it is expected that a process of re-development, infill developments, and changes of use
will continue to provide a supply of new homes and other uses, these opportunities are relatively
modest and will not address the identified need for new homes in particular. New greenfield
allocations are therefore necessary in order to deliver the required growth.
15.0.4 Sheringham is set amongst some of the most attractive landscape in North Norfolk and is a
naturally-contained town situated between the wooded glacial ridge and the North Sea, and is
surrounded by woodland, parkland, heaths and commons, which together provide a rich habitat
for wildlife. Most of the surrounding landscape falls within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty (AONB) and those areas which are not formally designated are nevertheless
attractive and important to the setting of the town.Within the AONB the National Planning Policy
Framework states that great weight should be given to conserving and enhancing scenic beauty
and that major developments should be avoided other than in exceptional circumstances, and
where it can be demonstrated that development is in the wider public interest.
15.0.5 Sheringham is naturally constrained to the north by the North Sea to the north of the town.The
Greater Wash Special Area of Protection (SPA), which incorporates the beaches and the North
Sea beyond. The beach to the east is also designated as a Site of Specific Scientific Interest
(SSSI), whilst the Beeston Cliffs and Weybourne Cliffs are also designated SSSIs.To the south
east of Sheringham, separating the town from Beeston Regis, are the Norfolk Valley Fens,
designated as a Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and also designated as a SSSI.
15.0.6 The Grade II* listed Sheringham Park and Garden is located to the west of the town, Upper
Sheringham Conservation Area to south and west, and  Sheringham Conservation Area to
north of the A149 
15.0.7  Further growth of the town into its sensitive landscape setting which is designated as nationally
important landscape (AONB) should be avoided if possible. Hence, the town's potential to
accommodate large-scale housing development is regarded as limited.
15.0.8 Sheringham town centre offers a choice of shops and services that serve both residents and
tourists and is classed as a Medium Town Centre in the Retail Hierarchy. There is an identified
need for small scale growth across comparison, convenience and food/beverage floorspace.
Shop vacancy rates remain low and there is limited potential to accommodate growth within
these. Large scale development sites are limited within the Primary Shopping Area, where209 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Sheringham 15development is likely to be small scale infill/extensions. Further potential edge of centre sites
would include surface car parks, but alternative provision would have to be sought if these were
to be developed and if the sequential and impact tests were met. Alternatively, future growth
requirements could be provided in Cromer, especially given the identified catchment links.
15.0.9 The town acts as an important local centre for retail, leisure and other services. It functions as
one of a cluster of three towns, together with Cromer and Holt which are identified in this Plan
as performing complementary functions in respect of housing, employment and retail.
15.0.10 The town has a limited supply of employment land. There is little demand for new industrial
development within the town. Approximately 57.2% of the working population find employment
in the town but this is often in low paid sectors. The town is therefore a significant net exporter
of employees, but many access jobs in nearby Holt and Cromer. Due to the environmental
constraints and lack of market demand in the town for new industrial land it is proposed that
additional employment land is located within Holt to help meet the needs of the Sheringham,
Holt and Cromer area.
15.0.11 The main considerations which influence the suggested location of development sites are the
need to:
Avoid significant extension of the town into it's sensitive landscape setting and in particular
the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.
Locating development where it is well related to, or can be connected to, key services and
the town centre preferably by walking, cycling, public transport or via better quality roads
minimizing traffic circulation.
Retain existing green spaces within the town boundary where they are either functionally
or visually important.
Infrastructure
15.0.12 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
Anglian Water identify that off-site mains water reinforcement will be required in certain
locations and that some enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity may be
required.
Sheringham is not identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment as being at risk from
fluvial or tidal flooding. However, there are several un-named drains in the vicinity of the
settlement that have the potential to present a flood risk, not all of which are shown to
have been modelled based on the Flood Zones. There are some risks of surface water
flooding across the Town.
15.0.13 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting physical
infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified shortages
in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.
Site Allocations
15.0.14 In order to help meet the identified housing need in Sheringham three residential sites  have
been allocated for development to deliver around 133 dwellings collectively over the plan
period. This would provide  approximately 47 affordable homes, on site public open spaces
and contributions towards road, drainage and other necessary infrastructure.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 210
15Sheringham15.0.15 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow.211 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Sheringham 15Allocations in Sheringham
SH07
SH04
SH18/1B© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 6 Allocations in SheringhamProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 212
15Sheringham15.1 Residential: Land Adjoining Seaview Crescent (SH04)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 45 dwellings, public
open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
710
288
21302436
El32
36
613254
364871YOUNGER DRIVE
436155
64
1
19211619
2016
666
33Sheringham9
1813
3938
70El Sub Sta5243352231
3425
Hilbre Close
29
5215291
6
5GRICE CLOSE2
46
341726
911
60
35
1011
8
5
214Morley Hill1040
81370
11
1362
1585621111
1
37KNIGHT'S GREENSEAVIEW
 CRESCENTLUSHER
TCB102ATKINSON WAY
71
63Hall28262
25CentreCommunityHilbre27212
47
CRASKE CLOSECLOSEPEGG ROAD
15137Sub Sta4
7
14501516
912HOLWAY ROAD1
206 to 8W
ILSON MEW
S
32
1
27
44110
22Court
5Shelter
217
116231315
46 5437242
61239
2SH04© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land Adjoining Seaview Crescent (SH04)
Description 
15.1.1 The site is well-contained within the landscape, despite being within the Norfolk Coast Area of
Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), and development would be well integrated with reasonable
access to schools, town centre and other facilities. The site is, however, the only remaining
undeveloped part of the Holway Road frontage and its open character and views through to
Morley Hill make a positive contribution to the general character of this part of Sheringham.
The site's development must therefore protect a vista eastwards towards Morley Hill along with
a footpath / cyclepath to the Hill in order to improve access for recreational purposes and
cross-town links. This should be achieved through careful attention to site layout, design and
building heights, which would also help minimise the impact of the development on the residential
amenities of the existing surrounding dwellings. The provision of a suitable access across the
site from the Sheringham Community Centre to Morley Hill is also required in order for pedestrian
and maintenance purposes
15.1.2 The area is connected to Morley Hill which provides an area of green space amongst
development. A buffer should be maintained around the perimeter of the site to maintain
connectivity between the site, Morley Hill and surrounding gardens. Hedgerows should be
planted up and extended around the boundary and within the site, and tree planting included
across the site. Areas of scrub and grassland should also be retained where possible. An initial
wildlife survey has been carried out and a further study may be required to assess the presence
of particular species.213 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Sheringham 1515.1.3 It is within the defined setting of Sheringham Park and development should have particular
regard to the impact on the long views available from the Park.
Constraints
15.1.4 Development proposals will need to take into account:
Anglian Water advised that enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be
required before development can proceed. Any development on the site should comply
with the conclusions of a comprehensive foul and surface water drainage strategy.
Vehicular access should be provided directly onto the A1082 (Holway Road), with the
provision of an additional access via Seaview Crescent, a pedestrian crossing on Holway
Road including a refuge island.
On site delivery of not less than 0.12 hectares of public open space.
There might be areas of geological importance or interest on the site which require
geodiversity investigation.
Deliverability
15.1.5 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy SH04
Land Adjoining Seaview Crescent
Land amounting to 1.7 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 45 dwellings, public open space, and associated on and off-site
infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Delivery of high quality design that pays careful attention to site layout, design and landscaping
having regard to the sites location within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty;
2. Provision of a pedestrian and cycleway route across the site from Holway Road to Morley Hill;
3. Retention of vista across the site towards Morley Hill through careful attention to site layout
and building heights, and to minimise the impact on the residential amenities of the dwellings
to the north and south of the site;
4. Submission, approval and implementation of comprehensive Surface Water Management
Plan and Drainage Strategy ensuring no increase in flood risk to and from the site, and that
any SUD’ s features are to be constructed outside the flow path (west side of the site);
5. Provision of a landscaped buffer around the site boundaries including appropriate landscaping
along the western and eastern boundaries, enhancement and extension to existing hedgerows,
retention of scrub and grassland and new tree planting within the site and wildlife mitigation
and enhancement  measures;
6. Provision of suitable access for pedestrian and maintenance purposes across the site from
Sheringham Community Centre to Morley Hill;
7. Provision of a pedestrian crossing on Holway Road including a refuge island to provide access
to bus stops and schools;
8. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access directly onto the A1082 (Holway Road);
9. Provision of an additional access via Seaview Crescent;Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 214
15Sheringham10. On site delivery of not less than 0.12 hectares of public open space;
11. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).215 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Sheringham 1515.2 Residential: Former Allotments, Weybourne Road, Adjacent to The
Reef (SH07)
The following site is allocated for residential development  of approximately  40 dwellings, public
open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
11
286SubEl
(Leisure Or Sports Centre)912SplashSewage Ppg Sta33 37MP 42.25
Track18.6m
Sta
3022
117SLs
Track
Sports FacilityLighting Towers
32Track352Allotment GardensA 14922.6m
SkateparkSH07© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Former Allotments, Weybourne Road, Adjacent to The Reef (SH07)
Description 
15.2.1 The site comprises of grassland and scrub, formerly used as allotments, located on the western
edge of Sheringham, between the existing allotments and the leisure/sports centre. It is well
located for access to the town centre and within walking distance of the schools and to the train
station. There is a bus stop located close to the site with a good service available. Access to
the site would be provided from Weybourne Road.
15.2.2 The site lies adjacent to the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) and is
within the defined setting of Sheringham Park Registered Park and Garden. Development
should have particular regard to the impact on the long views available from the Park.The area
is located within the 'Coastal Shelf' as defined in the Landscape Character Assessment, and
the strategy seeks to ensure that any new development is well integrated into the landscape
and does not form a harsh edge. It is important that careful attention is given to the site layout,
building heights and materials in order to minimise the visual impact of development, by not
exceeding two storeys. A comprehensive landscaping scheme should be prepared and
landscaped buffer provided along the northern and western  boundaries, including the
conservation and enhancement of the landscape features on the site,y to minimise impact of
development on the surrounding countryside.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 216
15Sheringham15.2.3 Vehicular access should be provided from the A149 Weybourne Road, including a 30mph speed
limit to cover the whole frontage of the site, along with provision of cycleways and footpaths
along the Weybourne Road eastwards and to the residential areas to the south.
Constraints
15.2.4 Development proposals will need to take into account:
Anglian Water advised that off-site mains reinforcement are required and enhancements
to the foul sewerage network capacity may be required before development can proceed.
Part of the site along the northern boundary is at risk of Surface Water Flooding, the layout
of the site should ensure that this part of the site remains undeveloped or adequate flood
resilience measures are incorporated in the design. Further discussion with the Lead Local
Flood Authority is required.
The site layout needs to take into account the sewers and water mains crossing the site,
and that any diversions would be at the developers' expense. Development should be set
back from the north eastern boundary to avoid encroachment to the pumping station
adjacent to the site. Submission of details to demonstrate the safeguarding of suitable
access for the maintenance water supply infrastructure is also required.
Deliverability
15.2.5 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy SH07
Former Allotments, Weybourne Road, Adjacent to The Reef
Land amounting to 1.7 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development  of approximately  40 dwellings, public open space, and associated on and off-site
infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site-specific requirements:
1. Delivery of high quality design which pays careful attention to site layout, design, scale and
massing and materials with overall building heights not exceeding two storeys in order to
minimise the visual impact of the development on the Norfolk Coast AONB and any impact
on the defined setting of Sheringham Park Registered Park and Garden;
2. Provision of substantial high quality landscaped frontage along the Weybourne Road and
western boundary, including the conservation and enhancement of the landscape  features
on the site, retention of perimeter trees and hedgerows and the setting back of the development
from the Weybourne Road;
3. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access from the A149 Weybourne Road;
4. Provision of an extension to the 30mph speed limit to cover the whole site frontage;
5. Provision of a 3.0m wide cycleway/footway along the Weybourne Road site frontage, between
the site access, eastwards to the swimming pool, and to the residential area to the south;
6. On site delivery of not less than 0.11 hectares of public open space or the agreed payment
of an equivalent financial contribution for the extension or improvement of local open space
provision;
7. Submission of comprehensive surface water management plan and drainage strategy ensuring
no increase in flood risk to and from the site, Provision of a layout setting the development
back from the north eastern boundary to avoid encroachment to the pumping station;217 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Sheringham 158. Provision of a site layout designed to take into account the existing water main within the site;
9. Submission of details to demonstrate the safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance
of water supply infrastructure; and,
10. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 218
15Sheringham15.3 Residential: Land South of Butts Lane (SH18/1B)
The following site is allocated for residential development of a maximum of 48 dwellings, public
open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
78
21
2436
El13
115
131913Woodfields School
6 4
2594
19
4Play Area
DefHAZEL AVENUEWAY4328
18
GG1
19
201614
159
1813
329
TrackLB24103234114
15125967
9
6
5
ED BdyGRICE CLOSE
26
9
221
35
1011
82114EM
ERYPath
1
1153
1
1
11
4MARGARETKNIGHT'S GREEN
27
282
2511SheringhamESS1
27
5A
215212COOPER ROADENGLISH CLOSECRASKE CLOSE
CL
SCOTTERRISE
PEGG ROAD
HARDINGHAM
Path (um)
714
26Sub Sta
7
1681516210
11
12
ED BdyRUSHMER124
27110
22
512Shelter
217
1
2313152421
676
122
A 1082DRIVESH04
SH18/1B© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land South of Butts Lane (SH18/1B)
Description 
15.3.1 This is a greenfield site, currently in arable use, to the south of Sheringham.The site is adjacent
to existing housing to the north, and a new residential development to the east. Although slightly
distant from the town centre, it is close to local schools and informal recreational areas.
15.3.2 Although the site is located within the Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB), and within
the Upper Sheringham Conservation Area, the site is not intrusive in the wider landscape, it is
enclosed by mature woodland to the south and existing residential development to the north.
The western edge of the site is more prominent in the landscape and longer views of this part
of the site are available from Upper Sheringham and the Conservation Area. The provision of
a substantial landscaped buffer is therefore required along the western boundary to minimize
any landscape and heritage impacts . The site is located within the Coastal Shelf landscape
character area, where the strategy seeks to ensure that any new development is well integrated
into the landscape. It is important that the site is carefully designed incorporating open space
and landscaping to reflect its location within the Upper Sheringham Conservation Area and the
AONB.
15.3.3 The site is within the defined setting of Sheringham Park Registered Park and Garden, and
development should have particular regard to the impact on the long views available from the
Park.219 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Sheringham 1515.3.4 The hedgerow and woodland around the site provide biodiversity benefit and would be further
enhanced through additional planting. The woodland edge should be buffered from any
development.
Constraints
15.3.5 Development proposals will need to take into account:
Vehicular and pedestrian access can be provided through the adjacent development site
from Holway Road. However the Highway Authority have indicated that this is be limited
to a further 48 new dwellings off one point of access. Provision of on-site and off-site
improvements to cycle paths and footpaths and access to the PROW FP27 and connection
to Cooper Road are required in order to support connectivity of the site with the town.
Anglian Water advised that off-site water mains reinforcements are required and
enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be required before development
can proceed. A foul drainage strategy is required along with submission of details to
demonstrate the safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance of water supply
infrastructure.
The site layout needs to take into account the sewers and water mains crossing the site,
and that any diversions would be at the developers' expense.
Deliverability
15.3.6 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy SH18/1B
Land South of Butts Lane
Land amounting to 1.7 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of a maximum of 48 dwellings, public open space, and associated on and off-site
infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Delivery of high quality design which pays careful attention to site layout, design, building
heights, materials and landscaping having regard to the site's location within the Norfolk Coast
AONB, Upper Sheringham Conservation Area, Sheringham Park Registered Park and Garden
and their setting;
2. Provision of a scheme for the retention and enhancement of perimeter trees and hedgerows;
3. Provision of substantial  landscaped buffer along the western boundary and between the
development and woodland to the south to minimise any visual impact from the Upper
Sheringham Conservation Area and the setting of Sheringham Park and Garden, along with
biodiversity enhancements and mitigation measure;
4. Submission of comprehensive foul drainage strategy (standard wording);
5. Submission of details to demonstrate the safeguarding of suitable access for the maintenance
of water supply infrastructure;
6. Provision of a site layout designed to take into account the existing water main within the site;
7. Provision of a site layout and design which minimises the loss of amenity to residents of
dwellings to the north;
8. Provision of convenient and safe access from the A1082 (Holway Road) via the existing access
road from the development to the east;Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 220
15Sheringham9. Provision of on-site and off-site improvements to enable safe cycling and walking connectivity
and access to Public Right of Way (PROW) FP27, including provision of footpath and cyclepath
connection to Cooper Road;
10. On site delivery of not less than 0.13 hectares of public open space; and,
11. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).221 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Sheringham 15Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 222
15Sheringham16 Stalham
Stalham is identified as a Small Growth Town in the proposed Settlement Hierarchy.This means
it has been identified as one of five towns, Holt, Sheringham, Wells-next-the-Sea and the village
of Hoveton, where a more limited amount of additional development is proposed.The plan
proposes two  development sites that collectively would be suitable for around 150 dwellings
and no less than 1 ha of employment.
16.0.1 The town acts as a local centre for retail and other services and has a role as a gateway to the
Norfolk Broads. Stalham does not have the same range of facilities and services as some of
the other towns in the District. Hence the town's potential to accommodate large-scale housing
development is regarded as comparatively limit unless it helps to address the housing needs
of the area.
16.0.2 Nicholson's Y ard represents Stalham's main functional employment area; however, Catfield
Industrial Estate, to the south east of the town, and employment opportunities related to the
Norfolk Broads play an important role in providing jobs for people in the area. Evidence also
suggests that the levels of commuting from Stalham are high, with many people going to work
in Norwich. Additional employment land is proposed in Stalham through a mixed use
development in order to provide more flexibility and choice.
16.0.3 There is very little previously developed (brownfield) land in Stalham.Whilst over the plan period
it is expected that a process of re-development, infill developments, and changes of use will
continue to provide a supply of new homes and other uses, these opportunities are relatively
modest and will not address the identified need for new homes in particular. New greenfield
allocations are therefore necessary in order to deliver the required growth. There are a range
of factors which influence the potential location of development in Stalham including,
environmental and landscape considerations and the need to take into account available
infrastructure and services.
16.0.4 The main considerations which influence the suggested location of development sites are:
The need to minimise the impact of development proposals on the landscape.
The need to minimise the impact of development proposals on Grade 1 and 2 agricultural
land surrounding the town.
Locating developments where they are, or can be connected, to key services and the town
centre preferably be walking, cycling or public transport or via better quality roads; avoiding
the locations where development proposals would adversely affect the Broads, protected
SPA, SAC, SSSI and RAMSAR Land and flood plain.
Avoiding locations which are detached from the town and not well related to existing built
up areas.
Avoiding locations that would lead to the physical and/or visual coalescence of settlements
(Stalham and Sutton).
Infrastructure
16.0.5 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
Anglian Water identify that off-site mains water supply reinforcement will be required in
certain locations and that for new development of over 10 dwellings some enhancement
to the foul sewerage network capacity will be required.223 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Stalham 16The area immediately adjacent to the Broads is identified in the Strategic Flood Risk
Assessment as being at risk from a combination of fluvial and tidal flooding. There are
some risks of surface water flooding predominantly due to pockets of water ponding on
roads, and open spaces.
The Health Authority indicate that there is likely to be sufficient capacity in health services
to support the proposed growth.
The Highway Authority indicate that localised highway network improvements will be
required.
There is adequate capacity in local schools to support the scale of development proposed.
16.0.6 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting
physical infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified
shortages in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.
Site Allocations 
16.0.7 Two new sites are allocated for development. These are intended to deliver approximately 150
dwellings over the plan period including approximately 50 affordable homes, no less than
1 hectares of employment, on-site open spaces and contributions towards road, drainage and
other necessary infrastructure. ST19A: Land Adjacent Ingham Road is a proposed allocation
for approximately 70 dwellings and ST23/2 Land North of Y armouth Road, East of Broadbeach
Garden is proposed for 80 dwellings and employment.
16.0.8 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 224
16StalhamAllocations in Stalham
ST23/2ST19/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Residential / Mixed Use Allocation Employment Allocation Settlement Boundary Broads Authority Area
Map 7 Allocations in Stalham225 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Stalham 1616.1 Residential: Land Adjacent Ingham Road (ST19/A)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 70 dwellings, public
open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
371
23
28
14
1313
91
El
2
Play AreaEl
JECKELLS ROADWILSON ROADLANCASTER
CLOSE
LOKEW
ILSON ROADLB
Path(um)
22721
2932
1
11
26ROAD
PEGGSPLACEBAILEYS LOKE4.5m6.2m
1319
112
Sub1
1to4
3918
10511239INGHAM ROADSTBENET'S131514
7
4 1494182
6
14
10302
27
169
1
1ElSubStaArea
GRANVILLE CLOSE
WHILEY LANE
6121343116175
31Sta
BRISTOWS LOKE
BATCHELORS232925
131 to 52915StaPlay3
471to41to415
182725
101CLOSE
ST23/2ST19/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land Adjacent Ingham Road (ST19/A)
Description
16.1.1 The site is situated on greenfield land comprising part of a larger arable field located on Ingham
Road. The site is well related to existing residential areas and to facilities and services within
the town being only a short distance from the town centre and local schools.There are footpath
links along Ingham Road and bus services available.
16.1.2 The site is part of a larger area which was put forward through the call for sites process, which
if fully developed for housing could accommodate between 200 to 300 houses. This level of
housing growth is not proposed in Stalham.
Constraints
16.1.3 Development proposals will have to take into account:
The site consists of Grade 1 agricultural land. However, its allocation would have a minimal
impact on the overall supply in the town.
Anglian Water advised that off-sites mains reinforcement is required and enhancements
to the foul sewerage network capacity may be required before development can proceed.
Deliverability
16.1.4 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 226
16StalhamPolicy ST19/A
Land Adjacent Ingham Road
Land amounting to approximately 2.3 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
residential development of approximately 70 dwellings, public open space, and associated on and
off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies within this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
1. Provision of safe vehicle access to Ingham Road;
2. Provision of a 2.0m footway along the full width of the southern frontage;
3. Widening of Ingham Road carriageway to 6.0m for the full width of the site frontage;
4. Provision of a Transport Assessment to assess whether off-site highway mitigation works are
necessary.  Specifically, consideration is required of traffic capacity at any junctions between
the site and the A149;
5. Delivery of layout, design and landscaping of the site that respects the setting of the site on
the edge of the town and careful attention to building heights and materials;
6. Provision of a suitable landscaping scheme including retention of mature trees and planting
of new trees within the site;
7. Provision of appropriate landscape buffering to soften the views from the north of the site;
8. Provision  of a Foul Drainage Strategy setting how additional foul flows will be accommodated
within the foul sewerage network  prior to the commencement of development clear plans
should be agreed for any necessary sewerage infrastructure improvements which will need
to be confirmed at a project level HRA;(new wording required);
9. Delivery of not less than 0.19 hectares of multi-functional open space together with measures
for its on- going maintenance;
10. Site layout and design should take account of the existing water main within the site; and,
11. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority.227 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Stalham 1616.2 Mixed-Use: Land North of Yarmouth Road, East of Broadbeach
Gardens (ST23/2)
The following site is allocated for mixed use development of approximately 80 dwellings, not
less than 1 hectare of employment land, open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
Livingstone
Bradford
43
The
77
11
11Surgery
67
2Cottage
Conifers 2Mill House103128
14
1313
9
Treryn1
HallBarn146El
2
Play AreaJECKELLS ROADWILSON ROAD
LOKEW
ILSON ROAD
TCB
2.7mPath (um)
2
The
21
TheStalham High
20Hall
White LodgeRond
4860
29
34Mill Cott
Thatched Cottage1
11
The Croft
61
Park
Play AreaBalancing
PondYARMOUTH ROADPEGGSPLACEBAILEYS LOKE
CT4.5m
Long OrchardBarn
Millside1to8House
18School
Cottage RodaCottage115
48
3323
33Sub1
1 to 4
3918
101239
The Old Exchange
Tennis CourtDrainPondINGHAMROAD
ROADTank
LBFS
L
Twrs
3.4m
Sub3
Garden
8324Winds
13 54Euneda
Greenway
5
15
87PW7
4 14
82
MillersThe Granary
Blacksmiths
PondRIVERMEADYARMOUTHKirklands
45
FarmSurgery
TheCottageClippons8940
TudorCottageSta
2
27
16933aHayloft1
ESSOutfall
MILLSIDE
MILLSIDEWHILEY LANE
MSHouse
635
StaStables1
Davory
82
72HillcrestEdgefieldChurch Farm
6
3
31
Linford House
35
17
NewnhamThe5
The312 to 8STALHAM
BRISTOWS LOKE
MILLSIDEBATCHELORS
ROAD
Track
49
23
El
SmallburghHouse
Hall
Kenber Cottage
576Stewards4513
Walnut Tree
2131 to 52
Tudors
915
Myrtles
Car
RIVERMEADMILLSIDEWILSON
41
CamelliasFour
2
Stalham Hall1298
7772
12542
1 to 41 to 4
3615
182725
101
El Sub Sta
RIVERMEADLOWERSTAITHE
RIVERMEAD
GP7.4mST23/2ST19/A
© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land North of Yarmouth Road, East of Broadbeach Gardens (ST23/2)
Description
16.2.1 The site is situated on greenfield land which comprises two parts, an enclosed rectangular field
to the east and an open section of agricultural land to the west. The area is well related to the
existing residential area including the recent development at Ingham Road. The site is within
walking distance to the key services including the High School and Junior School and there
are footpaths that link to Ingham Road and available bus services.
16.2.2 The site can be accessed from Y armouth Road with an additional link to the development to
the north to improve permeability.
Constraints
16.2.3 Development proposals will need to take into account:
Care should be taken to safeguard the setting of the adjacent Listed Building and
Conservation Area.
Part of the site consists of Grade 1 agricultural land, however, its allocation would have a
minimal impact on the overall supply in the town.
Anglian Water advised that enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may be
required before development can proceed.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 228
16StalhamDeliverability
16.2.4 The site is suitable and available for development. There are limited constraints on the site and
development should be achieved within the plan period.
16.2.5 A development brief will be required for the proposed development, which will establish the
broad principles of access, mix of uses, layout, density of development, landscaping and
conceptual appearance.
Policy ST23/2
Land North of Yarmouth Road, East of Broadbeach Gardens
Land amounting to approximately 4.1 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
mixed use development of approximately 80 dwellings, not less than 1 hectare of employment
land, open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies within this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
1. Prior approval of a master plan to address access, mix of uses including the provision of
serviced employment land, layout, density of development, landscaping and conceptual
appearance;
2. Retention and enhancement of mature trees and hedgerows around the site;
3. Provision of safe highway access from Y armouth Road, and a pedestrian/cycle link to the
developed area to the north to improve permeability;
4. Provision of a Transport Assessment to assess whether off-site highway mitigation works are
necessary.  Specifically, consideration is required of traffic capacity at any junctions between
the site and the A149;
5. No buildings or SUDs features should be constructed in the area of ponding in the South East
corner of the site;
6. Provision of a foul drainage strategy setting how additional foul flows will be accommodated
within the foul sewerage network, prior to the commencement of development clear plans
should be agreed for any necessary sewerage infrastructure improvements which will need
to be confirmed at a project level HRA;
7. Layout, design and landscaping, particularly on the eastern and western boundaries of the
site, should be implemented in order to protect and respect the settings of the adjacent Listed
Buildings and Conservation Area;
8. Delivery of not less than 0.21 hectares of multi-functional open space together with measures
for its on- going maintenance;
9. Provision of landscape buffering on the western boundary of the site to mitigate impacts on
nearby heritage assets and the Stalham Conservation Area;
10. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS); and,
11. Delivery of comprehensive development in accordance with agreed phasing which ensures
delivery of all aspects of the allocated uses.
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority.229 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Stalham 16Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 230
16Stalham17 Wells-next-the-Sea
Wells is identified as a Small Growth Town in the proposed Settlement Hierarchy.This means
it has been identified as one of four towns, together with Holt, Sheringham and Stalham and the
village of Hoveton, where a limited amount of additional development could be considered.The
Plan allocates two development sites which are collectively suitable for approximately 70
dwellings, including approximately 25 affordable homes and associated areas of public open
space.
17.0.1 Wells is situated within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, with the attractive
surrounding countryside, quality built heritage and the proximity of a number of international
wildlife designations making Wells an attractive but constrained location for growth. The town
is also relatively remote from the larger settlements that provide a wider range of facilities and
these factors limit the scale of new housing growth that is appropriate. The attractiveness of
the town has led to high demand for second homes which has contributed to increased house
prices, leading to a shortage of affordable housing for local people.
17.0.2 Wells has a thriving tourism industry that supports the economic vitality of the town. Due to the
remote rural location and the limited public transport available many visitors arrive by car.
17.0.3 Wells has only one employment area, the Great Eastern Way site, representing limited
opportunities for recycling of employment land over the Plan period. Due to the environmental
constraints and the local road network there are limited opportunities for the expansion of
employment land within the town. However, Egmere Enterprise Zone, situated 4 miles to the
south of Wells, provides opportunities for further economic development and the prospect of
additional job creation over the Plan period.
17.0.4 The town centre plays an important role as a service centre for residents and tourists. A good
range of shops and services along with community facilities are provided, however residents
rely heavily on convenience goods shopping in the adjacent and higher order settlement of
Fakenham. Expenditure rates on retail are low , which underlines the reliance and importance
of the tourist spend in the town. In order to maintain its dual role serving residents and tourists
the town centre is classed as a Medium Town Centre in the Retail Hierarchy. Given the smaller
traditional units and the low expenditure retention rates a smaller locally derived impact threshold
of 250 sqm is appropriate (see Policy E4 'Retail & Town Centres'). Growth in retail expenditure
is expected to remain low in the Plan period. Future retail development should be through small
infill opportunities and shop extension including expansion onto upper floors.
17.0.5 Wells is located next to the Internationally designated North Norfolk Coast Special Area of
Conservation (SAC) and Special Protection Area (SPA) which is also designated as a Site of
Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Ramsar site and a National Nature Reserve. Designated sites
are those areas which are particularly important for their features, flora or fauna. Some are
designated under the terms of international or European agreements such as the Ramsar
convention and the EC Habitats Directive and are among the most important sites nationally.
17.0.6 The North Norfolk Coast Ramsar Site is a wetland of international importance and is designated
under the Ramsar Convention. The SAC is strictly protected under the EC Habitats Directive,
forming part of a European network (Natura 2000) and the site makes a significant contribution
to conserving those habitats and species considered most in need of protection at a European
level. The SPA forms the other part of the Natura 2000 network and is designated due to its
importance for birds, in accordance with the EC Birds Directive. The site is further protected
by UK law as an SSSI and National Nature Reserve.
17.0.7 There is very little previously developed land in and around Wells which inevitably means that
new locations for development are on the edge of town in countryside locations. Whilst over231 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Wells-next-the-Sea 17the Plan period it is expected that a process of re-development, infill developments, and changes
of use will continue to provide a supply of new homes and other uses, these opportunities are
relatively modest and will not address the identified need for new homes in particular. New
greenfield allocations are therefore necessary in order to deliver the required growth.
17.0.8 The main considerations which influence the location of the allocated development sites are:
European and Internationally designated wetland sites.
Very high landscape quality, including nationally protected landscapes as part of the North
Norfolk Coast AONB and Heritage Coast.
Conservation Areas.
Constrained land supply within the built up area.
Designated Flood Risk Areas.
Infrastructure
17.0.9 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
Anglian Water identify that off-site mains water supply reinforcement will be required, and
that some enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity may be required.
Wells is identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment as being at risk of flooding
primarily driven by tidal/coastal influences and residual risk should defences fail. Tidal
locking has potential to increase levels upstream not draining effectively during high tide.
Surface water flood risks, however, are generally restricted to roadways and gardens.
There is adequate capacity in Education and Health facilities to accommodate the scale
of growth proposed.
17.0.10 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting
physical infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified
shortages in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.
Site Allocations 
17.0.11 Two residential sites have been allocated in Wells for development. These are intended to
deliver approximately 70 dwellings over the plan period including  25 affordable homes, on site
public open spaces and contributions towards road, drainage and other necessary infrastructure.
17.0.12 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 232
17Wells-next-the-SeaAllocations in Wells-next-the-Sea
W01/1W07/1© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 8 Allocations in Wells-next-the-Sea233 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Wells-next-the-Sea 1717.1 Residential: Land South of Ashburton Close (W01/1)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 20 dwellings, public
open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
Acacia Cottage8
30
10
3740
36
Sub StaROADMARKET LANE
10.7m77ESS
350135
1817
1830
CemeterySage Cottage
27682813ElHOME
46
1 to 622
3128
3932
PIECE
WAVENEY CLOSECranbrook
11 6
28Keepers Cottage
21
29
PondESS
Ashburton House
39211
16
ASHBURTON CLOSE
44
3628
Track
73
Lych Gate
7 to 1434
6020
87
ASHBURTON CLOSE
17.3mW01/1© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land South of Ashburton Close (W01/1)
Description
17.1.1 The site constitutes a small area of greenfield land located on the southern edge of
Wells-next-the-Sea, and comprises an arable field. The site is well contained in the landscape
and is effectively screened by the development to the north and the hedge boundaries around
the site. It is located close to local services, with vehicular access to the site to be provided
from Home Piece Road and Market Lane.
17.1.2 Development should ensure that it is integrated with the development to the north of the site,
and consider its relationship to the public right of way to the south which should be accessible
from the development.
Constraints
17.1.3 Development proposals will have to take into account:
That the site is within the AONB.
Enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity will be required.
Access and enhancements to the public bridleway which runs to the south of the site.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 234
17Wells-next-the-SeaDeliverability
17.1.4 The site is considered suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There
are limited constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy W01/1
Land South of Ashburton Close
Land amounting to 0.7 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 20 dwellings, public open space, and associated on and off-site
infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies in this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Delivery of high quality design that pays careful attention to site layout, building heights and
materials in order to minimise the impact of the development on the Norfolk Coast AONB;
2. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access from Home Piece Road to the north, and
Market Lane to the west;
3. Retention and enhancement of mature hedgerows and trees around the site boundaries;
4. Submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan ensuring
that there is no adverse effects on European sites and greenfield run off rates are not increased;
5. Submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Water Drainage Strategy setting out how
additional foul flows will be accommodated within the foul sewerage network;
6. On-site delivery of not less than 0.05 hectares of public open space;
7. Upgrading and enhancement of the public right of way (BR23) to the south of the site to provide
pedestrian and cycle access, including access from Ashburton Close;
8. Provision of landscaping to the south and west of the site to minimise the visual impact of the
development from Holkham Hall Registered Park and Garden (Grade I); and,
9. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).235 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Wells-next-the-Sea 1717.2 Residential: Land Adjacent Holkham Road (W07/1)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 50 dwellings, 0.6
hectares public open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
31
1
106
10 to 12
8House1
4
Claxtons
14WorkingsDrain
DismantledRailway
A149
MILLROAD
21.7m19.2mHM
82
5 1Bakers Yard
20West
Cottage
Balmore
ESSWorkings (dis)
17.5m98
6
34
2
6Laylands
Cottage32Sonny(dis)HOLKHAM ROAD
RUSSELL
108Coastguard
94
2
6
143a
2
70Tankards
Court
1
WESTFIELD AVENUE
MILLROAD
15.6m3.3m
Caravan Site
14202714Mallards
Taverners
42
10
CoachmansView
8
13HOLKHAM ROAD
YardHouseWest24
Dorrington House
13
64Yard
3to5
Gas Distribution Sta56
LBMast
21.4mStation
4
1
Brambles
60
2819
CottageTemple Ct36
11aLaylandsDrain
Mill Farm
12a91to2
3
Fountain House
16
62Workings (dis)
CLOSEBASES LANEMAINSAIL YARD
W07/1© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Open Space
Land Adjacent Holkham Road (W07/1)
Description
17.2.1 The site is an area of greenfield land located on the western edge of Wells-next-the-Sea, and
comprises a grassed field which slopes down towards Holkham Road to the north. The site is
within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and the site is reasonably prominent
in the local landscape, particularly when viewed from the lower ground to the south. The  site
can also be seen from the Beach Road causeway.The site allocated for development has been
selected in order to minimise landscape impact. However, it is important that the new
development gives careful attention to design and landscape setting.
17.2.2 The site is bounded by some mature trees and hedgerows and these should be retained and
extended with a strategic landscape buffer to the north of the housing site.
17.2.3 The open space  recognises a deficiency of open space in the west of the town and provides
a formalisation of informal access that is currently taking place. The site should provide
pedestrian and cycle access from the site to Holkham Road and into Bases Lane.
17.2.4 Vehicular site access should be provided via Mill Lane, subject to Highway Authority approval.
Constraints
17.2.5 Development proposals will have to take into account:Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 236
17Wells-next-the-SeaThe site is adjacent to national and internationally designated sites; the impact of the
development on the AONB.
Provision of suitable vehicle access off Mill Lane or Holkham Road,
A landscape based approach to the design and delivery of the development.
Off-site mains water reinforcement and enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity
will be required.
Deliverability
17.2.6 The site is considered suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There
are limited constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy W07/1
Land Adjacent Holkham Road
Land amounting to 2.6 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 50 dwellings, 0.6 hectares public open space, and associated on
and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Delivery of high quality design that pays careful attention to site layout, building heights and
materials in order to minimise the visual impact of the development on the Norfolk Coast
AONB and long distance wider landscape views;
2. Provision of 0.6 ha of high quality public open space including facilities for play & informal
recreation;
3. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access to the site from Mill Road;
4. Retention and enhancement of mature hedgerows and trees around the site boundaries
including provision of landscaping along the northern and eastern boundaries;
5. Provision of cycle and step free pedestrian access from Mill Road through the site and public
open space to both Bases Lane and Holkham Road, including footway improvements to a
minimum width of 2.0m between the Holkham Road pedestrian and cycle access and the
boundary of the property known as 4 Laylands Y ard;
6. Submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan ensuring
that there is no adverse effects on European sites and greenfield run off rates are not increased;
7. Submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Water Drainage Strategy including details
of any off-site mains water reinforcement, enhancements and setting out how additional foul
flows will be accommodated within the foul sewerage network;
8. Delivery of a scheme that pays careful attention to design and landscaping to minimise any
potential impacts on Holkham Hall Registered Park and Garden (Grade I) to the south and
west of the site, and to the Wells Conservation Area directly adjacent to the north east and
east of the site; and,
9. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS)
The site is underlain by a defined Mineral Safeguarding Area for sand and gravel. Any future
development on this site will need to address the requirements of Norfolk Minerals and Waste Core
Strategy Policy CS16 - ‘safeguarding’  (or any successor policy) in relation to mineral resources,
to the satisfaction of the Mineral Planning Authority.237 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Wells-next-the-Sea 17Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 238
17Wells-next-the-Sea18 Blakeney
18.0.1 Blakeney is identified as a Large Growth Village in the Settlement Hierarchy.This means
it has been identified as one of four villages, the others being Briston and Melton
Constable, Ludham and Mundesley, where a limited scale of growth is proposed.
18.0.2 Blakeney is an attractive and popular village on the coast with an historic quayside, surrounded
by a highly attractive coastal landscape, with high quality built heritage, and is in close proximity
to a number of international wildlife designations. It is located within, and is surrounded by, the
North Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, next to the Internationally designated
North Norfolk Coast Special Area of Conservation (SAC) and Special Protection Area (SPA)
which is also designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI), Ramsar Site, and a
National Nature Reserve. The North Norfolk Coast Ramsar Site is a wetland of international
importance and is designated under the Ramsar Convention. The SAC is strictly protected
under EC Habitat Directives and makes a significant contribution to conserving those habitats
and species considered most in need of protection at a European level. The SPA is designated
due to its importance for birds, in accordance with the EC Birds Directive, and is protected by
UK law as a SSSI and National Nature Reserve.
18.0.3 Compared to other neighbouring villages Blakeney has a reasonable range of facilities and
services including a small convenience store and post office, primary school, doctors surgery,
public houses, village hall and a number of tourism premises. As such, it provides for the
day-to-day needs of residents and visitors and performs a limited service role for residents of
adjoining villages.
18.0.4 There is very little previously developed land in and around the village and opportunities for
development within Blakeney itself are limited to modest infills, redevelopments, and changes
of use of existing buildings. There are few undeveloped, or previously developed, areas within
the defined settlement boundary (below), much of which is designated as a Conservation Area.
Many of the areas that are undeveloped are attractive green spaces and provide important
recreational opportunities that are an essential part of the character of the village and are hence
protected from development by the policies of this Plan.
18.0.5 This inevitably means that new locations for development are on the edge of the village in
countryside locations which are designated as part of the AONB. Extending the village along
the coast, or northwards towards the sea, risks adverse impacts on the sensitive landscape
which surrounds the village. For this reason this Plan allocates land to the south of the village
for new development as shown on the Map below.
Site Allocations
18.0.6 One site is allocated for residential development which is suitable to accommodate approximately
30 dwellings.
18.0.7 The allocation is shown on the following map, and in more detail within the individual site section
that follows.239 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Blakeney 18Allocations in Blakeney
BLA04/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Residential / Mixed Use Allocation Employment Allocation
Map 9 Allocations in BlakeneyProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 240
18Blakeney18.1 Residential: Land East of Langham Road (BLA04/A)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 30 dwellings, public
open space and on and off-site infrastructure:
13 1
526
Path
2
14260KINGSWAY
26.1m2
11
LANGHAM ROADPath4
750 El Sub Sta
52
Hettie Close
6
Brightwell
514
12
CloseCaroline4
Close27
13
62
68
87HARBOUR WAY3
BLA04/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land East of Langham Road (BLA04/A)
Description
18.1.1 The site comprises an agricultural field located on the south western fringe of the village off the
Langham Road. It is within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and is
prominent in the local landscape particularly when viewed from the higher ground to the south.
Acceptable proposals will need to pay particular attention to the landscape impacts of
development and successful schemes will avoid creating a hard edge to the village by
incorporating structural landscaping along the southern boundary and opportunities for mature
trees within the development. Building heights, roofing materials, glazing patterns and the
overall layout and design should aim to minimize the impacts of development, including at night
by minimizing the impacts of artificial lighting. The approximate number of dwellings identified
in the policy is likely to be the maximum the site could acceptably accommodate and in
determining if a proposal is acceptable priority will be given to character considerations over
quantity of development.
18.1.2 Vehicular and pedestrian access should be provided to Langham Road and will need to include
carriageway widening, a continuous footway to Kingsway, and an extension to the 30 mile an
hour speed restriction to the southern end of the site frontage. Off-site improvements to footpaths
and crossing points are required to ensure safe walking routes to the primary school and other
key services in the village.
18.1.3 The site is located approximately 150 metres to the north east of the Wiveton Downs Site of
Special Scientific Interest, and approximately 550 metres to the south of the North Norfolk Coast241 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Blakeney 18SAC/SPA/Ramsar/SSSI/NNR. Development of the site will increase the visitor pressures on
these protected sites and contributions towards mitigating these pressures, and those which
arise on other designated sites, will be required.
Constraints
18.1.4 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Anglian Water have indicated that development of the site may require improvements to
the local foul water drainage network and any development of the site should comply with
the conclusions of a comprehensive foul and surface water drainage strategy.
Deliverability
18.1.5 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership and there are no
known reasons why development on the site cannot be achieved within the plan period.
Policy BLA04/A
Land East of Langham Road
Land amounting to 1.5 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 30 dwellings, public open space and on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan, and the
following site-specific requirements:
1. Delivery of high quality design which pays careful attention to site layout, building heights,
materials and glazing in order to minimise the impact of the development on the Norfolk Coast
Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, wider landscape, views of Blakeney Church, and to
protect the residential amenities of adjacent occupiers;
2. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access from the Langham Road, including
carriageway widening at the site frontage to a minimum of 5.0m;
3. Footway improvements along the Langham Road, including the provision of a 2.0m wide
footway along the site frontage extending within the highway to link with existing footway at
Kingsway;
4. Improvements to the footway crossings at the New Road junctions with Saxlingham Road
and Wilson’ s Way;
5. Extension of the 30mph speed limit to southern extent of site;
6. Provision of high quality landscaping along the northern, eastern and southern site boundaries,
including the retention and enhancement of all existing boundary trees and hedgerows, having
particular regard to the northern boundary and integration of public footpath FP6 into the
development to facilitate access and protect amenity.
7. Provision of a scheme to deliver off-site improvements to FP6 and FP18 to provide a safer
route to the primary school, including an off carriageway facility at the Saxlingham Road;
8. Submission, approval and implementation of a Surface Water Management Plan ensuring
that there are no adverse effects on European Sites and greenfield run off rates are not
increased;
9. Submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Water Drainage Strategy demonstrating
how additional foul flows will be accommodated within the foul sewerage network;
10. On-site delivery of not less than 0.08 hectares of public open space; and,
11. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 242
18Blakeney19 Briston
19.0.1 The combined settlements of Briston and Melton Constable are identified as a Large
Growth Village in the proposed Settlement Hierarchy.This means they have been
identified as one of four villages, the others being Blakeney, Ludham and Mundesley,
where a limited scale of growth is proposed.The Plan allocates two development sites
which would be suitable for approximately  65 dwellings.
19.0.2 Briston & Melton Constable are two separate parishes that are closely related in terms of their
close proximity to each other. The combined settlements have a broad range of day-to-day
services including a large primary school, doctors surgery, a small number of convenience
shops and takeaways, public houses, a number of community buildings together with a small
industrial estate.
19.0.3 Whilst the villages lie in attractive unspoilt countryside neither are subject to significant
environmental constraints , for example, they are not in the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty, close to the Broads, or in close proximity to any internationally designated sites.
Much of Melton Constable is however designated as a Conservation Area reflecting it’ s railway
heritage.
19.0.4 Both villages are served by, and lie along the B1354 which is an important local transport
corridor providing convenient access to the wider transport network and quick links to adjacent
towns, particularly Fakenham. Compared to many other settlements there is a good level of
public transport along this route.
19.0.5 Melton Constable Industrial Estate, although now largely fully developed, provides opportunities
over the plan period for recycling of employment land. Given the location of Briston and Melton
Constable, within close proximity to Fakenham and Holt, and little evidence of demand for
further employment land within the villages over the plan period, no additional employment land
allocations are proposed.
Site Allocations
19.0.6 Two sites are allocated for residential development, one of which is carried forward from the
currently adopted Development Plan. Both are located in Briston parish and are collectively
suitable to accommodate approximately 65 dwellings. They are located on either side of the
primary school and are close to village services and bus routes.
19.0.7 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow.243 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Briston 19Allocations in Briston & Melton Constable
BRI01
BRI02© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 10 Allocations in Briston & Melton ConstableProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 244
19Briston19.1 Residential: Land East of Astley Primary School (BRI01)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 25 dwellings, public
open space, school parking and associated supporting on and off-site infrastructure:
Pond
ORCHARD CLOSEDavendaManor FarmPond
LB
Farthing HouseAldalyn
15Channonz
55
142
WOODFIELDRose Cottage
65
Field View
75
Weribe26Primary School
83FB
Holly HouseJubilee CottageFAKENHAM ROAD60.9m85
13The Bungalow
Astley36Pond
BRI01
BRI02© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land East of Astley School (BRI01)
Description
19.1.1 The site comprises an agricultural field located to the east of Astley Primary School. It is well
located in the village with good pedestrian access to key village facilities including the primary
school, village shops, doctors surgery and recreation ground. There are mature hedges along
the site boundaries and a pond located in the south west corner of the site. These features
should be retained and integrated into the green infrastructure provided on the site.
19.1.2 The Fakenham Road fronting the site is a busy route and it is congested at times, particularly
at school pick up and drop off times when parked vehicles in the road restrict through traffic. It
is for this reason that the vehicular access to the site should be solely from The Lane, which
borders the eastern boundary. Proposals for development on the site should contribute towards
addressing parking issues associated with the primary school.
Constraints
19.1.3 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Landscaping and setting on the Fakenham Road.
Potential for accommodating school parking.
Pedestrian / cycleway connections across the site from the adjoining existing housing to
the primary school should be delivered.245 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Briston 19The existing mature hedges and pond should be retained.
A water main crosses the site which will need to be protected or relocated and enhancement
to the foul sewerage network capacity may be required.
Deliverability
19.1.4 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy BRI01
Land East of Astley Primary School
Land amounting to 1.4 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for residential
development of approximately 25 dwellings, public open space, school parking and associated
supporting on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan and the
following site-specific requirements:
1. Retention of existing roadside hedges and setting back of development on both road frontages;
2. Provision of a car parking area for the school (pick up and drop off);
3. On-site delivery of not less than 0.07 hectares of public open space, to the south west area
of the site in addition to, and incorporating, the retention and enhancement of the existing
pond and provision of green infrastructure corridors to support biodiversity;
4. Provision of a layout of development which protects, or relocates, the existing water main that
crosses the site;
5. Submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Drainage Strategy including how any
additional foul flows will be accommodated in the foul sewerage network;
6. Provision of convenient and safe vehicular access solely from The Lane and incorporation of
footpath/cycle link through the development to the primary school; and,
7. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 246
19Briston19.2 Residential: Land West of Astley Primary School (BRI02)
The following site is allocated for residential development for approximately 40 dwellings, public
open space, school parking and associated supporting on and off-site infrastructure:
31302
48Pond2017
1393421
1411348
14
121
BURSTON CLOSE69.6m4
37
26Primary School251011B1354
HILLSIDERAILWAY CLOSE27125a
3122FAKENHAMROAD68.7m148
16
49Astley361Pond
125
2336LBBRI01
BRI02© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land West of Astley School (BRI02)
Description
19.2.1 The site comprises part of a large agricultural field located to the west of Astley Primary School.
It is well located in the village with good pedestrian access to key village facilities including the
primary school, village shops, doctors surgery and recreational facilities.
19.2.2  It is likely that vehicular access to the site would be from Fakenham Road which borders the
northern boundary. However, this road is a busy route and it is congested at times, particularly
at school pick up and drop off times when parked vehicles in the road restrict through traffic.
Therefore, alternative access arrangements via the adjacent estate roads (to the west) should
be explored.
Constraints
19.2.3 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Part of the site may be required for off-road car parking (pick up and drop off) for the school.
Vehicular access to Fakenham Road should be restricted to a single access point and
alternative access arrangements via the adjacent estate roads should be explored.
Pedestrian / cycleway connections across the site from the adjoining existing housing to
the Primary School should be delivered.
Water main crosses the site and enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity will
be required.247 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Briston 19Deliverability
19.2.4 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy BRI02
Land West of Astley Primary School
Land amounting to approximately 2 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
residential development for approximately 40 dwellings, public open space, school parking and
associated supporting on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the policies of this Plan and the
following site specific requirements:
1. Setting back of development from the road frontage along Fakenham Road;
2. Provision of a convenient and safe vehicular access from either Fakenham Road or Hillside;
3. Provision of a car parking area for the school (drop-off and pick-up);
4. Development layout that does not prejudice the potential development/ redevelopment of land
to the south and west including provision of a vehicular access point to the land to the south;
5. Provision of landscaping, pedestrian and cycle access, and green wildlife links through the
site;
6. Submission, approval and implementation of a Foul Drainage Strategy including how additional
foul flows will be accommodated within the foul sewerage network;
7. On-site delivery of not less than 0.10 hectares of public open space on the site frontage with
Fakenham Road;
8. Provision of pedestrian and cycle access through the site to connect with the existing network;
9. Retention and enhancement of existing hedgerows and landscaping to all the site boundaries
particularly to the east and west; and,
10. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 248
19Briston20 Ludham
Ludham is identified as a Large Growth Village in the proposed Settlement Hierarchy.This means
it has been identified as one of four villages, the others being Blakeney, Briston and Mundesley,
where a limited scale of growth is proposed.The Plan allocates two development sites which 
would be suitable for around 35 dwellings.
20.0.1 Ludham is a medium sized village with a good range of day to day services and a range of
community facilities including a village store and post office, doctor’ s surgery and primary school.
Most of the housing development, together with the shop and school, is located to the north of
the Y armouth to Norwich Road. Areas to the south of the road have a less 'built up' character.
Womack Water provides access to the Broads waterways and is a popular visitor destination,
particularly for those arriving by boat. The village plays an important role in meeting the needs
of residents, those of adjacent villages, and a seasonal influx of tourists
20.0.2 There is very little previously developed (brownfield) land in Ludham. Ludham contains a
conservation area which reflects the historic core of the settlement. The Norfolk Broads are
located to the south of the settlement, where a number of environmental designations are
situated and there is a degree of flood risk from both fluvial and surface water flooding. New
greenfield allocations are therefore necessary in order to deliver the required growth.
20.0.3 In summary, the main considerations which influence the suggested location of development sites
are the need to:
The need to minimise the impact of development proposals on The Norfolk Broads and
the landscape more generally
the need to minimise the impact of development proposals on the classified Grade 1 and
2 agricultural land surrounding the village
Avoiding building in areas which may be susceptible to flooding
Locating development close to village facilities and services 
Infrastructure
20.0.4 The land allocations have been developed in conjunction with advice and information
from infrastructure providers and statutory consultees. Each site will need to provide the
supporting infrastructure which is necessary to make the proposal acceptable in land use terms.
Where site specific requirements have been identified in preparing this Plan they are listed in
each of the site allocation policies.
Anglian Water advise that there is a sustainability reduction at Ludham water treatment
works and enhancement will be required to accommodate new development in Ludham.
Off-site mains water reinforcement may also be required, together with possible need for
enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity.
Ludham is identified in the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment as being at risk of flooding
primarily from a combination of fluvial and tidal influences of the River Thurne and Womack
Water. The settlement is located within a larger Dry Island and a Flood Risk Assessment
and / or Flood Warning and Evacuation Plan may be required at application stage.
20.0.5 As development takes place, it will need to be served by appropriate supporting
physical infrastructure and services. All developments are required to address any identified
shortages in infrastructure to the extent necessary to make the specific proposal acceptable.249 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Ludham 20Site Allocations
20.0.6 Two sites have been allocated in Ludham, to accommodate approximately 35 dwellings.  Both
sites identified are well located to existing local infrastructure and services within the settlement.
20.0.7 These allocations are shown together on the following map, and in more detail within the
individual site sections that follow. Other policy area designations referred to in the general
policies of the Plan are shown on the Policies Map.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 250
20LudhamAllocations in Ludham
LUD06/A
LUD01/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Residential / Mixed Use Allocation Employment Allocation Settlement Boundary Broads Authority Area
Map 11 Allocations in Ludham251 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Ludham 2020.1 Residential: Land South Of School Road (LUD01/A)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 20 dwellings inclusive
of open space and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
24124934
Hurst
34
The
4238
1
Coach6
252036
46 Manship
1
DrainThe Bungalow19
3561226
ESSW
ILLO
W
 W
AY
POUND ROADGP
1111a37131 to 4
2510
The Old
64
Vicarage
44
Church ViewOld
Lambs Cottage
13
Ppg Sta
HouseLAURELSCRESCENT
7.2m
Path (um)
48
Ashton
326124Ppg Sta
WILLOW WAY
22Cottages
11141731
15SCHOOL ROAD
LUD01/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land South Of School Road (LUD01/A)
Description
20.1.1 This site was allocated for residential development in the previously adopted Local Plan but
has not since been developed, therefore the site has been brought forward into the new Plan
period as a new allocation. The site currently compromises of a flat agricultural field with no
landscape features. It lies adjacent to established residential development to the north and
east. Convenient pedestrian links are available to the primary school, recreation ground and
general store.
20.1.2 A site of this size would typically be suitable for between 30 -40 dwellings but the proposed
number has been reduced to reflect the fact that part of the site is in a flood risk area and there
is a need for a lower density of development with comprehensive landscaping to reflect the
sites prominent edge of settlement location.
Constraints
20.1.3 Development proposals will have to take into account:
A small part of the site is in Flood Zone 2, the layout of the site should ensure that any
part of the site demonstrated to be at risk of flooding during the lifetime of the development
remains undeveloped. A flood risk assessment / or Flood Warning & Evacuation Plan may
be required as part of a planning application to assess all forms of flooding to and fromProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 252
20Ludhamthe development and inform the inclusion of suitable control measures. The settlement is
located within a larger dry island.
Anglian Water advise that there is a sustainability reduction at Ludham water treatment
works and off-site water mains reinforcement and enhancement to the water recycling
centre will be required. Enhancements to the foul sewerage network may also be required
before development can proceed.
There are no surface water sewers in the vicinity of the site.
Deliverability
20.1.4 The site is suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership. There are limited
constraints on the site and development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy LUD01/A
Land South of School Road
Land amounting to approximately 1.25 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
residential development of approximately 20 dwellings inclusive of open space and associated on
and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies within this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
1. Provision of a highway access via Willow Way;
2. Provision of pedestrian footway to connect with the school bus service stop on School Road;
3. The footway between Grange Close and Ludham Primary School should be improved and
widened to 2.0m, to include an adequate crossing point to enable safe crossing of Catfield
Road;
4. Retention and safeguarding of trees along the western boundary that are covered by a group
Tree Preservation Order;
5. Delivery of a high quality landscaping scheme particularly along the western boundary;
6. Development should have careful attention to form and site layout in order to allow for views
from School Road to the Grade 1 Listed church;
7. Submission, approval and implementation a foul drainage strategy setting out how additional
foul flows will be accommodated within the foul sewerage network and it is demonstrated that
there is adequate capacity in the water recycling centre;
8. Provision of required off-site water mains reinforcement;
9. Provision of adequate information in order to undertake a project Level Habitat Regulation
Assessment, HRA, addressing issues relating to sewerage infrastructure;
10. Delivery of not less than 0.05ha of public open space;
11. Provision of a satisfactory Flood Risk Assessment and completion of any necessary flood
mitigation measures; and,
12. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).253 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Ludham 2020.2 Residential: Land At Eastern End Of Grange Road (LUD06/A)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 15 dwellings, inclusive
of open space, and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
AmblesideGrange
CairnHouse18Bycroft
OakleighSub StaGP
3.8m
Albury
18
6 House
20Hannover
MALTHOUSELANEGRANGE CLOSE
Broads Cottage1EurekaBungalow
WindrushSpringfieldCATFIELD ROADGP
The Oaks8
10Farmhouse
9
SummerseatMalthouse
1The222
HedgesElGRANGE ROAD
AmelandLUD06/A© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land At Eastern End Of Grange Road (LUD06/A)
Description
20.2.1 This site was allocated for residential development in the previously adopted Local Plan but
has not since been developed, therefore the site has been brought forward into the new Plan
period as a new allocation. The site comprises part of an enclosed agricultural field with good
pedestrian access to key village facilities.. The Malthouse Lane boundary is delineated by an
existing hedgerow and this should be retained and reinforced with further native planting in
order to retain the rural character of the lane.
Constraints
20.2.2 Development proposals will have to take into account:
Anglian Water advise that there is a Sustainability reduction at Ludham Water
Treatment Works. Enhancement to water recycling centre will be required and
enhancements to the foul sewerage network capacity may also be required before
development can proceed. There are sewers crossing the site and diversion would be at
the developers' expense.
There are no surface water sewers in the vicinity of the siteProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 254
20LudhamLudham is located within a Dry Island, A Flood Risk Assessment and / or Flood Warning
and Evacuation Plan may be required.
The western boundary of the site is adjacent to a belt of oak trees covered by a group
Tree Preservation Order. The extension of the Grange Close roadway to serve the site
should have full regard to the need to retain and safeguard these trees.
Deliverability
20.2.3 The site is in joint family ownership and the owners have indicated support for the allocation.
There are limited constraints on the site and development should be achieved within the plan
period.
Policy LUD06/A
Land At Eastern End Of Grange Road
Land amounting to approximately 0.57 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
residential development of approximately 15 dwellings, inclusive of open space, and associated
on and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies within this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
1. Provision of highway access via Grange Close;
2. Delivery of a footway between Grange Close and Ludham Primary School that should be
improved and widened to 2.0m, to include an adequate crossing point to enable safe crossing
of Catfield Road;
3. Retention and safeguarding of trees along the western boundary that are covered by a group
Tree Preservation Order;
4. Submission, approval and implementation of a foul drainage strategy setting out how additional
foul flows will be accommodated within the foul sewerage network and it is demonstrated that
there is adequate capacity in the water recycling centre;
5. Provision of adequate information in order to undertake a project Level Habitat Regulation
Assessment (HRA) prior to the commencement of development addressing issues relating
to sewerage infrastructure;
6. Delivery of not less than 0.03ha of public open space or the agreed payment of an equivalent
financial contribution for the extension or improvement of local open space provision; and,
7. Appropriate contributions will be secured towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk
Green Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).255 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Ludham 20Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 256
20Ludham21 Mundesley
Mundesley is identified as a Large Growth Village in the Settlement Hierarchy and the strategy
suggests that the village accommodates low growth over the Plan period.The proposed land
allocation seeks to deliver approximately 30 dwellings.
21.0.1 Mundesley is a large and popular village on the coast that has a thriving tourism industry which
supports the economic vitality of the village. The settlement is situated on high cliffs looking
over a wide sandy beach that, along with its seafront, are major assets for the economy and
local environment. Parts of the village are situated on high ground and are visible from the wider
surrounding countryside. The centre of the village is designated as a Conservation Area and
land to the south is within the Norfolk Coast Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty. There are a
range of factors which influence the potential location of development in Mundesley including
its location on the coast, landscape and environmental considerations such as the presence
of the AONB.
21.0.2 Mundesley village benefits from amenities with a good range of day to day services and a range
of community facilities including, a small supermarket, a number of other shops and a post
office, pubs, restaurants and take-aways, doctor’ s surgery and primary school. These services
are supplemented by a number of tourism related services and offers.
21.0.3 There are two employment areas within Mundesley representing small scale employment uses
within the village. Given the environmental constraints, opportunities for expansion of employment
sites are limited and given the proximity of the village to North Walsham, five miles to the south,
there is little evidence of market demand for additional employment land.
21.0.4 There is very little previously developed land in and around Mundesley. Whilst over the plan
period it is expected that a process of re-development, infill developments, and changes of use
will continue to provide a supply of new homes and other uses, these opportunities are relatively
modest and will not address the identified need for new homes. A new greenfield allocation is
therefore necessary in order to deliver the planned growth.
21.0.5 In summary, the main considerations which influence the suggested location of development
sites are:
the AONB to the south;
the landscape setting along the coast;
the proximity to the Coastal Change Management Area;
the potential impact of development on the Conservation Area;
constrained land supply within the built up area;
Locating development close to existing built up areas with convenient access to existing
facilities and services
Site Allocations 
21.0.6 One site has been allocated which is suitable to accommodate approximately 30 dwellings.
21.0.7 This allocation is shown on the following map, and in more detail within the individual site section
that follows.257 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Mundesley 21Allocations in Mundesley
MUN03/B© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
Settlement Boundary Employment Allocation Residential / Mixed Use Allocation
Map 12 Allocations in MundesleyProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 258
21Mundesley21.1 Residential: Land off Cromer Road & Church Lane (MUN03/B)
The following site is allocated for residential development of approximately 30 dwellings inclusive
of open space and associated on and off-site infrastructure:
Hamilton1
High Street3642
16
2
645023
20
PWAll Saints'1 to 6
4b42Links Chalet ParkPath (um)
HILDA ROAD
SEAWARD36.8m
25.9mThe
246LibyCourt
1668
75
71447
5aClub
Siesta Mar
BreakwaterEl Sub StaSand
GardensAllotment
14a18Meadow House
1035
1
12
8051Church1 to 32
3
9
6
1
32Groyne
SubElCoastal Slope
ALL SAINTS WAYLych Gate39.4mHouseCoach
The
Ardencaple
2888504212
2a
84
19 31
1aThe RectoryBreakwater
Sand(um)
St Winifreds
121914
12Meadow Croft
161
19
27
227
65
139
522243
StaMANOR ROAD
11a52Coronation
41a73
23
255766
1a
38219
12Chalet Park
CROMER ROAD
CHURCH LANE
ESS17
18Tel Ex
7 760
18
13
2
35Trafalgar Court
8HalltoPath
Dismantled RailwayGUNNER CLOSE
Sand
Hall21
4Club1121
711
CourtManor1267644
22
9085
2537
4346
40
12
5
Annexe10Path (um)
GOODWIN ROAD
CRESTGP
1 to 6
MUN03/B© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Land off Cromer Road & Church Lane (MUN03/B)
Description
21.1.1 The site is located just outside the residential area of Mundesley with the former railway
embankment abutting the western boundary.The site is an elevated pasture field in a prominent
part of the village. The openness of the site should be carefully considered and development
in a way that does not negatively harm the surrounding landscape is required.
21.1.2 The site is well located to the existing infrastructure and services in the historic village centre
(Station Road and the High Street) and additional services along Beach Road.
21.1.3 The openness of the site and the potential impact of development on the landscape will influence
design and layout. Furthermore, the site is adjacent to the Conservation Area and directly
opposite the Grade II listed church.Therefore, any development will require a considered design
and landscape led approach to the layout and design of the development. Open space on the
site should be located towards the eastern end to help protect the amenities of adjacent residents
and minimise the impact on the setting of the Listed Church.
Constraints
21.1.4 Development proposals will have to take into account:259 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Mundesley 21Anglian Water identify that for new development of over 10 dwellings that some
enhancement to the foul sewerage network capacity will be required and off-site mains
water supply reinforcement may be required.
Deliverability
21.1.5 The site is considered suitable and available for development. It is in single ownership and the
owner confirms availability for development. There are limited constraints on the site and
development should be achievable within the plan period.
Policy MUN03/B
Land off Cromer Road & Church Lane
Land amounting to approximately 2.2 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for
residential development of approximately 30 dwellings inclusive of open space and associated on
and off-site infrastructure.
Planning permission will be granted subject to compliance with the relevant policies of this Plan
and the following site specific requirements:
1. Development proposals should be stepped back from Church Lane and the Coastal Change
Management Area to take account of coastal change and maintain key landscape and heritage
views through siting, scale, massing, materials, vernacular style and design to conserve, and
where appropriate enhance the Mundesley Conservation Area and grade II listed All Saints
Church;
2. Careful attention to layout and building design to ensure no unacceptable overlooking or
overshadowing of properties on Church Lane;
3. Delivery of a highway access from Cromer Road;
4. Off-site provision for a new pedestrian and cycle route that uses the former railway embankment
to connect Cromer Road and Church Lane, and  a new pedestrian and cycle route which
provides a continuous footway on Church Lane/All Saints Way to Links Road with appropriate
crossing points and access into the site;
5. On-site delivery of not less than 0.08ha of public open space;
6. Submission, approval and implementation of effective Surface Water Management plan,
ensuring that there is no increase of surface water run-off from the site;
7. Enhancements to the sewage network capacity ahead of occupation of dwellings to prevent
detriment to the environment and comply with Water Framework Directive obligations; and,
8. Appropriate contributions towards mitigation measures identified in the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure and Recreational Impact Avoidance & Mitigation Strategy (GIRAMS).Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 260
21Mundesley22 Tattersett
22.0.1 Tattersett village does not meet the criteria to be selected as a growth settlement and it is not
considered a sustainable location for new residential development. However the adjacent former
Airbase includes significant buildings, areas of previously developed land, and a cluster of
established employment uses.
22.1 Employment:Tattersett Business Park (E7)
The following site is allocated for employment development:
Tank
1819
12
ESSPath
RICHARDS ROADFLAG STREET
ROADTrack
990
16202425
16
11
Tattersett BusinessPondENGINE ROAD
BUCKET ROADCHERRYW
OOD
AVENUEFAP
12
18
125
1117
STREETFAP
21517
31
21115
Path (um
)
PEACHTREE
GEORGIA ROAD
PROP STREET
Tank1
1414
199
Tank
PondROSE
W
ALK
TEXAS AVENUE
220
202
21
14
PondFLAG
STREETAPPLEDORELANE
SCULTHORPE BOULEVARDPath
Tank
12
14
15
33
24Tattersett Farm845Tank
and Leisure ParkElSub Sta
Wicken CovertPath (um)
TURBOROAD
MUD ROADCUMMINGS BOULEVARDFAP2223
721
1Works
Path (um)
OAKDENE
ACCESSBATCHELOR DRIVECHESTNUTAVENUE
ARMY ROADFLORIDA BOULEVARDMast
E7© North Norfolk District Council. Reproduced 
by permission of Ordnance Survey © Crown 
copyright and database right [2021]. All rights 
reserved. Ordnance Survey Licence number 
100018623.
NOT TO SCALE
OS MasterMap ®
Tattersett Business Park (E7)
Description
22.1.1 This policy recognises that many of the designated Employment Areas within the District are
closely related to existing residential areas and/or may have access constraints, and that there
are some specific types of use, for example those which require very large sites, which may
be difficult to accommodate on small industrial estates in towns.
22.1.2 Tattersett Business Park is identified for such uses on the basis that such an allocation:
would be well related to existing employment uses already established on the site;
 would enjoy comparatively good access to the strategic highway network; and
additional development could provide the basis for securing environmental improvements
on the site such as improved landscaping.261 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Tattersett 2222.1.3 This site is considered suitable for a range of possible employment uses that may otherwise
be difficult to accommodate elsewhere.These need not, and should not, result in un-neighbourly
impacts and each planning application would continue to be determined on its merits.
Constraints
22.1.4 Development proposals will have to take into account:
The site is understood to have poor quality infrastructure (roads, drainage and electricity)
and substantial upgrades may be required prior to any further development taking place.
The Council regards further development on the site to be a mechanism for securing
substantial improvements in the sites appearance and these enhancements will need to
be agreed before any development will be permitted.
The site lies in water quality source protection zone 1/2 as identified by the Environment
Agency and only clean, uncontaminated surface water should be discharged to any
soak-away, watercourse or surface water sewer. There are currently no surface water
sewers in the vicinity of the site.
The site is currently served with electricity from Fakenham substation which has limited
capacity to support the proposed growth in the town. Proposals at site should clearly
demonstrate how they will not compromise growth elsewhere and may need to provide
self-contained power supplies.
Deliverability
22.1.5 The site was allocated through the Core Strategy for employment land. The original rationale
behind the allocation of the site was to identify a location suitable for uses that would not be
acceptable on Employment Areas for environmental or operational reasons. The site was
re-submitted through the Local Plan call for sites process for a range of uses including 'general
industrial', 'storage and distribution' and 'business and offices'. It is considered that there is a
need within the District for employment land suitable of accommodating uses that might not be
compatible with the surrounding uses of employment land within built up areas.
Policy E7
Land at Tattersett Business Park
Land amounting to 28.8 hectares, as defined on the Policies Map, is allocated for general
employment development. Development will be subject to compliance with adopted Local Plan
policies and the following criteria:
1. Prior approval of a Master Plan providing for landscaping of the whole of the allocated area,
phasing of development, access arrangements, and removal of stored tyres from the site;
2. Each new build proposal resulting in the removal of an equivalent amount of floor
space contained within the now derelict former barrack blocks on the adjacent site;
3. Development being restricted to employment generating proposals where it can be
demonstrated that the proposal is incapable of being accommodated on other designated
employment land in the District for either environmental or operational reasons;
4. There should be no development unless there has been clear demonstration that proposals
will result in no adverse impacts on protected wildlife; and,
5. Prior demonstration that there is adequate power supply without compromising growth
elsewhere.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 262
22Tattersett23 Housing Trajectory
23.0.1 As well as delivering sufficient homes to meet all needs over the Plan period the National
Planning Policy Framework requires that the strategy for housing provision provides a regular
supply of suitable development sites throughout the years covered by the Plan. The specific
requirement is to identify a sufficient supply and mix of sites, taking into account their availability,
suitability and likely economic viability. Planning policies should identify a supply of:
a. Specific, deliverable  sites for years one to five of the plan period.
b. Specific, developable  sites or broad locations for growth, for years 6-10 and, where
possible, for years 11-15 of the plan.
23.0.2 This Plan sets a minimum housing requirement of 9,600 new homes between 2016 and 2036,
equating to an annual average rate of around 480 dwellings per year, or 2,400 every five years.
The Plan sets this as the minimum but includes policies and specific development site proposals
that together allow for the delivery of at least 12,000 new homes.
23.0.3 The strategy anticipates that housing delivery rates will be variable year on year and that of the
12,000 dwellings planned for, approximately 1,500 homes located on the strategic allocations
at North Walsham West and Fakenham may not be built within the Plan period.
23.0.4 All of the identified development sites are suitable and are available for development but are
likely to take varying amounts of time to secure the necessary planning permissions before
developments can proceed. None of the sites in the Plan are subject to specific phasing
obligations which limit the commencement of development but the larger sites in particular are
subject to policy obligations to deliver key infrastructure or mixed uses at various stages as
development proceeds.
23.0.5 Market conditions, sales rates and local demand are likely to impact on delivery rates in some
locations and although some of the allocated sites are already subject to planning applications
it is likely that others will take some years to secure the necessary consents. These factors are
taken into account in the Housing Trajectory (below).
Sources of Supply
23.0.6 In this Plan total housing delivery is derived from three sources:
1. Commitments - these are homes which are either already built or have deliverable planning
consents.
2. New site allocations identified in the Plan.
3. The continued delivery of new homes over the rest of the Plan period on unidentified sites
(windfalls).
23.0.7 The expected yields from these sources are shown in Policy HOU 1 'Delivering Sufficient
Homes' , namely
Total Windfalls Allocations(1)Commitments
12,096 1,890 5,408 4,815
Table 8 Housing Delivery by Source 2016 -2036
1. Includes specialist elderly person accommodation.263 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing Trajectory 23Dwelling Completions and Commitments
23.0.8 In the period 2016 to 2021 some 2,422 new homes were built in the District at an average rate
of 497 per annum. This is slightly higher than the minimum annual requirement set in this Plan
so that by 2021 over 25% of the required homes had been built and there was no shortfall of
housing in the District when compared to the annual average requirement.
Cumulative
DeliveredAnnual Delivered Cumulative
RequirementAnnual Requirement
442 442 480 480 2016/17
988 546 960 480 2017/18
1,522 534 1,440 480 2018/19
1,941 419 1,920 480 2019/20
2,422 481 2,400 480 2020/21
Table 9 Dwellings Required and Delivered 2016-2021 (net)
Expected Future Delivery Rates 
23.0.9 In establishing when homes are likely to be provided the following approach has been taken:
1. Where planning applications have already been made, but a decision is pending, delivery
is unlikely before 2023/24 .
2. Where the site is owned/under option to a house builder and detailed discussions /
pre-application process has taken place, delivery may commence by 2025/26, allowing a
period of 4 years to secure the required planning permissions.
3. Housing completions in year one are likely to be limited due to the need for enabling
infrastructure (roads, drains, services). Thereafter delivery rates will not exceed typical
local industry averages.
4. Sites of 150-200 units are likely to be built by a single volume house builder with a capacity
to deliver between 30-50 per year depending on business model.
5. Larger sites, typically in excess of 300 units, will be delivered by two or more house
builders.
6. Affordable housing and elderly persons accommodation delivery will increase annual
completions at stages throughout the development process in accordance with site specific
phasing requirements.
7. Windfall delivery rates will be variable but for accounting purposes are illustrated as coming
forwards at a consistent rate throughout the Plan period with no allowance in year one of
the trajectory, and a discounted rate applied to avoid the risk of double counting and over
estimating delivery from this source.
23.0.10 The result of this process will be kept under regular review and further details published in
Annual Five Y ear Land Supply Statements. The position as of 30th March 2021 is illustrated
overleaf.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 264
23Housing TrajectoryTrajectory of Expected Housing Delivery 2016-36
207
279
329
276
325120
105
114
87
56
200 
165 
123 
65 45 51 
22 9 166 
194 
180 
120 
45 
47 
4 33 
147 
333 
544 
468 
420 
468 
343 
324 
370 
285 
300 
357 34 35 35 35 
35 
35 35 
35 
35 35 
35 34 34 115
169
91
56
100
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
135 
178
0100200300400500600700800900No. of Dwellings
Years528 
480 
Deliverable: Allocations & Sites
(Over 9 DwellingsPermissions: Small Sites (Under 10 dwellings)Completions: Small Sites (Under 10 dwellings)Completions: Windfall Sites Completions: Current Y ear to Date (Dec2021)
 
▲ 
Completions: LDF Allocations
Expected Annual Delivery
 Annual Average Requirement
 Future Expected Windfall New Local Plan Growth(Small Growth Villages)New Local Plan Allocations265 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing Trajectory 2323.0.11 The trajectory will be updated annually and published through Five Y ear Land Housing Supply Statements and Annual Monitoring Reports.
23.0.12 The table below provides further information on the expected delivery rates on individual development sites and from the other expected sources
of housing growth.
Beyond March
20362035/362034/35
2033/34
2032/33
2031/32
2030/31
2029/30
2028/29
2027/28
2026/27
2025/26
2024/25
2023/24
2022/23
2021/22
2020/21
2019/20
2018/19
2017/18
2016/17Location Site Ref
0 90 100 100 100 100 100 80 80 80 80 30 10 Land North of Rudham Stile Lane, Fakenham.
Remaining AllocationF01PO/17/0680
0 20 10 Land East of Langham Road, Blakeney BLA04/A
0 15 10 Land East of Astley School, Briston BRI01
0 30 10 Land West of Astley School, Briston BRI02
0 12 10 Land at Cromer High Station , Cromer C07/2
0 20 30 50 50 30 10 Former Golf Practice Ground, OverstrandRoad, CromerC16
0 30 50 50 50 84 83 50 30 30 10 Land West of Pine Tree Farm, Cromer C22/2
460 77 50 30 10 Land North of Rudham Stile Lane, Fakenham F01/B(Part)
0 15 30 10 Land South of Barons Close, Fakenham F10
0 25 30 10 Land at Junction of A148 and B1146,FakenhamF03
0 30 30 10 Land Adjacent Petrol Filling Station, Fakenham F02
0 14 13 Land North of Valley Lane, Holt H17
0 40 60 60 40 20 Land at Heath Farm, Holt H20
0 20 40 40 30 30 Land East of Tunstead Road, Hoveton HV01/B
0 10 10 Land South of School Road, Ludham LUD01/A
0 5 10 Land at Eastern End of Grange Road, Ludham LUD06/AProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 266
23Housing TrajectoryBeyond March
20362035/362034/35
2033/34
2032/33
2031/32
2030/31
2029/30
2028/29
2027/28
2026/27
2025/26
2024/25
2023/24
2022/23
2021/22
2020/21
2019/20
2018/19
2017/18
2016/17Location Site Ref
0 40 40 40 73 73 40 40 40 30 Land at Norwich Road & Nursery Drive, North
WalshamNW01/B
1037 160 100 100 160 100 100 160 100 60 30 Land West of North Walsham, North Walsham NW62
0 20 10 Land off Cromer Road & Church Lane,MundesleyMUN03
0 10 15 10 10 Land Adjoining Seaview Crescent, Sheringham SH04
0 14 13 13 Former Allotments, Weybourne Road, Adjacentto 'The Reef', SheringhamSH07 
0 8 30 10 Land South of Butts Lane, Sheringham SH18/1B
0 30 30 10 Land Adjacent Ingham Road, Stalham ST19/A
0 30 40 10 Land North of Y armouth Road, East ofBroadbeach Gardens, StalhamST23/2
0 10 10 Land South of Ashburton Close,Wells-next-the-seaW01/1
0 20 20 10 Land Adjacent Holkham Road,Wells-next-the-seaW07/1
0 481 419 534 553 442  Delivered (Total)
0 9 26 98 90 185 303 359 366  Deliverable Planning Permissions (Total)
0 135 135 135 135 135 135 135 135 135 135 135 135 135 135  Future Expected Windfall (135)
0 34 34 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 34  New Local Plan Growth (Small Growth Villages)
1497 526 469 455 540 494 513 638 599 664 812 593 502 505 494 366 481 419 534 553 442 Total267 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Housing Trajectory 23Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 268
23Housing Trajectory24 Monitoring Framework
24.0.1 To enable the Council to assess whether the Local Plan is performing effectively, and it's
objectives are being met, an Annual Monitoring Report (AMR) will be produced based on a set
of key indicative indicators aligned to the Plans Aims and Objectives. The Monitoring Report
will be as comprehensive as possible, providing factual evidence and will also show population
change, changes in legislation, and other factors that impact on the delivery of the Plan.
24.0.2 The key indicators are not exhaustive and the AMR will also be used to monitor trend data over
time and will be used as a trigger to either initiate a review of the Local Plan or introduce
additional guidance on how to implement a policy, if required. Where appropriate the AMR will
also include reference to national indicators required by central government and provide details
in relation to the period of the report in relation to the Duty to Cooperate, such as joint working,
commitments, consultations and updates to the Norfolk Strategic Framework. It will also monitor
Neighbourhood Plans that have been adopted.
24.0.3 The key indicators below will be added to and or expanded as required. As the Government
introduces new changes to the Planning system, the Council will also adapt its monitoring
framework to see how these changes affect its policies.
24.0.4 Along with the key indicators, the Sustainability Appraisal Report (SA) also includes a set of
monitoring requirements. The 16 objectives of the SA will also be monitored and reported in
the AMR. The monitoring of these indicators will help to measure how well the Plan contributes
to sustainable development and inform future reviews of plans and policies as well as enabling
the Council to consider whether any remedial action needs to be taken to deal with any
unanticipated problems. The SA indicators as reported in the SA Report are reproduced for
completeness below.
Commentary / Target Key Indicators Key
PoliciesStrategic
Objective
CC1 –
CC13
SS1
HOU1
HOU2
HOU71.Delivering
Climate
Resilient
Sustainable
Development1. Top two tiers of Hierarchy;
 Number and percentage dwellings
permitted/completed in Growth Towns 2. Update on allocations and
%age of development.
 Number / percentage on allocations
100%
 Percentage of development providing at least
10% biodiversity net gain
Maximise.
 Amount of renewable energy capacity and low
carbon energy permitted / installed
Reduction year on Y ear.
 Number of dwelling / percentage of
applications achieving a reduction below the
(Implement targets in accordance
to national requirements).target emission rate (CO2) as required by
policy / legislation over plan period.
Number / percentage achieving net zero ready
(CO2) Maximise.
100%
 Number of / percentage of non-residential
dwellings achieving BREEAM very good and
above
100% Compliance
 Number and percentage of new dwellings
including conversions, that meet or exceed
higher water efficiency standards <110Lts/ day/ person and
BREEAM requirements.269 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Monitoring Framework 24Commentary / Target Key Indicators Key
PoliciesStrategic
Objective
100% residential
 Percentage residential development
incorporating electric vehicle charging
infrastructure. 50% communal
Number of EV charging points provided
(non-residential) 30%, Hotels
20% non-residential.
Number and rational of approvals.
 Number of applications approved / refused in
the Coastal Change Management Area,
CCMA.
Positive action to support
communities due to coast change.
Number of permissions for relocation and
replacement across Use classes as a result of
Coastal Change Adaptation.
Target 100% FZ1.
 Percentage of dwellings permitted in each flood
risk zone
Target Zero.
 No of applications approved contrary to EA
advice on Flood Risk.
a. Updates from Brownfield
Register.(Published annually
December).
 Amount of Brown field land available for
development.
Number and percentage of dwellings
completed on Previously Developed Land.
b. Maximise.
In line with programme. ENV1
ENV4
ENV5
ENV7
ENV8
CC102. Protecting
Character
Percentage of conservation areas with current
Conservation Area Appraisals and
Management Plans.
Amount/ number of major
development permitted (>  10
units).
No dwellings / conversion permitted /
completed in AONB.
100% of those required to comply.
 Percentage of proposals in conformity with
adopted Design Guide SPD.
Contributions (£).
 Contributions collected towards the scheme
of recreational avoidance and mitigation
measures in accordance with the GIRAMS (£) (Provision of rational where these
have not been collected.)
Amount of ha./
 Amount of additional provision of onsite
Enhanced Green Infrastructure (EGI) Ha /
Contributions. contributions towards off-site strategic green
infrastructure (£)
(As specified in planning decision
conditions/ s106/ any other
associated requirements).
Once defined (NCC).
 Number of planning applications within Local
Nature Recovery Strategies.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 270
24Monitoring FrameworkCommentary / Target Key Indicators Key
PoliciesStrategic
Objective
Delivering the quantity of homes
necessary for required needs
incudes table 2 update.HOU1
HOU2
HOU3
HOU5
HOU8
HOU9
SS1
DS13. Meeting
Accommodation
Needs
Number / percentage net additional dwellings
delivered against housing target.
Number / percentage of dwellings delivered in
each settlement / tier of hierarchy.
Allocations permitted / delivered
Number / percentage dwellings permitted /
completed in Countryside policy area.
Updated housing trajectory
Update of table 2 permissions and
 Growth levels in Small Growth Villages and
remaining indicative allowances (table 2) completions and remaining village
indicative allowances. (as set out
in appendix 4)
>135/ year.
 Number / percentage windfall development
Target 2,000.
 Number / percentage affordable dwellings
permitted / completed
As permitted.
 Number and location of exception housing
schemes / dwellings permitted / completed
As required in Policy HOU2.
 Number and percentage 2 & 3 bedroom
dwellings.
As permitted.
 Amount of provision for Gypsy and Travellers
(Plots) transit/ permanent  
As required by Policy HOU8:
 Percentage of dwellings meeting M4(2) &
M4(3) standard.
M4(2) - 100% & M4(3) 5% on sites
20 units or over
As required in Policy HOU9.
 Percentage dwellings complying / exceeding
minimum National Described Space Standards.
1. 486 specialist retirement
units over plan period
Number of older people / specialist
accommodation units permitted / completed
by type and tenure, location and an on
allocations2. Number units delivered on
specified allocations.
40 ha (on designated areas). E1
E2
E3
E44 Enabling
Economic
Growth
New employment permitted by Use Class
(sqm) in relation to Employment Areas,
Enterprise Zones, Former Airbases and
non-designated employment areas.
Third party statistics – ONS.
 Employee jobs by industry.
Number and percentage of vacant
retail units in town centres.
Retail Vacancy rates and floor space available
in Large / Medium town centres.
Number permitted.
 Amount of residential development permitted
in town centres, including full permissions and
permitted development rights.
Number of units and amount of
floor space sqm.
Amount of Retail, Office and Leisure developed
permitted / lost in Large / Medium Town
Centres. Floor spaces sqm. and units.271 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Monitoring Framework 24Commentary / Target Key Indicators Key
PoliciesStrategic
Objective
Economic Impact of Tourism Rpt
– annual NNDC
Value of tourism and the number of tourism
supported jobs.
Amount of open space gained / CC1
CC11
CC13
HC2
HC3
SS1
SS35. Delivering
Healthy
Communities
Amount of green space provided (Open space
including Amenity Space) per parish lost per parish sqm - Open space
study table 13, Parish quantities
update.
Open space supply by parish, (Table 13 Open
Space study 2020)
Number of units/ type of
development/ replacement facility.
Number of proposals and completions on
designated Health & Social Care Campuses
Number of Made Plans and
monitoring commitments.
Details of Made and in progress
Neighbourhood Plans
Details housing allocations, permissions and
completions in Made Neighbourhood Plans.
Target air quality objective of
40μg/m3.
Annual average concentration of Nitrogen
Dioxide, in North Norfolk
Source
North Norfolk District Council,
2020 Air Quality Annual Status
Report.
Table 10 Key Indicators for Monitoring of Local Plan Aims & Objectives
SA Objectives
Monitoring Indicators Sustainability Appraisal Objective/s
Number and percentage of dwellings
completed on Previously Developed Land.SA1: To promote the efficient use of land, minimise the loss of
undeveloped land, optimise the use of previously developed land (PDL),
buildings and existing infrastructure and protect the most valuable
agricultural land. Number of permissions for the relocation and
replacement of development affected by
coastal erosion.
Area of Grade 1, 2, 3a or 3b agricultural land
lost to development.
Percentage of household waste that is
recycled / re-used / composted.SA2:To minimise waste generation and avoid the sterilisation of mineral
resources.
Percentage of new dwellings, including SA3: To limit water consumption to the capacity of natural processes
and storage systems and to maintain and enhance water quality and
quantity.building conversions, that meet or exceed the
Government’ s Building Regulations
requirement of 110 litres water use per person
per day.
Per Capita CO2 Levels. SA4:To continue to reduce contributions to climate change and mitigate
and adapt against it and its effects.
Ha of new development permitted in areas at
risk of flooding.
Number of Air Quality Management Areas
(AQMAs).SA5: To minimise pollution and to remediate contaminated land.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 272
24Monitoring FrameworkMonitoring Indicators Sustainability Appraisal Objective/s
Number of contaminated sites remediated
through the planning process.
Percentage of SSSI in favourable,
unfavourable and recovering condition.SA6: To protect and enhance the areas’  biodiversity and geodiversity
assets (protected and unprotected species and designated and
non-designated sites).
Contributions to the strategic mitigation
package contained in GIRAMS.
Percentage of the District’ s County Wildlife
Sites (CWSs) in positive conservation
management.
GI permitted / provided (ha). SA7: To increase the provision of green infrastructure.
Percentage of conservation areas with current
Conservation Area Appraisals and
Management Plans.SA8: To protect, manage and where possible enhance the special
qualities of the areas’  landscapes, townscapes and seascapes
(designated and non-designated) and their settings, maintaining and
strengthening local distinctiveness and sense of place.
Number of heritage assets ‘at Risk’. SA9: To protect, manage and where possible enhance the historic
environment and their settings including addressing heritage at risk.
Health indicators e.g. rate of diabetes
diagnoses (17+) and rate of dementia
diagnoses (65+). Obesity rates.SA10: To maintain and improve the quality of where people live and
the quality of life of the population by promoting healthy lifestyles and
access to services, facilities and opportunities that promote engagement
and a healthy lifestyle (including open space), including reducing
deprivation and inequality. Amount of new open space provided / loss of
Open Space (sqm).
Recorded crimes per 1,000 population. SA11: To reduce crime and the fear of crime.
Amount and type of new housing, including
affordable, care/sheltered housing and number
of care/nursing home beds.SA12: To ensure that everyone has the opportunity of a good quality,
suitable and affordable home to meet their needs.
Number and locations of exception site
permissions and housing completions.
Number of and percentage of dwellings that
meet or exceed the Government’ s Technical
Standards- Nationally described Space
Standards.
Employee jobs by industry SA13: To encourage sustainable economic development and
education/skills training covering a range of sectors and skill levels to
improve employment opportunities for residents. New employment permitted by use class
(sqm).
Value of tourism and the number of tourism
supported jobs.SA14: To encourage investment.
Vacancy rates within town centres and floor SA15: To maintain and enhance town centres.
space for Retail and Main town centre uses.
E(a) Display or retail sale of goods, other than
hot food; E(b) Sale of food and drink for
consumption (mostly) on the premises; and
E(c) Provision of:
E(c)(i) Financial services,273 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Monitoring Framework 24Monitoring Indicators Sustainability Appraisal Objective/s
E(c)(ii) Professional services (other than health
or medical services), or
E(c)(iii) Other appropriate services in a
commercial, business or service locality.
Number/ floorspace of retail units lost
(including through Permitted Development).
Number / floor space new retail provision per
town centre, edge of centre, out of centre
location
Number of permissions / units granted in each
of the tiers of the settlement hierarchy and
percentage of overall growth.SA16: To reduce the need to travel and to promote the use of
sustainable transport.
Table 11 Key Indicators for Monitoring of Sustainability Appraisal ObjectivesProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 274
24Monitoring FrameworkAppendix 1: Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage
Table 12 'Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage - Application Requirements'  details the level of
information required, and at what stage, for planning applications. This table should be read in conjunction
with Policy CC 7 'Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage' .
Relevant
Section
of LLFA
GuidanceRequired Documentation & Detail Application Type/Stage
Discharge
of
ConditionsReserved
MattersFull Outline /
Master
PlanPre-
Application
Flood Risk
Assessment/Statement Checklist
Drainage Strategy/Statement Checklist
Preliminary Sketch Layout Plan
11
 Flood Risk Assessment/Statement
including:
plans and drawings;
detailed pre-development (and
ideally post-development)
hydrology / hydraulic flood
modelling, if appropriate;
indication of mitigation (including
compensatory storage or managed
surface water flow path creation)
and freeboard allowance;
where appropriate, required
maintenance easements to watercourses
and structures.
12
 Drainage Strategy/Statement evidencing:
Plan A (workable solution for
managing surface water);
Plan B (evidence of agreement in
principle of an alternative surface
water drainage discharge location
proposal will be required.
where appropriate, an outline drainage
layout plan.
Preliminary layout drawings of
development.
15/16
 Preliminary “Outline”  hydraulic
calculations (including infiltration rates,
existing and proposed runoff rates /
volumes attenuation required including
climate change and urban creep).
13/14
 Ground investigation report (for
infiltration) and infiltration testing if only
relying on infiltration.275 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 1: Flood Risk & Surface Water DrainageRelevant
Section
of LLFA
GuidanceRequired Documentation & Detail Application Type/Stage
Discharge
of
ConditionsReserved
MattersFull Outline /
Master
PlanPre-
Application
Preliminary landscape proposals
(showing SuDS component locations
and required maintenance easements).
Preliminary indication of how each of the
4 pillars of SuDS will be met.
12
 Evidence of agreement in principle of a
third party for SuDS discharge to their
system (e.g. Anglian Water, Highways
Authority or third-party owner).
Identification of the
maintenance responsibility of any
ordinary watercourse (including
structures) within or adjacent to the
development.
10.8
 Infrastructure & Construction Phasing
Plan (inc. temporary works)
11
 Flood Risk Assessment/Statement
including:
plans and drawings;
detailed post-development flood
modelling, if appropriate;
detailed mitigation (including
compensatory storage or managed
surface water flow path creation)
and freeboard allowances.
Where appropriate, emergency plans
indicating safe access and egress and
maintenance easements to
watercourses.
Detailed development layouts showing
SuDS locations.
12, 13,
14, 15,
16, 21
Detailed drainage design
hydrology/hydraulic calculations and
drawings showing all locations,
dimensions and freeboard of every
element of the proposed mitigation &
drainage system e.g. swales, storage
areas, ponds, permeable paving, filter
strips (including sewer details if
proposed (pipe numbers, gradients,
sizes, locations, manhole details etc.))
13/14
 Full hydraulic & ground investigations
(Geo-technical factual and interpretive
reports, including infiltration results).
17
 SuDS Water Quality Assessment.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 276
Appendix 1: Flood Risk & Surface Water DrainageRelevant
Section
of LLFA
GuidanceRequired Documentation & Detail Application Type/Stage
Discharge
of
ConditionsReserved
MattersFull Outline /
Master
PlanPre-
Application
18/19
 Detailed landscaping details linking to
SuDS amenity and biodiversity elements.
20
 Detailed maintenance program and
on-going maintenance responsibilities.
21
 Exceedance flow plan.
Table 12 Flood Risk & Surface Water Drainage - Application Requirements277 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 1: Flood Risk & Surface Water DrainageProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 278
Appendix 1: Flood Risk & Surface Water DrainageAppendix 2: Open Space
To be read in conjunction with Policy HC 2 'Provision & Retention of Open Spaces'
Quality Standard Accessibility Standard Area
Required
(over
Plan
period
to
2036)Quantity
Standards
(per
1,000
population)Open
Space
Type
It is expected that the design of play would take a All residents within the 1.66ha 0.1ha per
1,000
populationPlay
Space
(Children)landscape design approach (designed to fit its
surroundings and enhance the local environment),District should have
access to a childrens play
incorporating play into the overall landscape masterplan space within 800m of
for new development, and could include natural play home. Reference should
e.g. grassy mounds, planting, logs, and boulders can also be made to Figure 9
of the North Norfolk Open
Space Assessment 2019.all help to make a more attractive and playable setting
for equipment, and planting can also help attract birds
and other wildlife to literally bring the play space alive.
All residents within the 1ha 0.06ha
per 1,000
populationPlay
Space
(Youth)In densely populated urban areas with little or no natural
or green space, this more natural approach can help
‘soften’  an urban landscape.District should have
access to a youth play
space within 1.2km of
home. Reference should The challenge for play providers is to create play spaces
also be made to Figure 10
of the North Norfolk Open
Space Assessment 2019.which will attract children, capture their imagination and
give them scope to play in new, more exciting, and more
creative ways 
e.g. moving away from fencing play areas (where it is
safe to do so), so that the equipment is integrated with
its setting, making it feel more inviting to explore and so
people are free to use the space without feeling
restricted.
Play England are keen to see a range of play spaces in
all urban environments:
a. Door-step spaces close to home
b. Local play spaces – larger areas within easy
walking distance
c. Neighbourhood spaces for play – larger spaces
within walking distance
d. Destination/family sites – accessible by bicycle,
public transport and with car parking.
Regard should be given to the guidance set out within
the following:
Play England’ s ‘Design for Play’
Play England’ s ‘Quality Assessment Tool’,  and;
KIDS ‘Inclusive Design for Play’
Inclusive Play ‘Plan inclusive Play Areas’
National guidance relevant to this typology is provided All residents within the 18.26ha 1.1ha per
1,000
populationParks &
Recreation in the ‘Green Flag’  quality standard for parks which sets
out benchmark criteria for quality open spaces. ForDistrict should have
access to a park or
outdoor sports space, Sport England have produced a recreation area within 1km
wealth of useful documents outlining the quality of home. Reference should
standards for facilities such as playing pitches, changing279 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 2: Open SpaceQuality Standard Accessibility Standard Area
Required
(over
Plan
period
to
2036)Quantity
Standards
(per
1,000
population)Open
Space
Type
rooms, MUGAs and tennis courts plus associated also be made to Figure 8
of the North Norfolk Open
Space Assessment 2019.ancillary facilities. The Rugby Football Union have
provided guidance on the quality and standard of
provision of facilities for rugby, and the England and
Wales Cricket Board have provided guidance for cricket
facilities. It is recommended that the guidance provided
in these documents is adopted by the Councils, and that
all new and improved provision seeks to meet these
guidelines.
The shape and size of space provided should allow for All residents within the 24.91ha 1.5ha per
1,000
populationNatural
Green
Spacemeaningful and safe recreation. Provision might be
expected to include (as appropriate) elements ofDistrict should have
access to a natural green
woodland, wetland, heathland and meadow, and could
also be made for informal public access through
recreation corridors.space within 1.6km of
home. Reference should
also be made to Figure
11-17 of the North Norfolk
Open Space Assessment
2019.For larger areas, where car-borne visits might be
anticipated, some parking provision will be required.The
larger the area the more valuable sites will tend to be in
terms of their potential for enhancing local conservation
interest and biodiversity. Wherever possible these sites
should be linked to help improve their wildlife value and
Green Infrastructure functionality as part of a network.
Natural Green Space should offer a more natural
ambience, and encourage ecological and habitat
diversity. In areas where it may be impossible or
inappropriate to provide additional natural green space
consistent with the standard, other approaches should
be pursued which could include (for example):
Changing the management of marginal space on
playing fields and parks to enhance biodiversity.
Encouraging living green roofs as part of new
development/ redevelopment.
Encouraging the creation of native mixed species
hedgerows.
Additional use of long grass management
regimes.
Improvements to watercourses and water bodies.
Innovative use of new drainage schemes /
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS).
Use of native trees and plants with biodiversity
value in high quality soft landscaping of new
developments.
The above should in any event be principles to be
pursued and encouraged at all times.
Protecting, creating, enhancing and retrofitting natural
and semi-natural features in our urban environments is
a cost-effective and win-win approach to delivering
positive outcomes for people and wildlife.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 280
Appendix 2: Open SpaceQuality Standard Accessibility Standard Area
Required
(over
Plan
period
to
2036)Quantity
Standards
(per
1,000
population)Open
Space
Type
The value of ‘amenity green space’  must be recognised All residents within the 16.6ha 1ha per
1,000
populationAmenity
Green
Spaceespecially within housing areas, where it can provide
important local opportunities for play, exercise and visual
amenity that are almost immediately accessible.District should have
access to an amenity
green space within 800m
of home. Reference should
It is therefore recommended that in addition to avoiding also be made to Figure 7
of the North Norfolk Open
Space Assessment 2019.the proliferation of small amenity spaces, that all amenity
green space should be subject to landscape design,
ensuring the following quality principles:
Capable of supporting informal recreation such as
a kickabout, space for dog walking or space to sit
and relax;
Include high quality planting of native trees and/or
shrubs to create landscape structure and
biodiversity value;
Include paths along main desire lines (lit where
appropriate);
Be designed to ensure easy maintenance.
The following recommendations are made to ensure the
quality of allotments:All residents within the
District should have9.96ha 0.6ha per
1,000
populationAllotments
access to an allotment
Well-drained soil which is capable of cultivation to
a reasonable standard.garden within 1.2km of
home. Reference should
also be made to Figure 6
of the North Norfolk Open
Space Assessment 2019.
A sunny, open aspect preferably on a southern
facing slope.
Limited overhang from trees and buildings either
bounding or within the site.
Adequate lockable storage facilities, and a good
water supply within easy walking distance of
individual plots.
Provision for composting facilities.
Secure boundary fencing.
Good access within the site both for pedestrians
and vehicles.
Good vehicular access into the site and adequate
parking and manoeuvring space.
Disabled access.
Toilets.
Notice boards.
Allotment sites should be of adequate quality and
support the needs of the local community. Allotment
sites which under-perform in terms of their value to the
local community should be improved.
Table 13 Open Space - Application Requirements281 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 2: Open SpaceProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 282
Appendix 2: Open SpaceAppendix 3:Technical Space Standards
27.0.1 The following are the current standards which would need to be achieved in order to comply
with Policy HOU 9 'Minimum Space Standards' .
Technical Requirements
a. the dwelling provides at least the gross internal floor area and built-in storage area (set
out in Table 15);
b. a dwelling with two or more bedspaces has at least one double (or twin) bedroom;
c. in order to provide one bedspace, a single bedroom has a floor area of at least 7.5m2 and
is at least 2.15m wide;
d. in order to provide two bedspaces, a double (or twin bedroom) has a floor area of at least
11.5m2;
e. one double (or twin bedroom) is at least 2.75m wide and every other double (or twin)
bedroom is at least 2.55m wide;
f. any area with a headroom of less than 1.5m is not counted within the Gross Internal Area
unless used solely for storage (if the area under the stairs is to be used for storage, assume
a general floor area of 1m2 within the Gross Internal Area);
g. any other area that is used solely for storage and has a headroom of 900-1500mm (such
as under eaves) is counted at 50% of its floor area, and any area lower than 900mm is
not counted at all;
h. a built-in wardrobe counts towards the Gross Internal Area and bedroom floor area
requirements, but should not reduce the effective width of the room below the minimum
widths set out above. The built-in area in excess of 0.72m2 in a double bedroom and
0.36m2 in a single bedroom counts towards the built-in storage requirement;
i. the minimum floor to ceiling height is 2.3m for at least 75% of the Gross Internal Area.
Minimum Gross Internal Floor Area & Storage
Built-in Storage
(msq)3-Storey
Dwellings
(msq)2-Storey
Dwellings
(msq)1-Storey
Dwellings
(msq)Number of Bed
Spaces
(persons)Number of
Bedrooms
1.0 39 (37) (1)1p 1
1.5 58 50 2p
2.0 70 61 3p 2
79 70 4p
2.5 90 84 74 4p 3
99 93 86 5p
108 102 95 6p
3.0 103 97 90 5p 4
112 106 99 p
121 115 108 7p
130 124 117 8p283 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 3: Technical Space StandardsBuilt-in Storage
(msq)3-Storey
Dwellings
(msq)2-Storey
Dwellings
(msq)1-Storey
Dwellings
(msq)Number of Bed
Spaces
(persons)Number of
Bedrooms
3.5 116 110 103 6p 5
125 119 112 7p
134 128 121 8p
4.0 129 123 116 7p 6
138 132 125 8p
Table 14 Minimum Gross Internal Floor Area & Storage
1. Notes (added 19 May 2016): 1. Built-in storage areas are included within the overall GIAs and include an allowance of 0.5m2 for fixed
services or equipment such as a hot water cylinder, boiler or heat exchanger. 2. GIAs for one storey dwellings include enough space
for one bathroom and one additional WC (or shower room) in dwellings with 5 or more bedspaces. GIAs for two and three storey
dwellings include enough space for one bathroom and one additional WC (or shower room). Additional sanitary facilities may be included
without increasing the GIA provided that all aspects of the space standard have been met. 3. Where a 1b1p has a shower room instead
of a bathroom, the floor area may be reduced from 39m2 to 37m2, as shown bracketed. 4. Furnished layouts are not required to
demonstrate Compliance. Source - Nationally Described Space Standard, 2015.Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 284
Appendix 3: Technical Space StandardsAppendix 4: Growth Levels in Small Growth Villages
28.0.1 Policy SS 1 'Spatial Strategy'  sets out the spatial strategy and settlement hierarchy for North
Norfolk. This states that in settlements classed as Small Growth Villages  development will
be delivered via a policy which allows for growth both within, and outside of, a defined Settlement
Boundary,  with the current exception of Corpusty and Saxthorpe, where growth is directed
through the adopted Neighbourhood Plan. The Policy explains the criteria which will need to
be satisfied in order to secure support for residential development. T his Appendix details how
Policy SS1, in relation to residential growth in Small Growth Villages will be applied by decision
makers.
28.0.2 The Policy allows for each village to grow by in the region of 6% in dwelling numbers from the
date of adoption of the Plan. The 6% 'allowance' is specified in Table 2 'Small Growth Villages
Housing Apportionment' . The allowance is measured from the number of dwellings present
within the defined settlement boundary as of 2021. The allowance relates to each individual
settlement and once reached no further permissions will be granted other than for the exempted
types of development listed below.
Exempted Development
28.0.3  In order to establish the remaining level of growth which may be permitted before the 6%
allowance is reached, calculations will take account of and exclude:
i. Dwellings already completed upon adoption of the Plan;
ii. Dwellings with planning permission but yet to be built upon adoption of the Plan;
iii. dwellings permitted that are brought forward through this Plan’ s Community-Led
Development and Affordable Housing in the Countryside policies, (Rural Exceptions Policy),
SS3 & HOU3, building conversions, and dwelling subdivisions.
28.0.4 Where a planning permission has lapsed, it will be removed from the calculations as part of the
monitoring process (i.e removed from the “commitments“) and will not count against the total
growth level.
28.0.5 The Annual Monitoring Report will publish updated monitoring figures for each of the selected
Small Growth Villages. Permissions will be monitored regularly so that up to date information
will be available throughout the year to inform pre-application advice and subsequent
development management considerations.
28.0.6 Given that the Council has no control over when applications are submitted it is recommended
that those considering an application for residential development in a Small Growth Village
seek pre-application advice on the remaining growth capacity in the relevant settlement before
submitting an application. In the event of two or more applications awaiting determination at
the same time priority will be given to the application which is registered at the earliest date
provided the application is likely to progress to a positive recommendation.
28.0.7 Each application will be considered on its merits in line with the applicable policies in the
Development Plan (including Neighbourhood Plans), and other material considerations.
28.0.8 For monitoring purposes, data on Small Growth Villages will be published in the following format:285 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 4: Growth Levels in Small Growth VillagesComments
(to include
details of
approvals
and
additional
approvals
out the
policy)Remaining
Allowance
(dwellings)Total
Commitments
(excluding
lapsed)Annual
Commitments
(1 April - 31
March)Commitments
(from
adoption to
year-end)Indicative
Housing
Allowance
(from
adoption to
2036)Baseline
Dwellings
(on
adoption of
the Plan)Settlement
(f) (e) (d) (c) (b) (a)
(b) + (e) (c) + (d)Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 286
Appendix 4: Growth Levels in Small Growth VillagesAppendix 5: Coastal Change Management Area
These indicative maps are to be read in conjunction with Policy CC 5 'Coastal Change Management '. A more detailed map view can be seen by
viewing the Policies Map.
Map 1 - Coastal Change Management Area + 30m Hold The Line Area287 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management AreaMap 2 - Coastal Change Management Area + 30m Hold The Line AreaProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 288
Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management AreaMap 3 - Coastal Change Management Area + 30m Hold The Line Area289 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management AreaMap 4 - Coastal Change Management Area + Hold The Line AreaProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 290
Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management AreaMap 5 - Coastal Change Management Area + 30m Hold The Line Area291 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management AreaMap 6 - Coastal Change Management Area + 30m Hold The Line AreaProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 292
Appendix 5: Coastal Change Management AreaGlossary
The final confirmation of a Local Development Plan Document as having
statutory status by a Local Planning AuthorityAdopted
Housing for rent or sale, for those whose needs are not met by the market Affordable Housing
(including housing that provides a subsidised route to home ownership
and/or is for essential local workers); and which complies with one or more
of the following definitions:
1. Affordable housing for rent : which must meet all of the following
conditions detailed in the NPPF:
(a) the rent is set in accordance with the Government’ s rent
policy for Social Rent or Affordable Rent, or is at least 20%
below local market rents;
(b) the landlord is a registered provider, except where it is
included as part of a Build to Rent scheme; and,
(c) it includes provisions to remain at an affordable price for
future eligible households, or for the subsidy to be recycled for
alternative affordable housing provision. For Build to Rent
schemes affordable housing for rent is expected to be the normal
form of affordable housing provision (and, in this context, is
known as Affordable Private Rent).
2. Starter homes : as specified in Sections 2 and 3 of the Housing and
Planning Act 2016 (and any subsequent secondary legislation).
3. Discounted market sale housing: is that sold at a discount of at least
20% below market value, including those classified as First Homes.
Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house
prices. Provisions should be in place to ensure housing remains at a
discount for future eligible households.
4. Other affordable routes to home ownership i.e housing provided
for sale that provides a route to ownership for those who could not
achieve home ownership through the market. It includes: shared
ownership and low cost homes for sale (at a price equivalent to at least
20% below local market value) and rent to buy (which includes a period
of intermediate rent).
Proposals that a certain site or area of land should be developed for Allocations
particular uses and/or buildings. They are shown on a Policies Map,
contained within the Local plan.They will be accompanied by related policies
which set out the parameters which development proposals need to accord
with.
A tree which, because of its age, size and condition, is of exceptional Ancient or Veteran
Tree biodiversity, cultural or heritage value. All ancient trees are veteran trees.
Not all veteran trees are old enough to be ancient, but are old relative to
other trees of the same species. Very few trees of any species reach the
ancient life-stage.293 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
GlossaryAn area that has been wooded continuously since at least 1600 AD. It
includes ancient semi-natural woodland and plantations on ancient woodland
sites (PAWS).Ancient Woodland
A report produced at the end of each year assessing our progress and the
extent to which policies in Local Development Documents are being
successfully implemented.Annual Monitoring
Report (AMR)
Where a heritage asset holds, or potentially holds, evidence of past human
activity worthy of expert investigation at some point.Archaeological
Interest
A national designation protecting areas of landscape importance. Area of Outstanding
Natural Beauty
(AONB)
The whole variety of life encompassing all genetics, species and ecosystem
variations, including plants and animals.Biodiversity
An environmental assessment method that assesses the environmental
performance of non-residential buildings. https://www .breeam.comBREEAM
See Previously Developed Land Brownfield Land
A register of previously developed land that local planning authorities Brownfield Land
Register consider to be appropriate for residential development, having regard to
criteria in the Town and Country Planning (Brownfield Land Registers)
Regulations 2017. Local planning authorities will be able to trigger a grant
of permission in principle for residential development on suitable sites in
their registers where they follow the required procedures.
Active: A fully wired and connected chargepoint which is ready to use. Charge Point (Electric
vehicle) Passive: means the provision of the necessary underlying infrastructure to
enable simple installation and activation of a chargepoint at a future date
(includes ensuring there is the capacity in the local electricity distribution
network and electricity distribution board, as well as cabling to parking
spaces)
Long term changes in temperature and other aspects of the Earth’ s climate, Climate Change
and related changes in the ocean, land surfaces and Habitats. Often
regarded as a result of human activity and the release of greenhouse gases
such as carbon dioxide (CO2) through fossil fuel consumption and
consequently resulting in in more frequent extreme weather conditions, and
increased global temperatures.
Adjustments made to natural or human systems in response to the actual
or anticipated impacts of climate change, to mitigate harm or exploit
beneficial opportunities.Climate Change
Adaptation
Action to reduce the impact of human activity on the climate system, primarily
through reducing greenhouse gas emissions.Climate Change
Mitigation
An area identified in plans as likely to be affected by physical change to the
shoreline through erosion, coastal landslip, permanent inundation or coastal
accretion.Coastal Change
Management Area
(CCMA)Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 294
GlossaryInformation about the vulnerability of new development in relation to coastal
erosion that demonstrates the appropriateness of a development in a coastal
change management area.Coastal Erosion
Vulnerability
Assessment (CEVA)
Planning permissions (number of units) that have been permitted but not
yet built.Commitments
An Order made by the local planning authority (under the Town and Country
Planning Act 1990) that grants planning permission for a site specific
development proposal or classes of development.Community Right to
Build Order
A supporting document that sets out the level of reduction in carbon and Compliance Statement
(Policy CC3) how a proposal will achieve the energy performance and carbon reduction
in relation to the Target Emission Rate of the 2013 Edition of the 2010
Building Regulations (Part L) (amended 2016).
The process of maintaining and managing change to a heritage asset in a
way that sustains and where appropriate, enhances its significance.Conservation
(heritage)
An area of special architectural and / or historic interest that deserves
preservation or enhancement of its character or appearance.Conservation Area
A limiting factor that affects development, such as an environmental
designation.Constraint
An accompanying plan document that sets out the process of consultation
and how feedback has been taken into account.Consultation
Statement
Land that has been polluted or harmed in some way making it unfit for safe
development and use unless cleaned.Contaminated Land
Engagement with specific and general consultees. Consultation
Local renewable and local low carbon energy sources. Decentralised Energy
Department for Communities and Local Government (successor to ODPM
as of May 2006).DCLG
Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. DEFRA
A set of illustrated design requirements that provide specific, detailed Design Code
parameters for the physical development of a site or area. The graphic and
written components of the code should build upon a design vision, such as
a masterplan or other design and development framework for a site or area.
A document providing guidance on how development can be carried out in
accordance with good design practice.Design Guide
A specific area shown on the Policies Map which illustrates the spatial
context of one or more policies.Designation
A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed Building, Protected
Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, Registered Battlefield or
Conservation Area designated under the relevant legislation.Designated Heritage
Asset
For the purposes of planning it is described under section 157(1) of the Designated Rural Area
Housing Act 1985. The entire district of North Norfolk, with the exception of
Cromer, Fakenham, Holt, North Walsham and Sheringham, and any area295 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Glossaryof the Norfolk Coast already designated as an AONB, is designated as rural
for the purpose of section 19 of the Housing Act 1980.  Section 19 Housing
Act 1980 has been replaced by s.157 Housing Act 1985.
Defined in the 1990 Town and Country Planning Act as "the carrying out of Development
building, engineering, mining or other operation in, on, over or under land,
or the making of any material change in the use of any building or other
land." Most forms of development require planning permission.
A document that outlines detailed planning requirements for the development
of a site. It is subject to public consultation prior to publication.Development Brief
Defined in section 38 of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, Development Plan
and includes adopted local plans, neighbourhood plans that have been
made and published spatial development strategies, together with any
regional strategy policies that remain in force. Neighbourhood plans that
have been approved at referendum are also part of the development plan,
unless the local planning authority decides that the neighbourhood plan
should not be made.
Legal agreements between a planning authority and a developer to ensure Developer
Contributions that certain extra works related to a development are undertaken. For
example, the provision of highways. Sometimes called "Section 106"
agreements.
The action of diversifying existing economic activity into new areas of
business in order to broaden the return on capital or assets.Diversification
The duty to cooperate was created in the Localism Act 2011, and amends Duty to Co-operate
the Planning and Compulsor y Purchase Act 2004  . It places a legal duty on
local planning authorities, county councils in England and public bodies to
engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing basis to maximise the
effectiveness of Local and Marine Plan preparation in the context of strategic
cross boundary matters.
Ecological networks are the basic, joined up infrastructure of existing and Ecological Network /
Corridor future habitat needed to allow populations of species and habitats to survive
in fluctuating conditions. As a short term benefit, a landscape that species
can move through easily allows re-colonisation of areas after disturbance
events, preventing local extinctions. In the long term, as our climate begins
to change, well connected habitats offer opportunities for populations to
move as conditions become more or less suitable. The movement of
individuals between populations in a connected landscape maintains genetic
diversity which allows populations to adapt to future changes in
environmental conditions.
For retail purposes, a location that is well connected to and up to 200-300
metres from the Primary Shopping Area.Edge of Centre
A classification of energy options, prioritised to assist progress towards a
more sustainable energy system.Energy Hierarchy
A procedure to be followed for certain types of project to ensure that
decisions are made in full knowledge of any likely significant effects on the
environment.Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA)
Any site included within the definition at regulation 8 of the Conservation of European site (Es)Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 296
GlossaryHabitats and Species Regulations 2017 (as amended) for the purpose of
those regulations, including candidate Special Areas of Conservation, Sites
of Community Importance, Special Areas of Conservation, Special Protection
Areas and any relevant Marine Sites. These are defined at
https://magic.defr a.gov.uk . RAMSAR sites - wetland sites designated to be
of international importance under the RAMSAR Convention are provided
the same level of protection as European sites and Habitat Sites in the
NPPF .
An opportunity for comments on submitted documents to be considered by Examination (Local
Plan) an independent inspector appointed by the Government. The purpose of
the Examination is to consider if the development plan is ‘sound’, i.e. it
‘shows good judgement’  and is justified.
First Homes are the Governments preferred discounted market housing First Homes
tenure and are a specific kind of discounted market sale housing that should
be considered to meet the definition of ‘affordable housing’  for planning
purposes. Specifically, First Homes are discounted market sale units which:
1. must be discounted by a minimum of 30% against the market value
and be no more than £250,000 after discount is applied;
2. are sold to a person or persons meeting the First Homes eligibility
criteria ( income, funding restrictions apply and purchasers must be
first time buyers)
3. Are discounted in perpetuity with restrictions passed on through
subsequent title transfer.
First Homes are the government’ s preferred discounted market tenure and
should account for at least 25% of all affordable housing units delivered by
developers through planning obligations.
www .gov.uk/guidance/first-homes
Flood Risk Zones
 Zone 1 Low Probability - this zone comprises land assessed as having
a less than 1 in 1000 chance of river and sea flooding in any year
(<0.1%)
Zone 2 Medium Probability - this zone comprises land assessed as
having between a 1 in 100 and 1 in 1000 chance of river flooding (1%
- 0.1%) and between a 1 in 200 and 1 in 1000 chance of sea flooding
(0.5% - 0.1%) in any year
Zone 3a High Probability - this zone comprises land assessed as having
a 1 in 100 or greater chance of river flooding (>1%) and a 1 in 200 or
greater chance of flooding from the sea (>0.5%) in any year
Zone 3b The Functional Floodplain - this zone comprises land where
water has to flow or be stored in times of flood
Open spaces with an important recreational function such as school playing
fields, sports pitches and recreational parks and gardens.Formal Education and
Recreation Areas
The range of rocks, minerals, fossils, soils and landforms. Geodiversity
A network of multi-functional green and blue spaces and other Green Infrastructure297 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
Glossarynatural features, urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range
of environmental, economic, health and wellbeing benefits for nature, climate,
local and
wider communities and prosperity.
Any site which would be included within the definition at regulation 8 of the Habitats Sites
Conservation of Habitats and Species Regulations 2017 for the purpose of
those regulations, including candidate Special Areas of Conservation, Sites
of Community Importance, Special Areas of Conservation, Special Protection
Areas and any relevant Marine Sites. Ramsar & candidate (proposed) are
afforded the same level of protection through paragraph 181 of the NPPF
as habitat sites.
Areas of undeveloped coastline which are managed to conserve their natural
beauty and, where appropriate, to improve accessibility for visitors.Heritage Coast
All aspects of the environment resulting from the interaction between people Historic Environment
and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past
human activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and
planted or managed flora.
Land (or a defined site), that has not previously been developed. (usually
farmland)Greenfield Site
Water held in water-bearing rocks and spaces underground. It sustains the
flow of water in rivers and is an essential source of water for public supply,
industry and agriculture.Groundwater
Areas of undeveloped coastline which are managed to conserve their natural
beauty and where appropriate, to improve accessibility for visitors.Heritage Coast
A local authority (County Council or Unitary Authority) with the responsibility
of planning and maintaining the highways network (excepting trunk roads
and motorways) and transportation within their areas.Highway Authority
Measures net homes delivered in a local authority area against the homes Housing Delivery Test
required, using national statistics and local authority data. The Secretary of
State will publish the Housing Delivery Test results for each local authority
in England every November.
The total amount of housing within a plan area, but this may be divided into
components such as private housing stock or rented housing stock.Housing Stock
Carrying out the proposed actions to required standards that are set out in
the Plan.Implementation
An examination held in public by a Government appointed Inspector from
the Planning Inspectorate.Independent
Examination
Basic services necessary for development to take place, for example, roads,
electricity, sewerage, water, education and health facilities.Infrastructure
A document that sets out the critical infrastructure that is required to support
the objectives, policies and spatial strategy set out in the Planning strategy
and details how, when and where this will be delivered.Infrastructure Delivery
PlanProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 298
GlossaryAll international sites (Special Areas of Conservation, Special Protection
Areas, and Ramsar sites), national sites (Sites of Special Scientific Interest)
and locally designated sites including Local Wildlife Sites.International, national
and locally designated
sites of importance for
biodiversity
Illustrates the broad strategies set out in the Local Plan. Key Diagram
A distinct pattern or a consistent combination of elements (natural and or
human) in the landscape of an area.Landscape Character
A legally binding contract, between a developer and the local planning
authority that constitutes a planning obligation.Legal Agreement
A building mentioned in statutory lists as being of special architectural or
historic interest. There are different grades of listing to indicate relative
interest.Listed Building
Spaces that meet specific criteria identified in the NPPF as being Local Green Spaces
‘demonstrably special’  to a local community because of beauty, historic
significance, recreational value (including as a playing field), tranquillity or
richness of its wildlife. Any designation should not be an extensive tract of
land and should be in close proximity to the community it serves
Local Nature Recovery Strategies are a new system of spatial strategies Local Nature
Recovery Strategies
(LNRS)for nature, which will cover the whole of England. They will be established
by the Environment Act and are designed as tools to drive more coordinated,
practical and focussed action to help nature. Each Strategy will, for the area
that it covers;
agree priorities for nature’ s recovery, 
map the most valuable existing areas for nature, 
map specific proposals for creating or improving habitat for nature and
wider environmental goals.
A plan for the future development of a local area, drawn up by the local Local Plan
planning authority in consultation with the community. In law this is described
as the development plan documents adopted under the Planning and
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. A local plan can consist of either strategic
or non-strategic policies, or a combination of the two.
The public authority whose duty it is to carry out specific planning functions Local Planning
Authority (LPA) for a particular area. The Broads Authority is also considered to be a local
planning authority, for those part of the District that are in the Broads
Executive Area. County Councils are the authority for waste and minerals
matters.
A five year transport strategy produced by the Highway Authority (Norfolk
County Council) setting out the key objectives and priorities for the area.Local Transport Plan
Retail development (including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); Main Town Centre
Uses leisure, entertainment and more intensive sport and recreation uses
(including cinemas, restaurants, drive-through restaurants, bars and pubs,
nightclubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres and
bingo halls); offices; and arts, culture and tourism development (including
theatres, museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference
facilities).299 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
GlossaryFor housing, development where 10 or more homes will be provided, or the Major Development*
site has an area of 0.5 hectares or more. For non-residential development
it means additional floorspace of 1,000m2 or more, or a site of 1 hectare or
more, or as otherwise provided in the Town and Country Planning
(Development Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015. *(Other than
for the specific purposes of paragraphs 176 and 177 of the NPPF)
A plan prepared by the Minerals Authority (Norfolk County Council) that
provides the framework for the minerals and waste planning strategy.Minerals and Waste
Local Plan
The process of measuring (in terms of quantity and quality), the changes
in conditions and trends, impact of policies, performance of the plan against
its objectives and targets, and progress in delivering outputs.Monitoring (and
review)
The National Planning Policy Framework sets out the Government’ s planning National Planning
Policy Framework
(NPPF)policies for England and how these should be applied. It provides a
framework within which locally-prepared plans for housing and other
development can be produced 
www.gov.uk/go vernment/pub lications/national-planning-policy-fr amework--2
National planning guidance issued by the government.
www .gov.uk/go vernment/collections/planning-pr actice-guidanceNational Planning
Practice Guidance
Long distance routes for walking, cycling and horse riding. National Trails
The necessary (evidenced) requirements of the public, which may be less
or different than their demands.Needs
A plan prepared by a parish council for a designated neighbourhood area.
In law this is described as a neighbourhood development plan in the Planning
and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.Neighbourhood Plan
A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a Non-designated
Heritage Asset degree of significance meriting consideration in planning decisions, because
of its heritage interest. It includes assets identified by the local planning
authority (including local listing).
The NSPF provides a structure for joint working on cross boundary strategic Norfolk Strategic
Planning Forum
(NSPF)issues through the Duty to Co- Operate.The Forum oversees the production
of the Norfolk Strategic Planning Framework (NSPF) document on behalf
of all the local planning authorities.
Document setting out those areas where the Planning Authorities and Norfolk Strategic
Planning Framework
(NSPF)relevant strategic stakeholders across Norfolk work together on shared
objectives and strategic cross boundary priorities. The document
demonstrates effective and on-going joint working across the county on
strategic planning matters. It addresses key cross-boundary issues and
progress in co-operating to address these.
A statement that specifies the direction and amount of desired change in
trends or in conditions.Objective
People over or approaching retirement age, including the active, newly Older people
retired through to the very frail elderly; and whose housing needs canProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 300
Glossaryencompass accessible, adaptable general needs housing through to the
full range of retirement and specialised housing for those with support or
care needs.
Areas of open space which make an important contribution to the appearance
or opportunities for informal recreation in an area.Open Land Areas
All open space of public value, including not just land, but also areas of Open Space
water (such as rivers, canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer important
opportunities for sport and recreation and can act as a visual amenity. In
this Plan, three types are designated; Open Land Areas; Formal Education
and Recreation Areas; and Local Green Spaces (also see separate glossary
definitions).
For the purposes of planning pitch means a pitch on a gypsy and traveller Pitch
site and is an area on a site developed for a family unit to live. On socially
rented sites, the area let to a tenant for stationing caravans and other
vehicles.
An engagement tool between Local planning authorities, the Norfolk and Planning In Health
Protocol Waveney Sustainability and Transformation Partnership, Clinical
Commissioning Groups, Health Partners and Public Health Norfolk and
Public Health Suffolk. Available in the Document Libr ary  and from the
Norfolk Str ategic F ramework .
For the purposes of planning Plot means a pitch on a travelling showpeople Plot
site (sometimes called a yard) and is an area on a yard for Travelling
Showpeople to live. As well as dwelling units, Travelling Showpeople often
keep their commercial equipment on a plot.
A written condition on a planning permission that restricts the development
in some way to achieve a stated purpose.Planning Condition
Legal agreements between a planning authority and a developer to ensure Planning Obligation
that certain extra works related to a development are undertaken. For
example, the provision of highways. Sometimes called "Section 106"
agreements.
Land which is or was occupied by a permanent structure, including the Previously Developed
Land curtilage of the developed land (although it should not be assumed that the
whole of the curtilage should be developed) and any associated fixed surface
infrastructure.This excludes: land that is or was last occupied by agricultural
or forestry buildings; land that has been developed for minerals extraction
or waste disposal by landfill, where provision for restoration has been made
through development management procedures; land in built-up areas such
as residential gardens, parks, recreation grounds and allotments; and land
that was previously developed but where the remains of the permanent
structure or fixed surface structure have blended into the landscape.
A defined area where retail development is concentrated. Primary Shopping
Area
Primary and Most Principle Routes as defined by Norfolk County Council
Route Hierarchy.Principle Route
Species and Habitats of principal importance included in the England Priority habitats and
Species Biodiversity List published by the Secretary of State under section 41 of the301 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
GlossaryNatural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006, Norfolk Biodiversity
Action Plan habitats and species, Biodiversity 2020 and 25 Y ear Environment
Plan.
A positive worded policy of the Local Planning Authority that proposes a
course of action or an allocation of land for a particular use or development.Proposal
The Policies Map illustrates all policies contained in the Development Plan
documents, together with any saved policies. It is updated each time a
Development Plan is adopted.Policies Map
Wetland sites designated to be of international importance under the Ramsar
Convention and provided the same level of protection as European sites
and Habitat Sites in the NPPF .Ramsar Sites
Includes energy for heating and cooling as well as generating electricity. Renewable and Low
Carbon Energy Renewable energy covers those energy flows that occur naturally and
repeatedly in the environment – from the wind, the fall of water, the
movement of oceans, from the sun and also from biomass and deep
geothermal heat. Low carbon technologies are those that can help reduce
emissions (compared to conventional use of fossil fuels).
Comments made on consultation documents. Representations
Living conditions in and around a dwelling. Residential Amenity
The expansion, enlargement or variation of the range of products or fields Rural Diversification
of operation of a rural business (branching out from traditional farming
activities, for example new income generating enterprise like renewable
energy, tourism and food processing).
Small sites used for affordable housing in perpetuity where sites would not Rural exception sites
normally be granted planning permission. Rural exception sites seek to
address the needs of the local community by accommodating households
who are either current residents or have an existing family or employment
connection.
A village or town which this Plan identifies (in Policy SS1) as an appropriate Selected Settlements
place for development and where the acceptable amount, type and location
of development is determined by a defined Settlement Boundary, and the
policies of this Plan.
Housing built by an individual, a group of individuals, or persons working Self-build and
custom-build housing with or for them, to be occupied by that individual. Such housing can be
either market or affordable housing. A legal definition, for the purpose of
applying the Self-build and Custom Housebuilding Act 2015 (as amended),
is contained in section 1(A1) and (A2) of that Act.
The logical choice of development sites following a sequence designed to: Sequential Approach
/
Sequential Testmaximise the use of previously developed land, identify appropriate retail
sites within town centres and locate waste management facilities within
settlements. In terms of flooding the sequential test is carried out to ensure
development is sited on Land that has the lowest risk of flooding and
compares a proposed site with other available sites as set out in the NPPF .
The public sector agencies and private sector organisations that provide
services to the public, such as water, drainage, electricity and gas.Service ProvidersProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 302
GlossaryThe surroundings in which a heritage asset is experienced. Its extent is not Setting of a Heritage
Asset fixed and may change as the asset and its surroundings evolve. Elements
of a setting may make a positive or negative contribution to the significance
of an asset, may affect the ability to appreciate that significance or may be
neutral.
A specific defined boundary around the built-up area of Selected Settlements
which determines which policies of this Plan apply to different types of
development proposals.Settlement Boundary
Non-statutory plans for coastal defence management planning, based on Shoreline
Management Plans
(SMPs)studies of the physical effects of coastal process on the shape of the
coastline. Two SMPs affect North Norfolk’ s coastline, SMP5 (to the West
of Kelling Hard) and SMP6 (to the east of Kelling Hard).
The value of a heritage asset to this and future generations because of its Significance (of a
Heritage Asset) heritage interest. The interest may be archaeological, architectural, artistic
or historic. Significance derives not only from a heritage asset’ s physical
presence, but also from its setting. For World Heritage Sites, the cultural
value described within each site’ s Statement of Outstanding Universal Value
forms part of its significance.
Sites designated by Natural England under the Wildlife and Countryside
Act 1981.Sites of Special
Scientific Interest
(SSSIs)
Allocations of sites for specific or mixed use development. Policies will
identify any specific requirements for individual proposals.Site Specific
Proposals
A judgement of quality and procedure based upon key elements of the plan
making process being: positively prepared, justified, effective and consistent
with national policy.Soundness (of Local
Plan)
A description of the area, designed to portray its individual character, key
trends and the current ‘drivers for change’.Spatial Portrait
A brief description of how the area will be changed at the end of the plan
period (10– 15 years).Spatial Vision
Areas classified under regulation 15 of the Conservation of Habitats and Special Protection
Areas Species Regulations 2017 which have been identified as being of
international importance for the breeding, feeding, wintering or the migration
of rare and vulnerable species of birds.
Individuals and organisations with an interest in a particular area or issue. Stakeholders
The Statement of Community Involvement, or SCI, sets out the way the Statement of
Community
Involvement (SCI)Council will involve the local community, stakeholders and statutory bodies
in the preparation and revision of the Local Plan. It identifies who will be
involved, when and how they will be involved.
The Statement of Community Involvement also describes the Council’ s
procedures and arrangements for involving the community when considering
planning applications and major proposals for development.
Required by law (statute), usually through an Act of Parliament. Statutory303 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
GlossaryCompanies concerned with water, gas, electricity and telecommunications
that hold a licence granted by the Department of Trade and Industry.Statutory undertakers
A procedure (set out in the Environmental Assessment of Plans and Strategic
Environmental
Assessment (SEA)Programmes Regulations 2004) that requires the formal environmental
assessment of certain plans and programmes, which are likely to have a
significant effects on the environment.
A comprehensive and robust appraisal of the extent and nature of flood risk Strategic Flood Risk
assessment (SFRA) from all sources of flooding, now, and in the future, taking into account the
effects of Climate Change and its implications for land use planning. The
Assessment sets out the flood risk constraints to help inform the Local Plan,
Neighbourhood Planning, and the determination of planning applications in
North Norfolk.
Policies and site allocations that address strategic priorities in line with the
requirements of Section 19 (1B-E) of the Planning and Compulsory Purchase
Act 2004.Strategic Policies
Management Plan of the AONB which sets out policies for the management Statutory Management
Plan of the AONB and for carryout the Norfolk Coast Partnership functions in
relation to it. Management Plans are material considerations in the planning
system.
When the Council formally hands in documents to the Government and
Planning Inspectors for their independent assessment of the Local Plan.Submission stage
Sustainable drainage systems are drainage solutions designed to control
surface water run off close to where it falls and mimic natural drainage as
closely as possible. They provide opportunities to:Sustainable Urban
Drainage Systems
(SUDS)
reduce the causes and impacts of flooding;
remove pollutants from urban run-off at source;
combine water management with green space with benefits for amenity,
recreation and wildlife and enhance the nature conservation, landscape
and amenity value of the sites surrounding
Any efficient, safe and accessible means of transport with overall low impact
on the environment, including walking and cycling, ultra-low and zero
emission vehicles, car sharing and public transport.Sustainable Transport
Documents that add further detail to the policies in the Development Plan. Supplementary
Planning Documents
(SPDs)They can be used to provide further guidance for development on specific
sites or on particular issues, such as design. SPDs are capable of being a
material consideration in planning decisions but are not part of the
Development Plan.
Documents which add further detail to the policies in the Local Plan. They
can be used to provide further guidance for development on specific sites,
or on particular issues, such as low carbon energy technologies.Supplementary
Planning Guidance
A tool for appraising policies to ensure they reflect sustainable development
objectives (i.e. social, environmental and economic factors). Required to
be undertaken for all LDDs, and to include SEA.Sustainability
Appraisal (SA)
A matrix drawn up by the local planning authority to measure how different Sustainability MatrixProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 304
Glossaryoptions for development score against sustainable development criteria,
e.g. which of several potential development sites would create the least
harm to the environment and social fabric etc.
A widely used definition drawn up by the World Commission on Environment Sustainable
Development and Development in 1987: "Development that meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
needs."
The government has set out four aims for sustainable development in its
strategy A Better Quality of Life, a Strategy for Sustainable Development
in the UK.
The four aims, to be achieved simultaneously, are:
social progress that recognises the needs of everyone;
effective protection of the environment;
prudent use of natural resources;
maintenance of high and stable levels of economic growth and
employment.
Objectives expressed in terms of specified amounts of change in specified
periods of time.Targets
Area defined on the local authority’ s policies map, including the primary Town Centre
shopping area and areas predominantly occupied by main town centre uses
within or adjacent to the primary shopping area. References to town centres
or centres apply to city centres, town centres, district centres and local
centres but exclude small parades of shops of purely neighbourhood
significance. Unless they are identified as centres in the development plan,
existing out-of-centre developments, comprising or including main town
centre uses, do not constitute town centres.
An illustration of the Council’ s expected rates of housing delivery over the
period covered by this Plan.Trajectory (Housing)
A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport issues Transport
Assessment relating to a proposed development. It identifies measures required to
improve accessibility and safety for all modes of travel, particularly for
alternatives to the car such as walking, cycling and public transport, and
measures that will be needed deal with the anticipated transport impacts of
the development.
A simplified version of a transport assessment where it is agreed the
transport issues arising from development proposals are limited and a full
transport assessment is not required.Transport Statement
A long-term management strategy for an organisation or site that seeks to
deliver sustainable transport objectives and is regularly reviewed.Travel Plan
All buildings fall under a Use Class as defined in The Town and Countr y Use Classes Order
Planning ( Use Classes )  Order  1987 The Town and Countr y Planning (
Use Classes )  Order  1987 The Town and Countr y Planning ( Use Classes
)  Order  1987 The Town and Countr y Planning ( Use Classes )  Order
 1987 The Town and Countr y Planning ( Use Classes )  Order  1987  (as
amended))305 Proposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan
GlossaryThe Use Classes Order specifies classes for the purposes of section 55(2)(f)
of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 and puts uses of land and
buildings into various categories known as 'use classes'.
Viability in planning is an important consideration to ensure the appropriate Viability
balance is struck between planning policies and the delivery of growth and
supporting infrastructure. Proposals can be accompanied by a viability
assessment/report which set out the financial viability of a development or
development typology. Any viability assessment should follow the
government’ s recommended approach to assessing viability, as set out in
national planning practice guidance, PPG.
In terms of retail planning, vitality is the capacity of a centre to grow or Vitality and Viability
develop its level of services and commercial activity.Viability is the capacity
of a centre to achieve the commercial success necessary to sustain the
centre.
The authority responsible for waste planning, in this case Norfolk County
Council.Waste Planning
Authority
Defined in the NPPF as a site that is not specifically identified or allocated
in a Development Plan.Windfall SiteProposed Submission Version (Regulation 19 Publication) Local Plan 306
Glossarywww .north-norfolk.gov .uk/localplan