 
1 | P a g e  
 Local Plan – Pre-submission 
Consultation Document  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
2 | P a g e  
 Contents  
Chapter One – Introduction          4 
Chapter Two – Spatial Portrait          11 
Chapter Three – Vision and Spatial Objectives       21 
Chapter Four – Sustainable Places         26 
Policy 1 – Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development      26 
Policy 2 – Spatial Strategy for Development within the Borough      27 
Policy 3 – Regeneration Schemes and Large Scale Change      37  
Chapter Five – Cohesive Communities        39 
Policy 4 – Creating a Skilled Workforce         39 
Policy 5 – Improving Health and Wellbeing        41 
Policy 6 – High Quality Design and Materials        43 
Policy 7 – Community Facilities          46 
Policy 8 – Green Infrastructure          48 
Policy 9 – Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities       52 
Policy 10 – Public Realm          55 
Chapter Six – Housing Delivery         58 
Policy 11 – Housing Choices          58 
Policy 12 – Housing Density          60 
Policy 13 – Affordable Housing          62 
Policy 14 – Self Build and Custom Build         64 
Policy 15 – Urban Infill Development         65 
Policy 16 – Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople      66 
Chapter Seven – Allocations and Regeneration Opportunity Areas     68 
Policy 17 – Kilby Bridge Settlement Envelope        68 
Policy 18 – Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area and Oadby Cemetery Allocation   70 
Policy 19 – Oadby Sewage Treatment Works        74 
Policy 20 – Wigston Direction for Growth Area        75 
Policy 21 – Cottage Farm Direction for Growth area       79 
Chapter Eight – Economic Prosperity         82  
3 | P a g e  
 Policy 22 – Delivering Retail          83 
Policy 23 – Retail Hierarchy          87 
Policy 24 – Local Impact Threshold         89 
Policy 25 – Protecting Identified Employment Areas       94 
Policy 26 – Sustainable Transport and Initiatives        96 
Chapter Nine – Town and District Centre Development      99 
Policy 27 – Primary Shopping Frontages         101 
Policy 28 – Secondary Shopping Frontages        103 
Policy 29 – Town Centre Boundaries         104 
Policy 30 – Other Areas within the Town Centre Boundary but beyond the Primary and Secondary Frontages  
Policy 31 – Use of Upper Floors within the Centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston  106 
Policy 32 – Shop Fronts           107 
Policy 33 – Security Shutters          109 
Policy 34 – Car Parking           110 
Policy 35 – Taxis           112 
Policy 36 – Hot Fo od Takeaways         113 
Chapter Ten – Protected Places         114 
Policy 37 – Biodiversity and Geodiversity        114 
Policy 38 – Climate Change, Flood Risk and Renewable Low Carbon Energy    116 
Policy 39 – Sustainable Drainage and Surface Water       120 
Policy 40 – Culture and Historic Environment Assets       121 
Policy 41 – Development in Conservation Areas        123 
Policy 42 – Green Wedges          126 
Policy 43 – Countryside           128 
Policy 44 – Landscape and Character         130 
Policy 45 – Local G reen Space          131 
Chapter Eleven – Delivery Plan         132 
Policy 46 – Infrastructure and Developer Contributions       132 
Chapter Twelve – Monitoring Framework        135 
Appendix 1 – Glossary; Appendix 2 – Technical Housing Standards; Appendix 3 – Local List   
4 | P a g e  
 Chapter One – Introduction  
1. Strategic Context  
1.1.1  The Borough of Oadby and Wigston is a relatively small, compact and urbanised Borough 
that shares its boundaries with Leicester City, Blaby District and Harborough District. The 
entire urban a rea of the Borough sits within the area known as the Leicester Principal 
Urban Area  (PUA). The Leicester PUA is defined as the built up area that is centred on 
Leicester. With the Borough area also being directly adjacent to the City of Leicester, the 
two share a strong spatial relationship, despite the differences in size and population.  
1.1.2  Looking wider than the Leicester PUA , the Borough is part of a collection of local planning 
authorities (LPA’s) that make up Leicester and Leicestershire. The LPA’s  situated within 
Leicester and Leicestershire are, Leicester City Council, Charnwood Borough Council, 
Harborough District Council, Hinckley and Bosworth Borough Council, Blaby District 
Council, Melton Borough Council, North West Leicestershire District Cou ncil and ourselves, 
Oadby and Wigston Borough Council. Leicester City Council is the only two tier unitary 
authority situated within Leicester and Leicestershire area; with Leicestershire County 
Council taking control of the functions that the other Boroug h and District areas do not, for 
example highways and education.  
1.1.3  The Leicester and Leicestershire area also comprises the Leicester and Leicestershire 
Housing Market Area (HMA). The Leicester and Leicestershire HMA authorities work 
together on a number of different strategies, partnerships, evidence base documents and 
processes and regularly meet under the Duty to Cooperate. Close joint working between 
the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA authorities ensures that there is a fully ‘joined up’ 
partn ership approach to tackling issues affecting each local authority as well as the wider 
HMA; for example transport and highway assessment evidence, housing and economic 
needs assessments, and strategic employment distribution.  
1.1.4  Currently the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA authorities, Leicestershire County Council 
and the Leicester and Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership (LLEP) are producing a (non 
statutory) Strategic Growth Plan that will act as the strategic planning framework for the 
Leicester a nd Leicestershire Housing Market Area, up to 2050.  
1.1.5  In addition to the wider HMA working mentioned above, the Council also works closely with 
both Leicester City Council and Harborough District Council due to the cross boundary 
green swathes of land t hat are defined and designated as green wedges. Green wedges 
play a vital role strategically by providing ‘green lungs’ out from the City of Leicester into the 
open countryside of the surrounding district and borough Council areas.  
 
 
 
 
  
5 | P a g e  
 National Policy and  Guidance (and Local Plan)  
National Planning Policy Framework and National Planning Practice Guidance  
1.2.1  The National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) was formally introduced by national 
government on the 27th March 2012 with the primary focus of delive ring sustainable 
development. The NPPF sets out the government’s planning policies for England and 
replaced numerous Planning Policy Statements and Planning Policy Guidance notes. The 
NPPF is a material consideration in determining planning applications an d must be taken 
into account in the preparation of Local and Neighbourhood Plans. The NPPF is 
supplemented by national guidance in the form of the National Planning Practice Guidance 
(PPG).  
1.2.2  The PPG was first launched during March 2014 and is a fluid document that is updated on 
an ongoing basis by national government when changes are required. The PPG is broken 
down into a number of different guidance categories (48 currently) that relate to certain 
aspects and / or policies set out in the NPPF, for ex ample the Duty to Cooperate, Planning 
Obligations and Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessments.  
Local Plans  
1.2.3  The government’s NPPF states that Local Plans are the key to delivering sustainable 
development that reflects the vision and aspirat ions of local communities. Government also 
suggests that Local Plan’s should be consistent with the principles and policies set out 
within the NPPF, including the presumption in favour of sustainable development.  
1.2.4  Local Plans are aspirational, yet rea listic documents that set out the vision and framework 
for future development within a local planning authority area, and address needs and 
opportunities (for example) relating to housing, the economy, the environment, community 
facilities, local infrastru cture, climate change and good design. The government also 
suggests they are critical tools for guiding decisions about individual development 
proposals as they (combined with Neighbourhood Plans) are the starting point for 
considering whether applications  for development are appropriate and sustainable and can 
be approved.  
1.2.5  The Oadby and Wigston Borough Council Local Plan is the overarching policy document for 
the authority area and set’s out the vision and framework for future development for the 
Plan period 2011 to 2031. The Local Plan supersedes the Council’s Core Strategy 
Development Plan Document and the Town Centres Area Action Plan Development Plan 
Document, as well as the Saved Local Plan.  
1.2.6  This Local Plan covers the period to 2031 in orde r to align with the Strategic Growth Plan 
and to enable effective cooperative working with other local planning authorities in the 
Leicester and Leicestershire HMA over Plan periods.  
 
 
 
  
6 | P a g e  
 Local Context and Corporate Priorities  
1.3.1  Although located in Leic estershire, it is important for the Borough of Oadby and Wigston to 
recognise the strong spatial relationship it shares with Leicester City, given that the 
Borough is located immediately adjacent to the City and located predominately within the 
Leicester P UA.  
1.3.2  The Council is also aware of the importance to recognise the spatial relationships that are 
in place with the other neighbouring authorities and service delivery partners, so that it can 
continue to deliver high quality and tangible outcomes, fo r example, the delivery of strategic 
housing options.  
Corporate Priorities  
1.3.3  The Borough Council has five Corporate Priorities that were agreed by Members in 
November 2016.  
1.3.4  The five Corporate Priorities for the Borough are:  
We will deliver;  
An inclusive and engaged Borough  – the Council will work with existing forums and will 
forge new relationships in order to strengthen community engagement and cohesion 
throughout the Borough. The Council will also listen to and empower residents by 
communicat ing, consulting and where possible offering a choice on decisions which would 
affect frontline services.  
Effective service provision  – the Council will continue to examine services and identify 
improvements in order to provide the most cost effective front line services. Through 
innovation, the Council will strive for optimum use of its asset’s, its human resources and 
those of its partners in order to protect frontline services.  
Balanced economic development  – the Council will develop, implement and create 
opportunities for balanced economic development that is primarily focused around the 
three centres (of Oadby, Wigston and South Wigston) whilst respecting the Borough’s 
natural environment. The Council will  also seek to provide suitable housing that meets local 
needs.  
Green and safe places  – the Council will invest in and encourage activities that provide 
green, pleasant and safe places in the Borough for everyone to enjoy. The Council will seek 
to protect t he Borough’s trees and natural habitat wherever possible.  
Wellbeing for all  – the Council will work with other organisations to improve wellbeing for 
all within the Borough. The Council will help secure new easy access to opportunities to 
enable everybody within the Borough to live a harmonious and healthy life.  
 
 
  
7 | P a g e  
 Duty to Cooperate  
1.4.1  The Duty to Cooperate was coined in the Localism Act 2011. It places a legal duty on local 
planning authorities, county council’s and public bodies to engage constructivel y, actively 
and on an ongoing basis to address strategic issues in their areas.  
1.4.2  The duty requires on -going constructive and active engagement throughout the preparation 
of local plans and other activities relating to sustainable development and use of land, in 
particular in connection with strategic cross boundary matters.  
1.4.3  The NPPF suggests that joint working on planning issues that cross administrative 
boundaries should be undertaken diligently for the mutual benefit of neighbouring 
authoritie s, and that LPAs should work collaboratively with other bodies to ensure that 
strategic priorities across local boundaries are properly coordinated and clearly reflected in 
Local Plans. LPAs are encouraged to take account of different geographic areas, inc luding 
travel to work areas, and county and district authorities should cooperate with each other 
on relevant issues.  
1.4.4  The PPG suggests that local planning authorities must demonstrate how they have 
complied with the duty at the independent examinati on of their Local Plans. The PPG also 
suggests that local planning authorities need to satisfy themselves about whether they have 
complied with the duty and as part of their consideration, they will need to bear in mind that 
the cooperation should produce effective and deliverable policies on strategic cross 
boundary matters.   
1.4.5  To ensure that the Council has meet the Duty to Cooperate, it has  actively and 
constructively engaged with, and continues to engage, actively and constructively with 
neighbour ing  local planning authorities, specific consultees and other public bodies in the 
preparation of this Local Plan, in accordance with the regulatory requirements and the 
approach set out in the NPPF.  
1.4.6  The Council has also been working collaboratively  with all other local authorities within 
Leicester and Leicestershire on the preparation of a Strategic Growth Plan and 
Memorandum of Understanding as well as the production of evidence, such as the HEDNA. 
Further information regarding how the Council has cooperated under the Duty can be found 
in the Council’s Duty to Cooperate Statement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
8 | P a g e  
 The Leicester and Leicestershire Statement of Cooperation and Strategic 
Growth Plan  
1.5.1  The eight local authorities in Leicester and Leicestershire together with Leicestershire 
County Council and the Leicester & Leicestershire Local Enterprise Partnership (LLEP) are 
preparing a Strategic Growth Plan that sets out the aspirations for delivering growth in the 
Leicester and Leicestershire HMA. It will set out, in  broad terms, the amount and location of 
future growth (housing, economic, infrastructure) the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA will 
be expecting to accommodate until 2050.  
1.5.2  Although the Strategic Growth Plan deals with the time period up to 2050, it treats the 
period’s pre 2031 and post 2031 very differently. Pre 2031, the housing and employment 
Objectively Assessed Needs for the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA, set out within the 
HEDNA, will be delivered through each of the local authorities individ ual Local Plan’s. The 
Strategic Growth Plan therefore focuses on the period post 2031, for which it identifies a 
‘notional housing need’. It recognises that for this period there are no reliable estimates of 
population growth or household change, thus it e stimates future housing needs by 
projecting forwards the annual figures set out within the HEDNA.  
1.5.3  To ensure that the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA housing and employment OAN is 
fulfilled up to 2031, a Statement of Cooperation and subsequent Memor andum of 
Understanding will be produced and signed by each local authority within the Leicester and 
Leicestershire HMA. These will set out how the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA 
employment and housing OAN will be delivered; including how any unmet need w ithin 
individual local authorities will be dealt with.  
1.5.4  Post 2031, the strategy set out in the Strategic Growth Plan, for this period, will come into 
effect. One of the key elements to this strategy is the delivery of a vehicular expressway to 
the sou th and east of Leicester that links the M1 motorway with the A6, the A47 and the 
A46. This also reflects the proposal that has been put forward in the Midlands Connect 
Strategy. When this route is in place, it will significantly improve access to the motor way 
network, unlock new land for development and reduce the high levels of traffic and 
congestion that are apparent within the City of Leicester and the surrounding local authority 
areas including the Borough of Oadby and Wigston.  
1.5.5  It should be noted  that currently there is insufficient certainty surrounding the delivery of the 
new expressway for it to be a consideration in this plan, particularly because the delivery of 
the notional housing need (as identified in the Strategic Growth Plan) in the Bor ough is 
wholly dependent upon the expressway being in place. Transport evidence supporting this 
plan indicates that without the new expressway there is extremely limited highway capacity 
to bring forward levels of development above that proposed in this pl an. The Council has 
committed to a review of this Local Plan within 5 years of the date of its adoption by which 
time proposals for the new expressway are likely to be at a more advanced stage and 
therefore its effects within the Borough a consideration in  the new plan.   
Monitoring Clause  
1.5.6  The Council is aware that although this Plan covers the period up to 2031, there may be 
instances when a partial or full review of the Plan may be required. In addition, the National 
Planning Practice Guidance recom mends that Local Plans are updated in whole or in part  
9 | P a g e  
 at least every 5 years. Therefore the Council will commence a partial or full review of the 
Local Plan no later than five years from the adoption of this Plan, or earlier, where;  
 through the annual mon itoring of the targets set out in Chapter 12 of this Plan, the 
Plan is not delivering its targets on a consistent ongoing basis.  
 a local authority within the Leicester and Leicestershire HMA has an evidenced unmet 
need, which cannot be met by the other loc al authorities within the Leicester and 
Leicestershire HMA and / or within the flexibility allowed within this Plan. In this 
instance a review will begin with the preparation of evidence to establish whether the 
unmet need can be met within the Borough.  
 the post 2031 strategy set out within the Strategic Growth Plan comes forward at a 
faster rate than is currently anticipated, for example the delivery of the new 
expressway, that requires additional housing or employment allocations to be made in 
the Borough  in line with the strategy set out within the Strategic Growth Plan.  
1.5.7  It must be noted that if a review of the Local Plan is required, whether in full or in part, the 
review of the Plan will be proportionate to the issues in hand.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
10 | P a g e  
 Sustainability Appraisal and Strategic Environmental Assessment Directive  
1.6.1  Under the Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004, Local Plans must undergo a 
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) which involves the identification and evaluation of the Local 
Plan impacts on the three elements of sustainable development; those being the economic, 
social and environmental impacts. The PPG advises that an integrated Sustainability 
Appraisal (SA) and Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) process can be 
undertaken, whereby the SA process incorporates the requirements of European Law on 
the environmental assessment of plans, referred to as the SEA Directive (European 
Directive 2001/42/EC).  
1.6.2  The main purpose of an SA is to ensure the Local Plan promotes sustainab le development 
through better integration of sustainability considerations. It can be used to highlight 
potential problem areas where a draft plan may not contribute to sustainable development 
as it should. By identifying potential issues at an early stage  of Plan preparation, they can 
be resolved to ensure the Plan is as sustainable as possible at adoption.  
1.6.3  When preparing its Local Plan, the Council is required by law to carry out a Habitats 
Regulations Assessment (HRA). The requirement to undertake HRA of development plans 
was confirmed by the amendments to the Habitats Regulations published for England and 
Wales in July 2007, and updated in both 2010 and 2012.  
 
1.6.4  The overall purpose of HRA is to conclude whether or not a proposal or policy, or whole 
development plan would adversely affect the integrity of the site in question. The HRA 
refers to the assessment of the potential effects of a development plan on one or more 
European Sites, including Special Protection Areas (SPAs), Special Areas of Conservation 
(SACs), Sites of Community Importance (SCIs) and Ramsar sites.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
11 | P a g e  
 Chapter Two – Spatial Portrait  
2.1.1  In order to plan for the future of the Borough and its residents, it is fundamental to 
understand how the Borough is today, and the issues, challenges and opportunities that it 
has. 
2.1.2  This Spatial Portrait provides a broad overview or ‘snapshot’ of the physical characteristics 
of the Borough as well as the current social, economic and environmental conditions that 
exist in the Borough. It highlights the summary of the key issues and challenges that the 
Local Plan will address. These provide the foundation from which the Vision and Spatial 
Objectives are built. These are set out later in this document.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
12 | P a g e  
 Physical Characteristics  
2.2.1  The Borough of Oadby and Wigston is a relatively compact highly urbanised Borough 
(approximately 2,400 hectares in size) that lies directly adjacent to and shares boundaries 
with the City of Leicester. It also shares boundari es with Harborough District and Blaby 
District. The urban areas of the Borough fall entirely within the Leicester PUA resulting in a 
strong spatial relationship with Leicester City despite the differences in size and population. 
The Borough plays an import ant role in providing residents of the Leicester PUA with a link 
to the countryside due to its position, ‘sandwiched’ between the City and the countryside 
beyond.  
2.2.2  For many years, the Borough has consisted of three main settlements (Oadby, Wigston and  
South Wigston). Oadby, a large village by the 1860s, established itself around agriculture. It 
expanded rapidly in the early 1900s as wealthy Leicester City business people built large 
family houses immediately to the east of the village. These houses sti ll remain as fine 
examples of the Arts and Crafts movement, although many are now in the ownership of the 
University of Leicester which established its Oadby Campus after the Second World War.  
2.2.3  Wigston, originally two settlements, was amalgamated into  Wigston Magna in 1529. The 
two settlements were linked by a series of ‘Lanes’ which still remain. The canal and railway 
brought further growth to what had been a predominantly agricultural community, resulting 
in further development to meet industrial and  housing needs. This continued after the 
Second World War with numerous housing estates rapidly extending the size of the town.  
2.2.4  South Wigston, a new town developed in the mid to late 1800s (by Orson Wright the owner 
of large brickworks) followed the tradition of ‘model’ towns by Victorian philanthropists. 
Unlike other ‘model’ towns of the time, it was not just intended to house workers of the 
brickyard though. Other commercial premises, particularly associated with the clothing 
industry were establish ed right from the start. The railway was fundamental to this 
development. The Victorian barracks, now used as the Territorial Army Headquarters, pre -
dated this growth. The current mature trees, open space and road layout to the north of the 
barracks date f rom the 19th century Glen Parva Grange Estate. This history is still very 
much evident today.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
13 | P a g e  
 Social Characteristics  
The Community - Population and Demographics  
2.3.1  According to the Office for National Statistics (ONS), it is estimated that th e total resident 
population of the Borough is 55,900. Of this total, 27,100 were males and 28,900 females 
(2014 -based SNPP). *figures do not total correctly due to rounding.  
2.3.2  ONS statistics also suggest that the Borough has a higher than average popul ation 
percentage over the age of 74 years old. Figures show that the Borough’s 10.7 per cent 
(over the age of 74 years old) is the highest of all the Leicester and Leicestershire local 
authority areas and is over 2 per cent higher than the East Midlands av erage (8.3 per cent) 
and the England average (8.1 per cent).  
2.3.3  The ethnic and cultural composition of the Borough is diverse. The overall Black and 
Minority Ethnic (BME) population (i.e. residents in categories other than White British) is 
28.4 per cen t (16,536 people). This figure is almost triple the Leicestershire County average 
of 11.07 per cent and approximately double the East Midlands regional figure of 14.6 per 
cent (Census 2011).  
Housing and the Economy  
2.3.4  As mentioned above, the Borough are a has three distinct settlement areas, Oadby, 
Wigston and South Wigston. Each of the three settlement areas have very different 
perceived levels of affluence (in this instance represented by indicative new build house 
prices 2016) as well as levels of soci al deprivation (in this instance represented by Indices 
of Multiple Deprivation 2015 (IMD) ranking).  
2.3.5  As a whole, the Borough is ranked 249th out of 354, (where 1 is the most deprived) by the 
Indices of Deprivation 2015. The Borough has gained 2 place s from its 2010 ranking of 
247th. The indices also measure deprivation for each Lower Layer Super Output Area 
(LSOA) in England (32,844 areas). On a settlement basis, South Wigston has the highest 
levels of social deprivation, Wigston has lower levels than  South Wigston, and Oadby has 
the lowest. In terms of IMD ranking (1 being the most deprived) South Wigston has the 
lowest ranked LSOA (6,661) in the Borough area and Oadby has the highest ranked LSOA 
(31,902).  
2.3.6  Using average indicative new build hous e prices, Oadby is perceived as the most affluent 
area within the Borough. Average indicative new build house prices range from £160,000 to 
£670,000. Wigston is somewhere in the middle regarding affluence with average indicative 
new build house prices rang ing from £133,000 to £303,000, and South Wigston is 
perceived as being the least affluent with average new build house prices ranging between 
£129,000 and £280,000.  
2.3.7  2011 Census data shows that the average household size within the Borough is 2.63 
persons per household. The average household size within the Borough increased 
markedly in the 10 years since 2001, where it was 2.45 persons per household. In general 
the Oadby area has the highest average number of persons per household, with some 
wards ill ustrating 3.7 persons per household.   
14 | P a g e  
 2.3.8  The most up to date Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA) 
illustrates an Objectively Assessed Housing Need for the Borough of 148 new homes per 
annum up to 2031. This OAN figure includes the ne ed for affordable housing.  
2.3.9  According to NOMIS data, the Borough currently has an unemployment percentage of 3.5 
per cent. When compared to the East Midlands percentage of 4.3 per cent and the Great 
Britain percentage of 4.8 per cent, the Borough is f airing relatively well in regards to levels 
of unemployment. In terms of employment occupation, the Borough has lower than average 
Managerial and Professional employment levels, however much higher levels of people in 
Administrative and Skilled trades empl oyment.  
2.3.10  The Borough has a number of identified employment areas. These are areas of land 
designated for uses defined as employment by the Use Classes Order. Some of the units 
on the identified employment areas lack the quality and flexibility requir ed by modern 
industry. In addition the environment, general layout and accessibility is poor. Whilst there 
is relatively low turnover of businesses, there is a lack of interest in the units that do 
become available for new employment uses. This is largely due to the quality of units and 
the identified employment areas having poor accessibility to the larger trunk roads such as 
the M1 and M69 compared to other nearby districts. The HEDNA identifies an employment 
land OAN of 1 hectare of B1a/b and 4 hectares of small scale B8 between 2011 and 2031.  
2.3.11  One of the major land users, employers and catalysts (in Oadby) for inward investment in 
the Leicester PUA , as well as within Oadby  itself, is the University of Leicester. The 
University has had a presence in the Borough for over 50 years and over this time has 
expanded its facilities which now provide student accommodation, conferencing and sports 
facilities.  The presence of the Cam pus contributes to the local economy by increasing the 
use of the facilities and services in Oadby district centre, and the sports facilities are used 
and enjoyed by local clubs and groups. The University has plans to continue improving and 
expanding its f acilities and replacing outdated accommodation.  
2.3.12  Tourism in the Borough plays a small yet important role in the local economy in relation to 
the centres of Wigston, Oadby, South Wigston and the settlement of Kilby Bridge, as well 
as large areas of gr een space including Brocks Hill Visitors Centre and Country Park, 
Leicester Racecourse, Glen Gorse Golf Course and Oadby Grange Country Park.  
The Centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston  
2.3.13  Wigston is the Borough’s main town centre and contains the largest variety of shops, 
services and facilities. The town is centred on the fully pedestrianised Bell Street, The 
Arcade and Leicester Road. Bull Head Street provides the town with a bypass and there 
are a number of Council owned public car parks around the town, all of which promote free 
shoppers parking. Wigston is the only ‘town’ centre within the Borough and one of only a 
small number of town centres within the Leicester PUA . Wigston therefore fulfils an 
important town centre function for residents li ving in the southern areas of the Leicester 
PUA.  
2.3.14  Oadby is a large district centre with a smaller, but nevertheless good range of shops, 
services and facilities which are mostly located along The Parade. Council owned public 
car parking is situated t o the east and west of The Parade and is easily accessed from the 
north and south of the centre. Oadby is particularly influenced by the presence of three out 
of centre supermarkets situated along the A6.   
15 | P a g e  
 2.3.15  South Wigston is a medium to small sized di strict centre extending almost the entire length 
of Blaby Road. This results in a stretched linear centre. Many of the properties and retail 
units clearly date back to the origins of the settlement. A large out of centre supermarket is 
located opposite Bla by Road Park at the eastern end of Blaby Road. The South 
Leicestershire College building, built in 2010, is also adjacent to the park.  
2.3.16  Each of these centres are of equal importance to many local people. There is a tendency 
with the residents of Wigs ton, Oadby and South Wigston, not to travel out of ‘their’ 
settlement to access other shops, services and facilities that are available within the 
Borough. This leads to each of the centres providing a similar range of opportunities, albeit 
at a different scale. This arrangement is a result of the way in which the three settlements 
have evolved and a perception that if needs are not met by the nearest centre it is unlikely 
that the other centres in the Borough will meet the needs either. It is also a result  of the 
limited public transport services that operate between the three centres, in comparison to 
the established links to the City of Leicester.  
2.3.17  The centres, particularly Wigston, are not only influenced by their proximity to each other, 
but their  proximity to Leicester City Centre and the Fosse Shopping Park in Blaby District. 
Both of these offer large amounts of retail floorspace and attract national retailers. Leicester 
City Centre offers a wide range of services and facilities. Nevertheless, th e Borough’s 
centres are valued by the Borough’s residents. However, historically they have suffered 
from a lack of investment, particularly in relation to their public realm, quality of design and 
in terms of making the best use of sites within their spati al setting. Recently, the Council 
received EU funding to improve the public realm along The Parade in Oadby and Bell 
Street in Wigston. Both schemes were positively received by all and have improved the 
immediate built environment exponentially, as well as  adding to the centres vitality and 
viability.  
Transport  
2.3.18  The Borough is crossed by three main transport routes that serve the City of Leicester; the 
A6, the A5199 and the B5366.  The B582 serves as the only transport route linking the 
settlements of  Oadby and Wigston and one of only two routes linking Wigston with South 
Wigston, the other being B5418. The A563 links the very northern parts of Wigston and 
Oadby with Leicester City and provides a form of access to the M1 and M69 motorways. In 
general t he Borough’s access to main arterial routes such as the M1, A14 and the A47 is 
poor. Due to this poor access to main arterial routes and the fact that the three routes into 
Leicester City from the south pass through the Borough, the Borough’s roads suffer from 
significant congestion, particularly at peak times.  
2.3.19  Significant congestion is apparent at many of the junctions within the Borough, as well as 
along its routes. At peak times, traffic flows along a number of the main routes within the 
Borough a re significantly hampered by congestion. Prior to the delivery of the key elements 
of the Strategic Growth Plan post 2031, the Borough Council will work closely with 
neighbouring local authorities as well as the County Council (as the highway authority) to  
ensure development, not only within the Borough, but outside of the Borough, is situated as 
to have least impact on the existing highway network.  
2.3.20  Public transport links within the Borough are in general poor also, with limited bus services 
operatin g between South Wigston, Oadby and Wigston, Parklands Leisure Centre, Brocks 
Hill Visitor Centre and Country Park and the Borough’s town and district centres. The public  
16 | P a g e  
 transport links, however, into Leicester City from the town and district centres are r elatively 
frequent.  
2.3.21  The Borough has access to the Leicester to Birmingham railway line via South Wigston 
Station. This mode of transport also provides a regular service to Leicester and onward to 
Nottingham and the north, as well as Nuneaton and Bir mingham to the south west. 
Passengers can also change at Leicester to access the Midland Mainline to London.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
17 | P a g e  
 Environmental Characteristics (including heritage assets)  
2.4.1  Attractive, safe and accessible parks and green spaces contribute positively to social, 
economic and environmental benefits and promote sustainable communities.   
2.4.2  The Borough has good access to the green open spaces and the open countryside via the 
Brocks Hill Country Park, the Green Wedge between Oadby and Wigston, the Green 
Wedge adjacent to the north east of Oadby, various other parks and open spaces, the 
River Sence, and the Grand Union Canal.  
2.4.3  There are other areas which contribute to the B orough’s Green Infrastructure also; such as 
Fludes Lane Woodland, Oadby Grange Country Park, Leicester Racecourse and Glen 
Gorse Golf Course. Furthermore, the Limedelves and part of the Grand Union Canal 
between Kilby and Foxton is classified as a Site of Special Scientific Interest, in part, a 
Regionally Important Geological Site, and a Local Wildlife Site. Although predominately 
urban, the Borough does have a good level of tree cover along a number of its streets / 
roads, for example Saffron Road in South  Wigston.  
2.4.4  There are 319 allotment plots (295 council and 24 privately owned) in the Borough which 
also play an important role in contributing to the natural environment and in promoting 
healthy lifestyles. The current demand for allotment plots is re latively low.  
2.4.5  In total, there are 10 Conservation Areas which are influential in maintaining the townscape 
and landscape of the Borough. Nine of these were designated by Oadby and Wigston 
Borough Council and benefit from individual Conservation Area Appraisals and a 
Conservation Area Supplementary Planning Document. The other area, the Grand Union 
Canal Conservation Area was designated by Leicestershire County Council. There are 
currently 37 listings of Listed Buildings and Structures situated in the Borough. There are 
currently no identified Buildings at Risk. There are a number of parks within the Borough 
that are home to equipped children’s play and sports facilities, such as football and cricket 
pitches.  
2.4.6  In addition to the above, there are ar eas of archaeological importance, as well as a number 
of non designated heritage assets, for example locally listed buildings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
18 | P a g e  
 Kilby Bridge  
2.5.1  The settlement of Kilby Bridge is located approximately a 20 minute walk south from 
Wigston  town centre and is part of the Grand Union Canal Conservation Area. The 
settlement is separated by the B5199, with built development either side. It is bounded to 
the north by the Leicester to London railway and to the south by the Grand Union Canal 
and R iver Sence (and the southern extent of the Borough boundary). Due to its proximity to 
both mentioned watercourses, parts of the settlement are liable to flooding.  
2.5.2  The settlement consists of a small number of residential properties, small scale commer cial 
and a public house. Due to its rural character, it is unique to the Borough and is an 
attractive and valuable asset. To the east of the settlement, is a Site of Special Scientific 
Interest, in part, a Regionally Important Geological Site, and a Local Wildlife Site.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
19 | P a g e  
 Key Issues, Challenges and Opportunities  
2.6.1  The current shape and characteristics of the Borough gives rise to a number of issues, 
challenges and opportunities, which are identified below:  
Physical characteristics  
- highly urbanised and compact  
- location between Leicester City and the open countryside  
- a number of historical areas and heritage assets  
- significant number of mature trees and hedge lines  
Population and demographics  
- a higher than average number of older resi dents  
- culturally diverse  
Housing and the economy  
- a need for housing, both market and affordable  
- Objectively Assessed Need of 148 new homes per annum up to 2031  
- Objectively Assessed Need for 1 hectare of B1a/b and 4 hectares of small scale B8 
employment lan d up to 2031  
- areas of relatively high deprivation  
- distinct disparities in land values and perceived levels of affluence  
- areas of high average household sizes  
- low levels of unemployment  
- large presence of the University of Leicester in Oadby  
- areas of identif ied employment land in need of refurbishment  
- relatively high levels of skilled trade employment  
The centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston  
- Wigston as one of only a small number of ‘town’ centres within the Leicester PUA  
- Council owned car parks  
- free sh oppers car parking  
- proximity of South Leicestershire College in South Wigston  
- proximity of Fosse Park retail park and Leicester City centre  
Transport  
- only one east - west route linking Wigston and Oadby and only two routes linking 
Wigston and South Wigsto n 
- access to main arterial highway routes is poor  
- the majority of Borough roads suffer from significant levels of congestions, particularly 
at peak times  
- reasonable public transport links from each of the centres to Leicester City but very 
limited public transport links between the three centres  
- rail station located in South Wigston on the Leicester to Birmingham rail route  
Environmental  
- protection and enhancement of the natural environment   
20 | P a g e  
 - good access to green open spaces and the countryside  
- a broad rang e of Green Infrastructure assets, including green wedges and water 
courses  
- limited opportunities for the creation of new allotment plots  
- a number of Listed Buildings, Conservation Areas and other heritage assets and their 
settings  
Kilby Bridge  
- the settleme nts location directly adjacent to the Grand Union Canal; potential for small 
scale tourism  
- a need to protect Kilby Bridge’s environmental and biodiversity qualities  
- potential flooding issues  
- the settlements location as a gateway into the Borough from the s outh 
2.6.2  Taking account of government policy and guidance, the need for sustainable development, 
the need for high quality design and innovation, and the specific local issues, challenges 
and opportunities that have been identified, the Council has creat ed a list of key focus 
areas that set the context for this Plan. These focus areas will then drive the vision and 
objectives of this Local Plan and ultimately the local planning policy contained within.  
Key Focus Areas  
1. Provision of sufficient land to meet the housing and employment Objectively 
Assessed Need’s identified within the HEDNA  
2. Provision of house types and tenures and accommodation for all of the community  
3. High quality and innovative design, whilst respecting local history, heritage, 
character and vernacular  
4. Protection and enhancement of open and green spaces (including water assets)  
5. Protection and enhancement of natural environment assets (including ancient 
woodland, veteran trees and habitat creation) and other green infrastructure assets  
6. Provisio n of high quality employment areas, with good transport connections  
7. Maintaining and improving the Borough’s prosperous, diverse and dynamic 
economy  
8. Development that is sustainable in terms of location, use and form  
9. Development is not located in flood risk areas or contributes towards flood risk in 
other areas  
10. Conserve and enhance areas of historical significance  
11. Conserve and enhance heritage assets  
12. The regeneration of the centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston  
13. Leicester University and its students as a  key Borough asset  
14. Maintaining low levels of unemployment  
15. Improving the poor transport connections between each settlement as well as the 
wider highway network  
16. Utilising the rural asset of Kilby Bridge settlement  
 
  
21 | P a g e  
 Chapter Three – Vision and Spatial Object ives 
3.1.1  The Vision and Spatial Objectives form the very heart of the Local Plan and are built from 
the foundations laid out in the spatial portrait and the key focus areas in the previous 
chapter; they also take account of the Council’s Corporate Priori ties. The Vision provides 
an interpretation of how the Borough might look in 2031 given the influence of this Plan.  
Vision  
In 2031, the Borough of Oadby and Wigston will be a safe, clean, and attractive place in 
which to live, work and visit. The Borough and its assets will be accessible to all through 
sustainable modes of transport. It will have a resilient and prosperous economy, secure 
environment, vibrant centres and healthy empowered communities. The Borough will be 
continuing to promote sustainable e conomic growth, as well as making the best use of its 
natural and heritage assets.  
Growth will contribute to people’s health, happiness and well -being in the Borough through 
the timely delivery of well -designed and high quality development. High quality 
development will continue raising the level in terms of environmental standards, quality of 
life and local distinctiveness.  
Residents in the Borough will have the opportunity to enjoy peaceful, harmonious, high 
quality and healthy lifestyles in communities that offer a range of; quality new housing 
which meet local needs; job opportunities; and other important services and facilities.  
Residents will be able to enjoy a variety of open landscapes including parks, sporting 
facilities and the open countryside with its elements of natural beauty and wealth of wildlife 
areas where biodiversity has been conserved and enhanced.  
3.1.2  It is the role of the Local Plan to deliver the Vision and ensure that the right spatial planning 
policy is in place to do so. The Co uncil’s Vision can be broken down into four key areas of 
spatial focus:  
Vibrant town centres…..  
3.1.3  Wigston centre will play a key role as the main Town Centre and Oadby centre and South 
Wigston centre as District Centres. The relationship between these centres will be 
strengthened, particularly by working with public transport operators to improve public 
transport links.  
3.1.4  The centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston will be offering high quality facilities 
including retail, office, residential, and civic and leisure opportunities. The strong network of 
local centres will support the three main centres and will contribute to the overall 
sustainable mix of facilities throughout the Borough, reducing the need for local people to 
travel unsustainably . 
3.1.5  Residents will be proud of the centres within the Borough and will use them to their fullest. 
The centres will be clean and safe and will have a high standard of architecture and use of 
materials in their public realm, built form and open spaces.  
 
  
22 | P a g e  
 A prosperous economy…..  
3.1.6  New employment opportunities will continue to exist in the Borough. The centres of Wigston 
and Oadby will be the key focus areas for office and retail employment based opportunities.  
3.1.7  The Identified Employment Areas of the Borough will be the focus for industrial, storage 
and distribution use employment. The identified areas will offer accommodation for all types 
and sizes of appropriate businesses that are located close by to good publ ic transport links 
and the main highway network. Identified areas will be encouraged to redevelop poor 
quality units that are not fit for purpose, as new innovative ways of working and thinking 
become typical.   
3.1.8  The provision of a range of housing an d educational opportunities throughout the Borough 
will provide employers with a skilled workforce. Fast, frequent and affordable public 
transport between the Borough and Leicester City and the Borough’s centres will ensure 
that local residents enjoy the b enefits of living so close to one of Britain’s major cities.  
Healthy empowered communities…..  
3.1.9  Oadby, Wigston and South Wigston will be prosperous and healthy communities in their 
own right. Residents will have fair and equal access to all forms of s ervices and facilities 
and will be part of a great community that supports one another. Residents will have good 
access to the network of high quality cultural, educational and health facilities, as well as 
high quality open spaces and the countryside area s. A diverse mix of housing types and 
tenures that are accessible to all will mean that all residents have a safe and secure home 
to live in.  
3.1.10  Residents will be encouraged to utilise sustainable modes of transport as well as walking. 
Growth will be l ocated in sustainable locations, and will integrate walking and cycling into its 
design proposals and schemes.  
Safe, clean and attractive.....  
3.1.11  Residents and visitors alike will feel safe on the streets and in their homes because design 
has been a ke y component in keeping crime and anti -social behaviour to a minimum. All 
new development will integrate measures to conserve energy, achieve sustainable energy 
generation, and minimise waste. All new development will be located as to minimise 
existing and future flood risk, taking account of the flooding sequential test.  
3.1.12  All new development in the Borough will have the best standards of design, including the 
centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston. Investment in the Borough’s Green 
Infrastructure  will lead to improved biodiversity and a stronger understanding within the 
local community about their role in the conservation of habitats and species and the links 
with the urban and natural environment. The quality of Conservation Areas and other 
heritage assets and their settings will also have benefitted from careful and positive 
management.  
3.1.13  Local residents will benefit from increased opportunities to access the open countryside, 
the River Soar and the Grand Union Canal waterways, particularly in the vicinity of Crow 
Mills in South Wigston and Kilby Bridge, located south of Wigston. There will continue to be 
a good range of leisure and recreational facilities including parks, leisure centres, 
allotments, golf courses, and sports pitches.   
23 | P a g e  
 The Spa tial Objectives  
3.2.1  In order to ensure that the Vision and strategy is effectively delivered, this Local Plan sets 
out a number of Spatial Objectives. The Spatial Objectives focus on the key issues and 
challenges that need to be addressed to fulfil the V ision. The objectives consist of a 
‘headline’ and detail as to why each objective is a key issue locally.  
Vibrant town centres.....  
Spatial Objective 1: Regeneration of town and district centres  
Masterplans and associated policies and land allocations will  deliver regeneration, investment and 
growth in the centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston. The centres will be a focus of growth 
due to their sustainable locations at the heart of their communities. They will be the key locations 
for retail, leisure,  community facilities, office based employment and some residential development. 
New development will respect the unique character of each centre and ensure the provision of 
open areas of public space that residents and visitors can enjoy.  
Spatial Objectiv e 2: Wigston town centre  
Reinforce Wigston’s role as the Borough’s main town and one of only a small number of town 
centres in the Leicester PUA. Building on the recent public realm regeneration works along Bell 
Street, continued regeneration of the town c entre will encourage investment from national retailers 
as well as supporting the smaller independent retailers that provide a diverse and unique mix of 
retail outlets. The realisation of the adopted Local Development Order and objectives set out within 
the Area Action Plan Guidance document will also support this regeneration.  
Spatial Objective 3: Oadby district centre  
Reinforce the role that Oadby’s centre plays within the Borough. Continue to encourage the mix of 
retailers that accommodate the main shopp ing streets, as well as the supplementary uses such as 
cafes, bars and restaurants. As well as the encouragement of local residents, a concerted effort 
will be made to encourage the use of the centre by the thousands of students that reside under a 
mile aw ay in University of Leicester’s Manor Road student campus.  
Spatial Objective 4: South Wigston centre  
Continue to promote regeneration opportunities within the district centre that build upon the 
significant investments made to Blaby Road Park, and the Sout h Leicestershire College campus. 
Reinforce the role that South Wigston’s centre plays within the Borough. The realisation of the 
adopted Local Development Order will also support this regeneration.  
A prosperous economy…..  
Spatial Objective 5: Improved empl oyment opportunities  
Areas identified within the Borough for industrial, storage and distribution employment will be 
protected from uncomplimentary or detrimental changes of use. Office based and retail based 
employment will be focused in the most sustaina ble locations. Such focuses will help to maintain 
the Borough’s current low rates of unemployment by offering a variety of employment opportunities 
around the Borough that have good transport connections. Land will be allocated within the town 
centres, Ide ntified Employment Areas and at the Wigston Direction for Growth for appropriate 
employment uses that meet the Borough’s required need, as well as offering opportunities for  
24 | P a g e  
 businesses to establish and grow. A mix of type and size of employment uses will b e encouraged 
within each location identified, to achieve a better balance between the location of jobs and 
housing, which reduces the need to travel.  
Spatial Objective 6: Accessible transport links  
The use and development of sustainable transport, includin g travel planning, working from home, 
public transport, cycling and walking will be actively encouraged. Improve residents and employees 
access to fast, frequent and affordable public transport. The east / west public transport links 
between Oadby and Wigs ton and Wigston and South Wigston will be improved. In addition, the 
reliable public transport links between each of the Borough’s main centres and the City of Leicester 
will be maintained and enhanced where possible to do so. Whilst encouraging the reduct ion of 
private car use, the highway network within the Borough will be improved to ensure as reliable and 
free flowing movement of vehicular traffic as possible.  
Healthy empowered communities…..  
Spatial Objective 7: Growth of the Leicester PUA  
Establish a number of ‘directions for growth’, within Wigston and Oadby that are directly adjacent 
to the Leicester PUA, have appropriate access and do not have significant detrimental impacts on 
the current highway network. The ‘directions for growth’ wil l be located as to reinforce Wigston’s 
main town centre role as well as realising Oadby centres role within the Borough. These growth 
areas will contribute towards meeting the Council’s identified Objectively Assessed Needs.  
Spatial Objective 8: A balanced  housing market  
A mix of housing opportunities will be provided to positively meet the housing needs of the local 
community, including private rented and affordable homes. A mix of type, tenure and affordability 
will be provided to ensure that all resident s of the Borough have access to appropriate homes. The 
primary focus for new housing will be the three main centres, the rest of the urban area, as well as 
the allocated ‘direction for growth’ areas. Support will be given to proposals or schemes that reali se 
these primary focus locations and the needs of the local community.  
Spatial Objective 9: Healthy lifestyles  
A wide range and mix of high quality cultural, educational and health facilities will be provided in 
the most appropriate and sustainable locatio ns. Walking and cycling will be supported throughout 
the Borough and improved access to these travel methods will be required in large scale 
development schemes. The existing provision of publicly accessible open spaces and leisure and 
recreation facilitie s within the Borough will be conserved and enhanced. The Council will adopt a 
‘no net loss’ strategy towards open spaces within the Borough.  
 Safe, clean and attractive.....  
Spatial Objective 10: High quality and sustainable design  
All new development with in the Borough, whether it is new build or conversion, will be required to 
illustrate the highest standards of design and construction. Design will also be a key component in 
ensuring that streets are safe from crime and anti social behaviour and promote s ocial inclusion 
and community cohesion. All development will be required to respect local history, character and 
vernacular, whilst incorporating measures to conserve energy, achieve sustainable energy 
generation and minimise waste. All development will be  required to contribute towards; reducing  
25 | P a g e  
 greenhouse gas emissions; reducing flood risk, both existing and future; and, achieving 
sustainable waste management.  
Spatial Objective 11: Conserving and enhancing green (including water assets) infrastructure  
All development should be respectful to the natural environment and landscape (including Local 
Green Spaces, ancient woodland and veteran trees), as well as conserving and enhancing the 
Borough’s biodiversity. Both green and water assets will be protected, m anaged and enhanced. 
Due to the predominately urban nature of the Borough, enhancement of the landscape and 
biodiversity will consist of, for example the planting of trees and woodlands (where possible), and 
the creation of ponds and other natural habitats  to improve species resilience to climate change. 
Provision of a network of multi -functional green spaces which secure a net gain in biodiversity will 
be sought.  
Spatial Objective 12: Enhancing local heritage  
To encourage the enhancement and preservation o f historically significant buildings and heritage 
assets, archaeological sites, conservation areas, parks and other cultural assets providing 
opportunities for people to access and understand our local heritage. To conserve and enhance 
the Borough’s herita ge, respecting historic buildings and their settings, links and views.  
Spatial Objective 13: Green Wedges and the Countryside  
To protect and enhance the Green Wedges by limiting development to appropriate uses only, as 
well as safeguarding our other open s paces for sport and other forms of recreation. To encourage 
small scale development in the countryside that provides for employment, leisure and residential 
development essential to the needs of the more rural economy. To improve access for local people 
to the natural environment and key Green Infrastructure assets, so as to enhance the value of their 
leisure time.  
Spatial Objective 14: Kilby Bridge regeneration  
A settlement envelope will be created to set a development limit for the Borough’s only rural 
settlement, Kilby Bridge. The settlement of Kilby Bridge, would benefit from small scale 
development, consisting of residential, commercial and tourism. Any development would need to 
conserve and enhance the Grand Union Canal Conservation Area and the other environmental 
and heritage assets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
26 | P a g e  
 Chapter Four – Sustainable Places  
4.1.1  Within the NPPF, the government has clearly stated that the presumption in favour of 
sustainable development is the golden thread running through the planning system, both 
when plan making and decision taking. The government also states that the planning 
system should be genuinely plan led, and should empower the local people to shape their 
surroundings.  
4.1.2  Pursuing sustainable development in the Borough involves seeking positive improvement in 
the quality of the built, natural and historic environment, as well as in people’s quality of life, 
including (but not limited to):  
- creating sustainable communities;  
- making it easier for jobs to be created in the Borough’s main cen tres; 
- widening the choice of high quality homes;  
- replacing poor design with high quality design;  
- improving the conditions in which people live, work and travel;  
- improving access to leisure opportunities; and  
- achieving net gains for the natural environmen t. 
Policy  1 Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development  
All development proposals should take account of the broad aim of sustainable development; 
ensuring that development contributes positively towards ensuring a better quality of life for 
residents , now and for generations to come.  
The Council will be positive when considering development proposals that reflect the presumption 
in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning Policy Framework. The 
Council will jointly work with  applicants where possible to ensure that development proposals 
improve the social, economic and environmental conditions in the Borough; meeting the challenges 
of climate change and protecting and enhancing the Borough’s ecosystems.  
For development to be  deemed ‘sustainable’ within the context of this Plan, it should contribute 
towards delivering the Spatial Strategy, the Council’s Vision and Objectives, and should be in 
conformity with the local planning policies contained within this Plan. Development t hat conflicts 
with policies of the Plan will be refused unless material considerations indicate otherwise.  
Should there ever be a time when the Plan is deemed absent or silent or out of date, the Council 
will not look upon development proposals positively , where the proposal is deemed unsustainable, 
and / or the adverse impacts associated with the proposal significantly and demonstrably outweigh 
the benefits, when assessed against the policies set out within the National Planning Policy 
Framework, when tak en as a whole. Development will also be restricted if specific policies within 
the National Planning Policy Framework indicate that it should be.  
 
 
 
 
  
27 | P a g e  
 Spatial Strategy for Development within the Borough  
4.2.1  The spatial strategy for the Borough is derived  from the Council’s Vision and Spatial 
Objectives, which are underpinned by the spatial portrait for the Borough as well as the 
Council’s Corporate Priorities.  
4.2.2  The spatial strategy also takes account of the wider Leicester and Leicestershire Housing 
Market Area and the Leicester PUA, as well as the role that the Borough plays within both. 
The Borough’s urban areas sit entirely within the Leicester PUA and the Borough plays a 
key role in supporting the regeneration of Leicester City, as do all of the o ther local 
authority areas within the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area. The Borough 
and Leicester City have a unique and close spatial relationship, particularly in regards of 
supporting the local economy, shaping strategic green infrastruc ture, and influencing how 
residents live out their day to day lives. This close relationship is something that the 
Borough is seeking to conserve and enhance where possible.  
4.2.3  All new development should be Plan led and should fulfil the key principles of sustainable 
development.  
Housing Growth  
4.2.4  The Council’s Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) for housing, of 2960 for the period 2011 to 
2031, is the starting point for the Council’s Plan period target. The Council’s OAN for 
housing is fully evidenced by the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic 
Development Needs Assessment. To get from this starting point, to a Plan period target, 
the Council has undertaken fundamental evidence base assessments that have illustrated 
that the Council’s OAN i s deliverable for the period 2011 to 2031.  
4.2.5  As the Council is seeking to meet its Objectively Assessed Need in full, under the Duty to 
Cooperate it will not be reliant on any other local authority within the Leicester and 
Leicestershire Housing Market  Area to help meet its own need. Although, the Council can 
meets its own need in full, it is aware that the City of Leicester has declared an unmet need 
and will need help from other HMA partners to deliver its unmet need up to 2031.  
4.2.6  The spatial stra tegy makes provision for 2,960 new additional homes between 2011 and 
2031.  
4.2.7  The spatial strategy for housing growth allows sufficient flexibility to ensure that the Plan 
aligns with national policy and guidance, and allows for choice and competition within the 
Borough. The three Direction for Growth areas allocated within this Plan have upwards of 4 
different developers, with further developers having interest in the smaller sites that have 
been allocated also. The Council would always seek to activel y encourage the reuse of 
previously developed land, however is aware that prioritising this over sustainable growth 
areas would not be positive planning and would be at odds with national policy and 
guidance. The Council will take a three ‘pronged’ approac h to providing the homes that the 
Borough needs. The three approaches are; allocating provision of new additional homes 
within the town centre of Wigston and the district centre of Oadby; allocating provision of 
new additional homes on smaller sites (11 to  99 new additional homes) that are within or 
directly adjacent to the Leicester PUA; and, allocating provision of new additional homes 
within the three Direction for Growth areas.   
28 | P a g e  
 4.2.8  Table 1 illustrates the position as of 1st April 2017 regarding the housing delivery of the Plan 
period target. The table shows the number of net additional homes that have been built 
since 1st April 2011, the number of committed net additional homes and the number of net 
additional homes allocate d in this Plan.  
Table 1: Housing delivery for the Plan period  
(A) Housing requirement for the Borough for the period 2011 to 2031  2960  
 
(B) New additional housing completions between 1st April 2011 to 31st 
March 2017  578 
(C) New additional housing commitments as of 31st March 2017  768 
(D) Total new additional homes already complete or with extant planning 
permission as of 31st March 2017 (B + C = D)  1346  
(E) Residual provision between 1st April 2017 and 31st March 2031  1614  
(F) New additional homes allocated on land within the town centre of 
Wigston and the district centre of Oadby  205 
(G) New additional homes on allocated Direction for Growth areas  1159  
(H) New additional homes on smaller allocation sites (11 -99 units)  250* 
(I) Total new additional homes provided between 1st April 2017 and 
31st March 2017 (F + G + H = I)  1614  
*two sites providing 10 new additional homes have been included within the figure, however will not be allocated as they 
are both below the large si te threshold of 11 +. The sites are contained within the Council’s latest SHLAA and consist of 
one site of 8 new additional homes and one site of 2 new additional homes.  
4.2.9  The Council will apply the Plan, Monitor, Manage approach to deliver this Plan’s  spatial 
strategy.  
4.2.10  The number of new additional homes allocated within this Plan (not including the town and 
district centre allocations) stem from the Council’s latest Strategic Housing Land Availability 
Assessment (SHLAA). The allocated new additi onal homes figure (F + G + H) consists of 
town and district centre allocations, 0 to 5 year SHLAA sites and Direction for Growth 
areas. It should be noted that although certain allocations stem from the SHLAA, this was 
merely the starting point. Further ev idence was undertaken to ensure that the sites within 
the SHLAA are appropriate, deliverable and sustainable.  
4.2.11  In addition to Table 1, there is an additional number of new homes that could be delivered 
up to the end of the Plan period 2031 or beyond.  This additional number of new homes 
consists of new homes within the settlement boundary of Kilby Bridge (up to 40 new 
additional homes), Phase 3 of the Wigston Direction for Growth (approximately 300 new 
additional homes), and new additional homes provid ed on Windfall sites (70 new additional 
homes). The additional new homes figure identified allows the Council a ‘buffer’ 
(approximately 400 homes) against the Plan period target of 2960, which would negate any 
potential delivery issues on allocated sites. The additional homes figure could help fulfil a 
small proportion of Leicester City’s declared unmet need.  
4.2.12  Should evidence suggest a need for further development at the Wigston Direction for 
Growth area (Phase 3), it would be subject to appropriate t esting, in particular, highway and 
transport infrastructure capacity, and liaison with the Borough Council and Leicestershire 
County Council Highways department. Any proposal would also be subject to the 
development being sensitive to the countryside areas  that surround it and sustainable and 
appropriate in size and facility provision. This will be Plan led and will be considered 
through a future review of this Plan.   
29 | P a g e  
  
Figure 1 – Local Plan Housing Trajectory  
 
30 | P a g e  
 Employment Growth  
4.2.13  The Council’s Objectively Assessed Need (OAN) for employment use land, for the period 
2011 to 2031, is;  
 B1 a/b  B1c / B2  Small scale B8  Total  
Total  1 0 4 5 
 
4.2.14  Similar to the OAN for housing, the OAN for employment use land is the starting point from 
which the Council’s Plan period target stems. The Council’s OAN for employment use land 
is fully evidenced by the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic D evelopment 
Needs Assessment. To get from this starting point, to a Plan period target, the Council has 
undertaken fundamental evidence base assessments that have illustrated that the Council’s 
OAN is deliverable for the period 2011 to 2031. As the Council is seeking to meet its 
Objectively Assessed Need in full, under the Duty to Cooperate it will not be reliant on any 
other local authority within the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area to help 
meet its own need.  
4.2.15  In addition to the Hous ing and Economic Development Needs Assessment, the Council as 
part of its further evidence base, commissioned an Employment Land and Premises study, 
which sought to look in more detail at the demand / need for employment uses within the 
Borough area. The s tudy also took account of the current state and quality of the Borough’s 
existing employment use land stock.  
4.2.16  The Employment Land and Premises study identifies an Employment use land requirement 
of 8.25 hectares (including 5 year buffer) for the peri od of 2011 to 2031.  
4.2.17  The scope for meeting the identified employment use land requirements are extremely 
limited within the Borough, however viable and sustainable opportunities have been 
identified.  
4.2.18  The spatial strategy makes provision for the following new additional employment use land 
between 2011 and 2031.  
- 5 hectares of B1, B2 and / or B8 use land at the Wigston Direction for Growth area 
(includes 2.5 hectares with extant outline planning permission ), 
- 0.55 hectares of B1, B2 and / or B8 use land at land at Magna Road, South Wigston  
- 2.67 hectares of B1, B2 and / or B8 use land at Oadby Sewage Works, and  
- 9,800 sqm of new office / commercial floorspace (0.3 hectares) within the town centre of 
Wigston an d the district centre of Oadby.  
4.2.19  The provision of the above exceeds the need / requirements illustrated within both the 
Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment and the Borough’s Employment 
Land and Premises study, and allows capacity for ‘ churn’ within the Borough’s existing 
employment sites.  
4.2.20  The 0.55 hectares of B1, B2 and / or B8 use land at Magna Road, South Wigston is an 
outstanding employment land allocation, originally defined within the Council’s Saved Local 
Plan. The Council’ s Core Strategy retained the allocation. The Council’s Employment Land 
and Premises Study suggests that the land allocation should be further retained as it 
presents a logical extension to the Magna Road Identified Employment area. This Local  
31 | P a g e  
 Plan will fur ther retain the land allocation for employment uses B1, B2, and / or B8 uses. 
The allocation is defined on the Adopted Policies Map.  
Town Centre Growth  
4.2.21  The spatial strategy is set around the principle that the town centre of Wigston and the 
district  centres of Oadby and South Wigston will be key focus areas for new development 
up to 2031. These centres will accommodate an appropriate level of development relative 
to their size and character.  
4.2.22  In 2013, the Council adopted a Town Centres Area Act ion Plan that set out levels of growth 
for the centres of Wigston and Oadby. The Area Action Plan also, through a masterplan, 
illustrated one way in which the levels of growth set out could be implemented. Since the 
adoption of the Area Action Plan, a cert ain level of growth and regeneration has occurred 
within the two centres. For the purposes of this Plan, levels of growth will be set out for the 
town centre of Wigston and the district centre of Oadby, that are similar to the levels set out 
within the Tow n Centres Area Action Plan 2013. This Plan, however, has amended the 
levels of growth to take account of development and regeneration that has occurred (since 
2013) and up to date evidence base. The amended levels of growth are contained within 
this spatia l strategy.  
4.2.23  Since the adoption of the Area Action Plan, the following development has occurred within 
the centres of Wigston and Oadby;  
- 26 new additional homes have been committed on Area Action Plan sites  
- Bell Street, Wigston has been fully pedestr ianised, and  
- Over £800,000 has been spent on refurbishing the public realm within each of the centres 
of Wigston and Oadby  
4.2.24  In addition to the above development, a Local Development Order has been produced for 
part of Wigston town centre.  
4.2.25  To ensure that the development approach within the Borough’s main centres is flexible, this 
Plan contains policies relating to overall levels of growth within the Borough’s centres as 
well as generic development management policies (illustrated within Chapters  8 and 9). 
The existing masterplans relevant to the centres of Wigston and Oadby demonstrate that 
the objectives and levels of growth can be delivered. Upon adoption of this Plan, the Town 
Centre Area Action Plan will be superseded as a policy document and  will become 
guidance. The document will be titled the ‘Area Action Plan Guidance’ document. This 
document will be reviewed and updated post adoption of this Plan when necessary.  
4.2.26  It must be noted, that any development proposed within the Borough’s t own or district 
centres, will need to comply with all relevant policies contained within this Plan and not just 
those relating to town and district centres. Also, any new development proposed within the 
centre of Wigston or Oadby, must not compromise the d elivery of the levels of development 
set out within this Plan.  
Growth in the Leicester PUA, outside of the Borough’s town and district centres  
4.2.27  This Plans spatial strategy supports housing development on suitable land within the 
Leicester PUA. Approp riate housing development proposed within the Leicester PUA will 
be supported in principle as it will be located within a sustainable location that has easy  
32 | P a g e  
 access to public transport, and is within easy reach of the Borough’s main centres as well 
as emplo yment opportunities.  
4.2.28  As well as housing, the Leicester PUA plays an important role in supporting a wide range of 
other uses, including local shops, parks and recreation grounds, public houses, doctor’s 
surgeries and dental practices. It is important  that such facilities are widespread throughout 
the Leicester PUA and are available locally to the majority of the Borough’s residents. It is 
vital that a mix of uses is provided within the Leicester PUA that contributes towards the 
delivery of sustainable  development.  
4.2.29  One of the key pieces of evidence base for identifying potential housing sites within the 
Leicester PUA, is the Council’s Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA). 
The SHLAA identifies theoretical capacity of a site by an  agreed process and methodology. 
The SHLAA is updated on at least an annual basis and aids the Council in producing short, 
medium and long term housing trajectories.  
Direction for Growth Areas  
4.2.30  The term ‘direction for growth’ was first used within th e Council’s Core Strategy, the term 
refers to strategic areas of development growth that are located outside of the Leicester 
PUA and are situated on predominately greenfield land. The previous Core Strategy 
identified a single direction for growth area to wards the south east of Wigston. This growth 
area directly supported the Borough’s main town centre of Wigston.  
4.2.31  Due to the level of housing and employment growth required in the Borough, compliance 
with the NPPF, and the Council’s promotion of posit ive planning, this Plan has identified 
three direction for growth areas; one a direct extension of the previous growth area to the 
south east of Wigston (Wigston Direction for Growth); one in the most northerly part of the 
Borough, along Gartree Road and S toughton Road in Oadby (Stoughton Grange Direction 
for Growth); and, one towards Oadby’s most southerly part, along the A6 (Cottage Farm 
Direction for Growth).  
4.2.32  Although the Borough is constrained by transport and highway capacity, all three of the 
direction for growth areas have direct access onto good main road links and are situated 
directly adjacent to the Leicester PUA. All three direction for growth areas allocated (once 
built out) will form a part of the Leicester PUA.  
4.3.33  In preparing this Plan, a number of different site options were identified as possible 
locations for direction for growth areas. The refinement of these options into the Spatial 
Strategy has been influenced by public consultation and preparation and analysis of 
evidence bas e. 
4.3.34  The South East Leicestershire Transport Study published in 2017 was produced with the 
involvement of Oadby and Wigston  Borough Council, Harborough District Council, 
Leicester City Council and Leicestershire County Council. The study concluded that, 
although there would be increased traffic levels on the surrounding roads and junctions of 
each growth area identified, each of the growth areas have the potential to accommodate 
growth without having a significant detrimental impact on the wider highway network. 
However, certain levels of mitigation will be needed.  
4.3.35  In total, and over several Plan periods, the three growt h areas have the capacity for up to 
2050 new additional homes and 5 hectares of employment land for the Borough.  
33 | P a g e  
 Approximately 300 new additional homes will be provided at the Stoughton Grange 
Direction for Growth Area, 400 (Phase 1 and 2) new additional h omes will be provided at 
the Cottage Farm Direction for Growth Area, and up to 1,350 (Phase 1, 2 and 3) and 5 
hectares of employment land at the Wigston Direction for Growth Area. Both the Wigston 
Direction for Growth Area and the Cottage Farm Direction fo r Growth Area, have extant 
planning permissions for their Phase 1 elements, providing 450 new additional homes and 
2.5 hectares of employment land and 150 new additional homes, respectively.  
4.3.36  300 new additional homes at the Wigston Direction for Grow th area, are identified for 
Phase 3, which is planned for post Plan period (2031 onwards). As mentioned earlier, 
should evidence suggest a need for further development at the Wigston Direction for 
Growth, it will be Plan led and considered through a future  review of the Plan.. The Council 
does not expect or foresee any circumstances that could affect the delivery of new homes 
on any of its allocated sites, however the Council seeks to plan positively through this Local 
Plan.  
4.3.37  Excluding the 300 new add itional homes planned for Phase 3 of the Wigston Direction for 
Growth, approximately 1,700 new additional homes are to be provided at the Direction for 
Growth areas, equating to nearly 60 per cent of the total new additional home delivery 
within the Boroug h during the Plan period 2011 – 2031.  
4.3.38  The three growth areas will directly support the Borough’s main town centre of Wigston and 
the district centre of Oadby. The growth areas will also contribute significantly towards the 
provision of vital facilit ies and services, including education provision, affordable homes 
provision, improved bus services, improved cycle ways and footpaths, community facility 
building provision, improved local shopping and leisure facilities, and provision of outdoor 
sport and  open space. The growth areas will also contribute towards improvements to the 
local highway network.  
4.3.39  Due to their scale, each of the Direction for Growth areas will be required to produce a 
masterplan or development brief prior to the submission of  a planning application.  
4.3.40  Each growth area has a specific policy within Chapter 7 of this Plan.  
Phasing of Development throughout the Plan period  
4.3.41  The spatial strategy for housing growth allows sufficient flexibility to ensure that this Plan 
aligns with national policy and guidance, and allows for choice and competition within the 
Borough.  
4.3.42  The spatial strategy is based on a three ‘pronged’ approach to delivering the growth that 
the Borough needs. The three approaches enable sustainable development to occur 
throughout the Borough.  
4.3.43  As the housing delivery trajectory illustrates, the provision of new additional homes 
throughout the Plan period is neither smooth nor consistent, particularly during the early 
years of the Plan period. S uch fluctuations can be attributed to the economic market, both 
nationally and locally, and the fact that nearly 60 per cent of the Borough’s housing 
provision is located on three large growth areas.  
4.3.44  In producing the housing trajectory, account was taken of lead in times for the larger sites, 
as well as the upfront infrastructure requirements of the larger sites. The further the  
34 | P a g e  
 trajectory looks into the future, the more difficult it becomes to forecast provision rates, 
therefore towards the back end  of the Plan period there is a smoothing of the trajectory, to 
take account of this.  
4.3.45  It must be noted that, although the Council has made every attempt to allocate, identify and 
forecast all new additional homes for this Plan period, it realises tha t other development will 
come forward on non strategic sites that has not been allocated or identified (windfalls).  
4.3.46  Government guidance states that Local Planning Authorities may make an allowance for 
windfall sites in the five year supply if they have compelling evidence that such sites have 
consistently become available in the local area and will continue to provide a reliable 
source of supply. It goes on to state that any allowance should be realistic having regard to 
the Strategic Housing Land A vailability Assessment, historic windfall delivery rates and 
expected future trends, and should not include residential gardens.  
4.3.47  Evidence suggests that a windfall allowance could be included within the housing trajectory.  
4.3.48  From the 1st April 2 008 until 31st March 2017, 514 (or 61 per cent) of the total 842 
additional new homes provided within the Borough would be defined as windfalls. Of the 
514 additional new homes, 362 have been provided on large sites of 11 homes or more.  
4.3.49  Over the 9 y ears mentioned above, the average number of new additional homes being 
delivered on both large and small windfall sites is 57 dwellings per year. As mentioned, the 
Council has not included a windfall allowance within the housing trajectory, however has 
identified an allowance within the housing supply buffer figure. The Council has been 
conservative in its approach and has decided to use only a proportion of the annual 
average; some 25 per cent of the 57 dwelling average per year, equating to 14 units per 
year or 70 units over a 5 year period. Other than the anomaly in 2011 – 2012 where none 
of the units were classed as windfalls, the number of windfall units has ranged between 30 
and 89 in the other 8 years (6 of these 8 years have seen 60 units plus as win dfalls).  
Policy 2  Spatial Strategy for Development within the Borough  
The Council will always seek the reuse of previously developed land and will concentrate 
development within the Borough’s key centres and the Leicester Principal Urban Area. In addition,  
the Council has allocated land outside of these areas to ensure that the development needs of the 
Borough are met.  
In order to deliver the required levels of growth to meet the Borough’s needs up to 2031, this Plan;  
- allocates sufficient land to provide at least 2,960 new additional homes;  
- allocates sufficient land to provide at least 8 hectares of employment use development; 
and, 
- identifies sufficient land to provide up to 2,974 sqm of new additional retail floor space.  
To achieve the above levels of development, the Council has identified and allocated land within 
Wigston town centre, Oadby district centre, South Wigston district centre, the Borough’s 
designated local centres, areas within the Leicester PUA and the three  Direction for Growth areas.  
The Borough’s main town of Wigston and main district centre of Oadby will contribute the following 
levels of development.   
35 | P a g e  
 Wigston Town Centre  
- 9,000 sqm of new office floorspace  
- 1,169 sqm of additional retail floorspace  
- 129 new residential units  
- At least the same number of existing public car parking spaces  
Oadby District Centre  
- 800 sqm of new commercial floorspace  
- 1,351 sqm of additional retail floorspace  
- 76 new residential units  
- At least the same number of exis ting public car parking spaces  
The existing masterplans relevant to the centres of Wigston and Oadby demonstrate that the 
objectives and levels of growth can be delivered.  
Areas within the Leicester PUA  
The areas situated within the Leicester PUA, but out side of the town centre of Wigston and the 
district centre of Oadby will contribute the following levels of development.  
- 250 new additional homes, including;  
  Meadow Hill, Welford Road Wigston (53)  
  Land west of Welford Road, Wigston (50)  
  Arriva Bus Depot, Station Street, South Wigston (43)  
  Former Oadby Swimming Pool, Oadby (32)  
  Nautical William, Aylestone Lane, Wigston (29)  
  39 Long Street, Wigston (18)  
  53-59 Queens Drive, Wigston (15)  
- 3.22 hectares of employment use land  
- 454 sq m of additional retail floorspace  
Direction for Growth Areas  
The Direction for Growth Areas will contribute the following levels of development.  
- at least 1,159 new additional homes, and  
- at least 5 hectares of employment use land  
In addition to providin g new additional employment use land, the Council will seek the retention of 
existing Identified Employment Areas.   
36 | P a g e  
 To ensure that development and growth within the Borough is provided in a sustainable manner, 
the Council will work in partnership with loca l authorities, agencies and organisations to identify 
and coordinate the provision and funding of infrastructure and facilities (including green 
infrastructure) required to meet the needs of planned development and to conserve and enhance 
existing key biod iversity, environmental, social, cultural, historic and economic assets.  
All allocated land is identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
37 | P a g e  
 Regeneration Schemes and Large Scale Change  
4.4.1  Proposals for new regeneration schemes and initiatives that lead to large scale change will 
be identified and consulted upon in accordance with the Council’s Statement of Community 
Involvement and the requirements set out in the appropriate Town and Country Planning 
Regulations. The Cou ncil will seek to consult with key stakeholders and ensure that 
representatives of the wider local community are involved throughout any planning and 
implementation process, relating to large scale change.  
4.4.2  The key areas within the Borough for potenti al large scale new development or 
regeneration schemes are identified within Policy 2 of this Plan. The Council has an Area 
Action Plan Guidance document for the centres of Wigston and Oadby that will provide a 
basis for facilitating regeneration schemes w ithin each location.  
4.4.3  Much of the University of Leicester’s student accommodation, conferencing facilities and 
sports and recreational facilities are based at their campus in Oadby. The Council 
continues to support the general principle of enhancemen t of the University of Leicester’s 
Oadby Campus, however would encourage the preparation of a long term framework for its 
future development. All schemes relating to the Oadby campus should be in accordance 
with other relevant objectives and policies in th is document.  
4.4.4  Regeneration schemes in the Borough will be encouraged through masterplanning and / or 
Development Briefs. Such planning will provide an organised, streamlined and sustainable 
approach that will prevent ad hoc development out of context with the general character, 
history and structure of the area, from being detrimental or negative.  
4.4.5  In large scale developments or schemes that are proposed, such as the Direction for 
Growth areas, proposals will need to include a mix of uses and tak e account of any existing 
local landscape or townscape character. Such mixed use should include residential 
dwellings, on site employment opportunities (where appropriate), recreation and leisure, 
community facilities and formation of a local centre (where  relevant). Such a mix of uses 
will contribute towards sustainable development and will play a role in reducing the effects 
of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases on climate change.  
4.4.6  Although development of previously developed land and / or bu ildings may be able to 
integrate and benefit from existing infrastructure, provision of new and/or improved existing 
infrastructure may be required to mitigate negative impacts of the large scale change. Any 
provisions sought will be done so in accordance with policies in this Plan, Leicestershire 
County Council Highways Department and Education Department, as well as national 
policy and guidance.  
Policy 3  Regeneration Schemes and Large Scale Change  
When regeneration schemes or large scale change is proposed, the Council will require the 
production of, either, Masterplans, Development Briefs and / or other appropriate plans or 
strategies. In conjunction with Leicestershire County Council Highways Depa rtment, the Council 
will also require the production of Transport Assessments.  
Submitted Masterplans, Development Briefs and / or appropriate plans or strategies, where 
relevant should:   
38 | P a g e  
 - Identify the land area suitable for new development or redevelopment  and set out the 
appropriate uses.  
- Conserve and enhance heritage assets and their settings.  
- Establish a spatial and sustainable pattern of growth.  
- Identify constraints to development and illustrate how these will be overcome.  
- Identify all sensitive  features and measures for protection.  
- Illustrate all relevant access, transport and potential traffic issues, as well as mitigation 
 measures.  
- Establish priorities for implementation along with timescales and sources of funding.  
- Take account of loca l landscape and / or townscape character in the design of the scheme.  
- Set out the necessary infrastructure needed to bring the site forward.  
- Take into account all other relevant policies within this Local Plan.  
Where regeneration schemes or large scal e change is proposed, the earliest liaison between the 
applicant, the Borough Council and Leicestershire County Council Highways Department and 
Education Department (and Leicester City Council where relevant) is essential.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
39 | P a g e  
 Chapter Five – Cohesive Communities  
Creating a Skilled Workforce  
5.1.1  Education and training can play a pivotal role in reducing unemployment and making the 
local economy more flexible and adaptable to change. It allows this by enabling businesses 
access to an appropri ately skilled workforce. The Council’s Economic Regeneration 
Strategy supports the Council’s ambition for continued economic prosperity, education and 
training.  
5.1.2  The Plan’s spatial objective for education and learning (Healthy Lifestyles) is to improv e 
and provide learning and educational opportunities and prospects for the Borough’s 
residents. This includes practical vocational training and apprenticeship, across a broad 
range of sectors.  
5.1.3  The skill base of the Borough is a critical factor for e conomic growth and future prosperity. 
The number of young people who reach adulthood with no qualification or skill is something 
that the Council wishes to discourage, as this can contribute to higher rates of 
unemployment. This in turn can discourage inve stment and growth in the Borough.  
5.1.4  A survey carried out by the Office of National Statistics (ONS) illustrates that between 2004 
and 2015, there was a relatively high percentage of Borough residents with NVQ 4 
qualifications and above. Put in context,  the percentage for the Borough is higher than the 
equivalent for the East Midlands and Great Britain. Conversely, there is a relatively high 
number of residents in the Borough with no qualifications, which is higher than the East 
Midlands and Great Britai n figures. In 2013 approximately 4,200 (12.2%) of the Borough’s 
residents had no qualifications, whilst the East Midlands and Great Britain figures were 
10.4% and 9.4% respectively.  
5.1.5  The Council will therefore continue to work in partnership with loc al educational facilities, 
such as schools and universities, the Leicester & Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership 
(LLEP), and Leicestershire County Council (as the Local Education Authority) to ensure 
that the skills, learning and educational needs of the  Borough are met and that the 
Borough’s younger generation has the opportunity to realise their full potential.  
5.1.6  Existing educational facilities (amongst other facilities) will be protected from potential loss 
through the Community Facilities Policy o f this Local Plan and in principle support will be 
given to proposals that will result in improved educational facilities, including proposals to 
expand existing educational facilities or create new educational facilities.  
5.1.7  The Council is keen to imp rove education and skills of its residents. To help achieve this, 
the Council will encourage applicants for major residential and non -residential development 
to liaise with local colleges and apprenticeship schemes, to utilise the existing skills of the 
Borough’s residents as an integral part of the construction process.  
Policy 4  Creating a Skilled Workforce  
The Council will support development proposals that relate directly to the development of local 
skills, and training opportunities, particularly for yo ung people and residents who are unemployed.   
In granting planning permission for major development schemes, developers will be encouraged to 
contribute to local employment development, skills and training, including:   
40 | P a g e  
 - making best efforts to employ local contractors, subcontractors, apprentices and trainees 
during construction; and,  
- where appropriate, developing and implementing a business orientated employment and 
skills plan to develop skills.  
The Council will work with its partners including, Leicester & Leicestershire Enterprise Partnership, 
local universities, colleges, schools and academies and Leicestershire County Council, to maintain 
and improve the local work force and provide residents the best chance to be more competitive in 
the job market.  
Planning permission will be granted for new residential development where the individual or 
cumulative impacts of the development on education provision can be addressed, at the 
developer’s cost, either on -site or throu gh financial contributions towards off -site improvements.  
Where appropriate, the Council will also consider the use of legal agreements to secure any 
necessary improvements in education provision arising as a result of development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
41 | P a g e  
 Improving Health and Wellbeing  
5.2.1  National government requires local planning authorities to ensure that health and wellbeing, 
and health infrastructure are considered in local and neighbourhood plans and in planning 
decision taking. Public health organ isations, health service organisations, commissioners 
and providers, and local communities are expected to work effectively with local planning 
authorities in order to promote healthy communities and support appropriate health 
infrastructure.  
5.2.2  The Cou ncil is committed to maintaining and enhancing the health and wellbeing of its 
residents. Due to this commitment, the Council set up its own Health and Wellbeing Board 
that aims to bring key decision makers together from a range of local health providers t o 
review local health data, share information on service provision and lobby for change. The 
Council will seek to ensure that all of its residents are happy and live long and healthy lives, 
with less inequality.  
5.2.3  The Council will work collaboratively with the local Clinical Commissioning Group and the 
National Health Service (NHS), as well as local GP surgeries and other health partners to:  
- support the NHS (including local GP Surgeries) in delivering a health and wellbeing service 
which meets the needs  of Borough’s residents;  
- encourage healthier communities through the targeting of unhealthy lifestyle choices;  
- seek contributions towards new or enhanced health facilities from developers where new 
housing development would result in a shortfall of provisi on; and,  
- ensure increased access to the Borough’s open spaces as well as offering increased 
opportunities for physical activity.  
5.2.4  On a regular basis the Leicester Shire and Rutland Statistics and Research department 
produce Joint Strategic Needs Asses sments (JSNAs) for the local authorities within 
Leicester, Leicestershire and Rutland. The assessments analyse the health needs of 
populations to inform and guide commissioning of health, wellbeing and social care 
services within local authority areas.  
5.2.5 In terms of ‘general health’ according to the most up to date Joint Strategic Needs 
Assessment, the percentage of Borough residents that are in ‘very good health’ is 45.19 per 
cent, which is slightly lower than the overall England percentage of 47.17 pe r cent. 
Conversely, the percentage of Borough residents that are deemed in ‘bad health’ or ‘very 
bad health’ are lower than the England percentages (3.71per cent and 1.09 per cent, 
compared to 4.25 per cent and 1.25 per cent respectively).  
5.2.6  Although t he Borough, in general, fairs pretty well in terms of the statistics illustrated above, 
this Plan has a vital role to play in ensuring that the opportunities exist for people to make 
healthy and / or healthier lifestyle choices. It will also help address a ny health inequalities 
across the Borough.  
5.2.7  By having a positive approach to local health and wellbeing, the Council will seek to create 
and support vibrant, sustainable and healthy communities by promoting and facilitating 
healthy living and lifesty le choices as well as creating an environment that offers plentiful 
opportunities for improving health and wellbeing.  
5.2.8  To ensure that all new development contributes towards providing an array of opportunities 
for healthy living and wellbeing of the B orough’s residents, all proposals should, through  
42 | P a g e  
 design and provision, encourage walking and cycling, as well as encourage the use of other 
sustainable modes of transport. Where there is potential to do so, development should 
contribute towards, for examp le, the provision of and / or the refurbishment of footpaths, 
cycle ways, canal towpaths, outdoor adult gyms, outdoor sports provision, children’s play 
equipment and recreational open spaces.  
5.2.9  National policy suggests that to deliver the social, recre ational and cultural facilities and 
services the community needs, planning policies should plan positively for the provision and 
use of shared space, community facilities and other local services, and should guard 
against the unnecessary loss of valued fac ilities and services.  
5.2.10  To ensure the community’s needs are delivered and safeguarded, the Council will seek to 
prevent the loss of required local services and facilities. All new large scale development 
proposals that could have a detrimental impact on existing local services and facilities 
would need to submit a Health Impact Assessment (HIA) screening statement. The 
Department of Health sets out a guide to carrying out Health Impact Assessments. 
According to guidance, the initial stage of a HIA is ‘ screening’. It is this initial stage that 
dictates whether a full HIA is required or not. Guidance currently sets out five screening 
questions that should be answered when development is proposed.  
5.2.11  A HIA is a practical approach used to judge the effe cts that a proposed development has 
on the health and wellbeing of the local community, whether positive or negative. The 
findings of a HIA are used to make recommendations as to how any positive health impacts 
of the proposed development may be increased and how any negative impacts can be 
reduced.  
Policy 5  Improving Health and Wellbeing  
Development proposals will be required to assess their impact upon existing services and facilities, 
specifically services and facilities relating to health, social wellbe ing, culture and recreation.  
All residential development proposals of 11 units or more and non -residential development 
proposals of a combined gross floorspace of more than 1000 sq.m will be required to submit a 
Health Impact Assessment screening statemen t. The statement will measure the potential impact 
and demands of the development proposal upon the existing services and facilities.  
The Borough Council will require the Health Impact Assessment screening statement to be 
prepared in accordance with the advice and best practice for such assessments as published by 
the Department of Health and other agencies.  
For developments where the initial screening assessment indicates more significant health 
impacts, a more comprehensive, in depth Health Impact Asses sment will be required.  
Where significant impacts are identified, planning permission will be granted where measures to 
mitigate the impact are provided, either onsite and/or offsite through the use of planning 
obligations.  
 
 
  
43 | P a g e  
 High Quality Design and Mate rials 
5.3.1  High quality design, and the use of high quality materials is paramount in ensuring that new 
development creates attractive, buildings and spaces that are sustainable, well connected, 
and are in character within the locale they are set. It is i mperative that new development 
provides buildings and spaces that people enjoy now and in the future.  
5.3.2  Design in planning is about making places welcoming, easy and efficient for people to use 
in terms of functionality, durability, and accessibility.  High quality and inclusive design 
should reflect local character and distinctiveness and be the basis for shaping balanced, 
safe, healthy and integrated communities. It is important to recognise that design is not just 
about the visual and functional aspe cts of a development but also its influence on social 
and environmental wellbeing.  
5.3.3  The construction of buildings and spaces and the sustainability and efficiency of buildings 
and spaces are nationally regulated through Building Regulations. The Build ing Regulations 
are a set of national standards on key aspects of construction, including the reduction in 
carbon emissions and the efficient use of water.  
5.3.4  Any development proposal should deliver the highest possible quality of design and use of 
materials. The design principles set out in this policy should be used to help structure 
discussions between the Council and the development proposer. A Design and Access 
Statement will be required to accompany any development proposal or application.  
5.3.5  The Council will also actively encourage developers to take account of the standards and 
principles set out in the Building for Life 12 (published by the Building for Life Partnership). 
The Council seeks to ensure that all new buildings and spaces are ‘fit for purpose’ and are 
appropriate for healthy living.  
5.3.6  For non residential buildings, the BREEAM standard was created as a cost -effective means 
of bringing sustainable value to development. Evidence demonstrates that sustainable 
developments, like thos e delivered through BREEAM, offer value in many ways, including: 
reduced operational costs. The Council would encourage the use of the BREEAM standard 
in all new non residential development.  
5.3.7  Good design responds in a practical and creative way to bot h the function and identity of a 
place. It puts; land, water, drainage, energy, community, economic, infrastructure and other 
such resources to the best possible use – over the long, as well as the short term.  
5.3.8  Any development proposal should seek to ensure that there is a significant positive effect 
on the community in which it is situated. Any negative affect should be effectively mitigated; 
consideration should be given to the following aspects.  
- local character (including landscape setting);  
- safe, c onnected and efficient streets;  
- a strong network of green spaces (including parks) and public places;  
- crime prevention;  
- high quality architecture;  
- access, inclusion and health;  
- efficient use of natural resources;  
- cohesive and vibrant neighbourhoods;  
- air quality and air quality management;   
44 | P a g e  
 - sustainable construction; and,  
- climate change.  
5.3.9  Development should be designed to be adaptable and flexible and reduce the effects of 
climate change, throughout the proposed lifetime of the development, and not just  in the 
short term. The use of sustainable building materials and the re -use of materials in all 
developments will be sought, as will the use of recycled aggregates in the construction of 
buildings and spaces. Development proposals should also seek to use design to create 
layouts and orientation that minimise energy consumption.  
5.3.10  When new development proposals have an effect on existing areas of public realm or are 
incorporating areas of public realm (whether new or existing) into the design of a sch eme, 
the Public Realm policy in this plan should be taken account of.  
5.3.11  New development should provide high quality connections for pedestrians, cyclists and 
motor vehicle users that avoid dead ends or convoluted routes. New development should 
also in tegrate any new routes into the wider settlement routes and connect to existing 
services and facilities effectively and efficiently. Designing places that are easy and efficient 
to navigate is imperative.  
5.3.12  When new development connects to and makes u se of existing routes, it should not be 
restricted to highways and pavements, it will include other routes, such as canal towpaths 
and other public rights of way.  
5.3.13  As well as connections, all development should provide the appropriate level of parkin g, 
including that for cycling and motor vehicles (where relevant).  
5.3.14  Development should have regards to and enhance local character and history by ensuring 
that it responds to its landscape setting and history of the area, topography and wider 
context , within which it is located, as well as the local streetscape and local building 
materials.  
5.3.15  All development proposals should also have regard to the design principles and guidance 
set out within the Council’s Landscape Character Assessment, and whe re relevant the Area 
Action Plan Guidance and Local Development Orders.  
Policy 6  High Quality Design and Materials  
The Council will require the highest standards of inclusive design and use of the highest quality 
materials for all new development and major  refurbishment in the Borough.  
Proposals for new development and major refurbishment should create a distinctive environment 
by; 
- respecting the existing local and historic character;  
- utilising inclusive design principles, including layout, orientation,  landscape, streetscape, 
scale, materials, natural surveillance and sustainable construction;  
- creating development that is of high architectural quality;  
- ensuring patterns of development are sympathetic to their surroundings; and,   
45 | P a g e  
 - responding to th e local topography and the overall form, character and landscape setting of 
the settlements;  
Proposals for new development and major refurbishment should ensure safe and healthy 
communities by;  
- creating inclusive places that design out opportunities for anti -social behaviour and crime;  
- creating spaces that are accessible to all regardless of ability or background;  
- encouraging sustainable means of travel;  
- protecting local amenity, includi ng, resisting development that has unacceptable 
contributions towards air quality, noise, vibration, smell, light or other pollution, loss of light 
or overlooking;  
- providing opportunities to promote biodiversity;  
- providing opportunities for well desi gned and integrated public art;  
- incorporating measures to minimise waste and energy consumption, conserve water 
resources and provide for renewable energy generation;  
Proposals for new development and major refurbishment should create connected places by  
ensuring that development;  
- connects  effectively and efficiently to existing routes, by avoiding dead ends and 
convoluted routes, to allow it to integrate into the wider settlement and to link to existing 
services and facilities;  
- integrates with exist ing sustainable modes of transport including cycle, pedestrian 
(including canal towpaths and public rights of way), and public transport; and  
- provides appropriate parking facilities, including that for cycling and motor vehicles (where 
relevant).  
Complia nce with the above criteria will need to be expressed through submission of a Design and 
Access Statement.  
Major development including large -scale refurbishment will require preparation of a masterplan, 
development brief and/or design code where deemed app ropriate by the Council.  
Proposals for innovative and outstanding design or construction that contributes to the aims of 
sustainable development and reducing the impacts of climate change will be considered favourably 
by the Council.  
 
 
 
 
  
46 | P a g e  
 Community Facilities  
5.4.1  Community facilities (sometimes referred to as Community assets) are defined as buildings 
or spaces where community led activities for community benefit are the primary use and the 
facility is managed, occupied or used primarily by the vol untary and community sector. 
Community facilities can include purpose -built structures such as community halls and 
village halls, places of worship, health centres, schools and cultural facilities such as 
museums, libraries, theatres, post offices and publ ic houses.  
5.4.2  Some community buildings provide only one type of activity while others provide as diverse 
a range as possible in response to the needs of the communities they serve. They are key 
part of sustainable communities and can contribute positiv ely towards community 
wellbeing.  
5.4.3  The Council will continually monitor and assess the local community’s needs to ensure that 
provision of community facilities within the Borough is appropriate. For the purposes of this 
policy, built sporting facilitie s are not included within the definition of community facilities. 
Built sporting facilities will be taken account of within Policy 9 of this Plan.  
5.4.4  In recent years the Borough has seen significant investment within its community facilities, 
both from the private sector as well as the Council itself, for example the new combined 
health centre in Wigston. Through working closely and collaboratively with key 
stakeholders, it is anticipated that such investments are likely to continue into the future.  
5.4.5 Town centre masterplans, Local Development Orders, development briefs and 
Supplementary Planning Documents have previously and will continue to seek to meet any 
further identified needs for community facilities within the Borough.  
Retention, Enhancement  and New Community Facilities  
5.4.6  The loss of community facilities can have a substantial impact on people’s quality of life, 
wellbeing and overall viability of the local area. The Council will expect new development to 
at least retain, and where possib le, improve existing local community facilities. It is 
important that these are integrated into the design of new development. If development 
proposals are likely to have an effect, whether positively or negatively on an existing 
community facility, it is imperative that the proposer of development has early engagement 
with the Council.  
5.4.7  For existing community facilities, the Council will work with partners to secure future 
improvements and will protect them against redevelopment for alternative uses ( should 
evidence suggest that there is a need to do so), particularly housing and commercial 
development.  
5.4.8  The NPPF at paragraph 70 states that planning policies and decisions should:  
- Guard against the unnecessary loss of valued facilities and service s, particularly where this 
would reduce the community’s ability to meet its day -to-day needs;  
- Ensure that established community facilities are able to develop and modernise in a way 
that is sustainable, and be retained for the benefit of the community.  
 
  
47 | P a g e  
 Asset of Community Value  
5.4.9  Part 5 Chapter 3 of the Localism Act 2011(Act) allows local people and groups to put 
forward to local authorities, what is known as an ‘asset of community value’; through the 
Community Right to Bid procedure. The Act requires local authorities to maintain a list of 
‘community assets’ that have been put forward by qualifying groups or bodies and agreed 
for designation by the local authorities themselves. Further information regarding assets of 
community value can be found on the  Council’s website. It is important to note that should a 
building be designated as an asset of community value, it does not preclude future 
development; however it does give the local community and / or local community group 
better opportunities of securi ng an assets future use for the community.  
Policy 7  Community Facilities  
The council will work with key partners including developers to secure and maintain a range of new 
community facilities.  
All development proposals should support and enhance communit y services and facilities where 
appropriate by:  
- providing on -site and / or contributing towards new or enhanced community facilities off -site 
to meet any needs arising from proposed development.  
 - avoiding the loss of community facilities, unless it can  be demonstrated that they are no 
longer needed by the community they serve.  
The council will support community facilities where;  
- there is good access by pedestrian routes, cycle routes and public transport.  
- they encourage co -location of community uses .  
- sufficient car parking is already available or can be provided to meet the needs of the 
 development.  
- residential amenity can be protected from any detrimental impact in terms of noise, traffic 
and hours of use, and  
- the external appearance of the  building can provide a sense of place and can positively 
reflect the character and appearance of its surroundings.  
Generally, town centre, district centres and local centres will be the most appropriate locations for 
community facilities.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
48 | P a g e  
 Green Infr astructure  
5.5.1  The NPPF states that Green Infrastructure is a network of multi -functional green space, 
both urban and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and 
quality of life benefits for local communities. Green Infrastruc ture is regarded as a vital part 
of urban infrastructure. The Borough Council’s aim is to continually improve the quality of its 
natural green assets as well as to ensure a net gain in its quantity. All new development 
should maximise existing Green Infras tructure and create new areas of green space that 
contribute towards the overall network of Green Infrastructure.  
5.5.2  The NPPF requires the planning system to encourage multiple benefits from the use of land 
in urban and rural areas, recognising that som e open land can perform many functions 
(such as for recreation, wildlife and food production). Well designed Green Infrastructure is 
essential in improving environmental quality, health, wellbeing and community cohesion.    
5.5.3  Green Infrastructure also plays an important role in terms of climate change mitigation (e.g. 
through carbon storage) and climate change adaptation (e.g. through moderating urban 
temperature extremes).  
5.5.4  Throughout the Borough there is a network of ex isting areas of strategic Green 
Infrastructure falling into different categories which are important to the character of both 
the urban and rural areas; and provide valuable spaces for formal and informal recreational 
activities in our communities. These s trategic areas include the countryside around the 
Leicester PUA, the green wedges, river corridors (and their riparian habitats), canals (and 
their riparian habitats) and railway lines, and are illustrated in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2: map illustrating the stra tegic green infrastructure corridors of the Borough  
 
49 | P a g e  
 5.5.5  Current provision of more local Green Infrastructure within the Borough includes formal and 
informal open spaces, cemeteries, sports fields, the golf course, Leicester Racecourse, 
local wildlife sit es, local nature reserves, country parks, Veteran trees, woodland, important 
hedgerows, ponds, The Washbrook and allotment sites.  
5.5.6  Green Infrastructure offers significant opportunity for exercise, sport and informal 
recreation. Green Infrastructure o ffers access and movement and can promote sustainable 
modes of movement such as walking and cycling.  
5.5.7  Green infrastructure should contribute to and enhance the quality of life of existing and 
future residents and visitors to the Borough. Opportunities  to achieve this include;  
- providing improvements that respect existing landscape character, that will assist in 
attracting and retaining inward investment;  
- protecting and enhancing existing biodiversity, creating new areas for biodiversity and 
reversing th e fragmentation of habitats by restoring the connectivity between them;  
- providing continued, new and enhanced links to the countryside; and,  
- coordinating the use of green space to optimise its use for leisure, biodiversity, drainage, 
flood management and other socio economic activities.  
5.5.8  The provision of accessible Green Infrastructure is seen as increasingly important to 
regeneration and creating places that are based upon local distinctiveness. Quality 
environments also attract quality investment in  terms of housing, jobs, skills and visiting 
attractions.  
5.5.9  Green Infrastructure can contribute to the high quality natural and built environment that 
fosters sustainable communities. Biodiversity is preserved and enhanced by ensuring 
Green Infrastruct ure is networked through corridors of green space. As well as biodiversity, 
Green Infrastructure includes sites of ecological, geological and historical interest. Within 
the Borough these sites include:  
Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI)  
- The Grand Union Canal and Limedelves Site of Special Scientific Interest, located east of 
Kilby Bridge between Kilby and Foxton  
Regionally Important Geological Sites (RIGS)  
- Kilby Bridge Pit Regionally Important Geological Site, located between Wigston and  Kilby 
Bridge, east of Welford Road  
Local Wildlife sites  
- There are numerous Local Wildlife sites located within the Borough.  
5.5.10  In addition to the above sites, this Plan identifies habitats and species that comprise green 
infrastructure assets within the Borough. The identified assets include; veteran trees; trees 
with special interest; hedgerows; woodland; ponds; nature reserves; gardens; 
watercourses; otters; water voles; farmland birds; bats; Great Crested Newts, Marbled 
White Butterflies; and, Brow n Hares.  
5.5.11  The Council’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan provides a detailed compilation of the various 
components of Green Infrastructure within the Borough and identifies the new Green  
50 | P a g e  
 Infrastructure that is required in the Borough in order to accommod ate growth.  It 
establishes what needs to be done and by when, who needs to do it and what the priorities 
for action are. Where possible it identifies capital and, where appropriate, revenue costs 
together with sources of funding. It is intended that the G reen Infrastructure Plan will 
contribute towards the delivery and implementation of this policy and that it will assist in the 
determination of planning applications in the Borough.  
5.5.12  The proposed Direction for Growth areas should establish new Green Infrastructure 
corridors that link to the existing Green Infrastructure network. All new Green Infrastructure 
assets / corridors should tie in with, and connect and enhance existing green infrastructure 
assets / corridors. Provision of new Green Infrastruc ture is an important contribution that 
developers can make when sites are developed. More detail relating to the requirements of 
each of the Direction for Growth areas is contained within Chapter 7 of this Plan.  
5.5.13  The Borough has two Green Wedges: the  Oadby and Wigston Green Wedge separating 
the settlements of Oadby and Wigston and Oadby, Thurnby, Stoughton Green Wedge 
encompassing the land to the northern boundary of the Borough. These ensure that green 
corridors through the Borough and into neighbour ing authority areas are maintained. Green 
Wedge Strategies (Oadby and Wigston Green Wedge Strategy (2004) and the Oadby, 
Thurnby, Stoughton Green Wedge Strategy (2005) provide the Borough with a framework 
for managing the green wedges.  
Policy 8  Green Infrastructure  
The Council will seek a net gain in Green Infrastructure through the preservation and enhancement 
of open spaces and assets that comprise the Borough’s Green Infrastructure and its network.  
All new development must contribute towards achievi ng this net gain. Green Infrastructure assets 
will be created, preserved, managed and where necessary enhanced by:  
- safeguarding and enhancing existing Strategic Green Infrastructure assets / corridors;  
- the creation of new multi -functional areas of gree n space;  
- seeking opportunities to link fragmented habitats, protect vulnerable habitats and integrate 
biodiversity within communities;  
- seeking the creation of new strategic and / or local Green Infrastructure assets / corridors 
within all new developme nt; 
- actively promoting the restoration, re -creation and enhancement of existing Green 
Infrastructure assets / corridors and the biodiversity that they support;  
- not allowing development that compromises the integrity of the existing overall Green 
Infras tructure network;  
- protecting and conserving species and sites of ecological and geological significance;  
- using developers contributions to facilitate off -site improvements to existing Green 
Infrastructure assets / corridors, particularly their quality and accessibility;   
51 | P a g e  
 - where relevant working in partnership to enhance the value of Strategic Green 
Infrastructure assets / corridors that are also of significance outside of the Borough, such as 
the Grand Union Canal and River Sence (including their ripari an habitats).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
52 | P a g e  
 Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  
5.6.1  Open space, sports and recreation underpin peoples’ quality of life, with well designed and 
implemented planning policy, being fundamental in delivering the broader Government 
objectives of, supporting urban regeneration and rural renewal; promotion of social 
inclusion and community cohesion; health and well being; and, promoting more sustainable 
local communities.  
5.6.2  National planning policy and guidance sets out that it is for the local authority to assess the 
need for open space and opportunities for new provision in their areas.  
5.6.3  The NPPF defines open space as ‘all open space of public value, including not just land, 
but also areas of water (such as rivers , canals, lakes and reservoirs) which offer important 
opportunities for sport and recreation and act as a visual amenity’.  
5.6.4  Open spaces in towns and rural areas are essential in improving public health, well -being 
and quality of life. Attractive, saf e and accessible parks and green spaces contribute 
positively to social, economic and environmental benefits and promote more healthy 
communities.  
5.6.5  Since 2009, the Council has audited and assessed all of the land within the Borough that is 
fully acces sible to the public, on an annual basis. The land areas identified in these audits / 
assessments are characterised into different typologies depending on their features and 
assets. The typologies used by the Council are outlined below:   
- Parks and Recreati on Grounds  
- Outdoor Sports Facilities  
- Children and Young Peoples Space  
- Informal Open Space  
- Natural Green Space  
- Amenity Green Space  
- Allotments  
- Cemeteries and Churchyards  
5.6.6  As well as the open space typologies above, working closely with Sport England, the 
Council has assessed the current level of built sports facilities within the Borough, as well 
as the expected levels of need over the Plan period up to 2031. The typologies assessed 
are: 
- Sports Halls  
- Swimming Pools  
- Small Halls / Community Venues  
5.6.7  The assessment undertaken in collaboration with Sport England illustrates that the current 
level of provision of the built facilities described above are sufficient for the projected growth 
within the Borough over the Plan period up to 2031. The Council wi ll seek no net loss of 
these current levels of built facility provision.  
5.6.8  Each type of open space and built facility mentioned above has various community benefit. 
It is important that the Council provides a balance between types of open space in ord er to 
meet local needs. For example, not all residents living in each area will have a demand for 
open space in the form of playing pitches or allotments.   
53 | P a g e  
 5.6.9  Locally based open space requirements have been developed by the Council and have 
been very su ccessful in maintaining (and increasing) the levels of open space within the 
Borough. With this success it is felt that it would not be appropriate to deviate from the 
current requirements, however through close discussion with Sport England, the 
requireme nt and provision of the Outdoor Sport Space typology will be achieved through 
the Council’s Playing Pitch Strategy rather than through the use of the Council’s quantity 
requirement approach.   
5.6.10  The requirements for each typology of open space are ide ntified below.   
5.6.11  The Council’s Open Space Audit assesses the provision of open space on an annual basis 
and identifies areas of deficiency and surpluses in provision of open space, sports and 
recreational facilities. This is used to inform where res ources arising from new development 
or where offsite contributions will be focused.  
5.6.12  Proposals for new residential development should contribute to the provision and / or 
enhancement of open space in areas where there is a deficiency in provision, or  poor 
quality of open spaces. This provision could be either on or off -site depending on the scale 
and nature of development and the level and quality of existing facilities in the local area. 
On-site provision of open space should provide at least the req uirements as set out below, 
whereas off -site contributions towards open space provision should be consistent with the 
Council’s Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document.  
5.6.13  All areas of open space, sports and recreational facilities wil l be protected and retained, not 
just those identified within the Council’s open space study and annual audits.  
Typology  Quantity Requirement  
Parks and Recreation Grounds 
eg recreation grounds, parks, and 
formal gardens  0.50 hectares per 1000 residents  
Outdoor Sports Space eg playing 
fields, football pitches, tennis 
courts, bowling greens, artificial 
pitches  As identified within the Council’s Playing Pitch Strategy  
Children and Young Peoples 
Space eg sites with equipped 
play facilities  0.30 hectares per  1000 residents  
Informal Open Space eg  
Spaces open to free and 
spontaneous use by the public, 
but neither laid out nor managed 
for a specific function such as a 
park, public playing field or 
recreation ground; nor managed 
as a natural or semi -natural 
habitat. 0.50 hectares per 1000 residents  
Natural Green Space eg  
meadows, river floodplain, 
woodland, country parks, nature 
reserves  
 0.80 hectares per 1000 residents  
Allotments eg growing produce, 
health, social inclusion and 
promoting sustainability  0.50 hectares per 1000 residents   
54 | P a g e  
 Sports Halls  As identified within the Sport England built facilities 
assessment  
Swimming Pools  As identified within the Sport England built facilities 
assessment  
Small Halls / Community Venues  As identified within the Sport E ngland built facilities 
assessment  
Cemeteries and Churchyard  
There is no quantity requirement for these types of open space; however the Council has 
identified land south of Gartree Road in Oadby (as illustrated on the Adopted Policies Map) 
as appropriate  for the provision of cemetery and burial grounds. This land will ensure the 
Council has sufficient land available to provide for the Borough’s cemetery and burial needs 
up to 2031.  
 
Policy 9  Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities  
In relation to open  space, sport and recreation facilities, the Council will seek to protect existing 
sites from development where there is a demand to retain them, they contribute towards the Green 
Infrastructure in the Borough, and the equivalent cannot be provided elsewhe re. New development 
will be expected to contribute either physically or financially to the provision or improvement of 
open space, sport and recreation facilities.  
The quantity requirements, the Playing Pitch Strategy and the Council’s Developer Contributi ons 
Supplementary Planning Document will be used in relation to the provision of open space, sport 
and recreation facilities provision within the Borough, to satisfy need and allow every resident 
access to adequate, high quality, accessible open space and play areas.  
Provision of open space, sport and recreational facilities should:  
- be located close to their intended population catchment areas;  
- be accessible by a choice of transport modes other than the private car;  
- be of an appropriate scale and de sign; and  
- seek positive impacts to landscape form.  
Existing open space, sports and recreational buildings and land, including playing fields, should not 
be developed or lost unless:  
- an assessment has been undertaken which has clearly shown the open s pace, buildings or 
land to be surplus to requirements;  
- the loss resulting from the proposed development would be replaced by equivalent or better 
provision in terms of quantity and quality in a suitable location; and  
- the development is for alternative  sports and recreational provision, the needs for which 
clearly outweigh the loss.  
 
 
  
55 | P a g e  
 Public Realm  
5.7.1  Public realm is the public spaces between buildings and structures that are of the built 
and/or natural environment, that are open and freely accessed by the public. Public realm 
also provides the context and setting for existing and new development. It in cludes hard 
and soft surfacing materials, street furniture (including lighting, benches, litter bins), traffic 
and pedestrian signage, way finding and control, trees, and landscaping. For a full definition 
of public realm see the Borough Council’s Public R ealm Strategy Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
5.7.2  Although it is acknowledged that many public realm schemes involve the use of street 
furniture, barriers and signage, the Council does not support schemes that create 
unnecessary street clutter. The use  of signage and barriers will only be supported were 
they are incorporated innovatively into the design of a scheme or they are absolutely 
necessary.  
5.7.3  It is anticipated that new areas of public realm / or improvements and / or refurbishments 
will form  part of all large development proposals, for example, development within the town 
and district centre boundaries and development occurring at the Direction for Growth areas. 
Any public realm scheme must ensure that it is designed and developed to the high est 
standards. All schemes must improve the attractiveness of the streets and make the areas 
more desirable places to visit, to shop, work and live. Both Wigston town centre and Oadby 
district centre have identified areas for outdoor events such as markets , and schemes 
should be designed to accommodate such uses. Development that seeks to provide 
outdoor events spaces within South Wigston will be encouraged where relevant to do so. 
Further guidance relating to the centres of Wigston and Oadby can be found i n the Area 
Action Plan Guidance document.  
5.7.4  Further to the public realm improvement works that have already taken place within the 
town centre of Wigston and the district centre of Oadby, the following schemes will be 
actively encouraged:  
- Further impro vements to the public realm within the centres of Wigston, Oadby and South 
Wigston;  
- Improvements to the public transport facilities within the centres of Wigston, Oadby and 
South Wigston; and  
- Extension and improvement of The Lanes in Wigston town centre.  
5.7.5 The use of high quality materials presents an attractive and welcoming environment, and 
they also ensure longevity against deterioration. Public realm development presents an 
opportunity to replace existing impermeable hard standing and surfaces with permeable 
materials and to incorporate Sustainable Drainage systems (SuDs). A good sustainable 
drainage scheme will be integrated into the development design and will provide multiple 
benefits, such as; creating an attractive environment; providing habitat  and wildlife; being 
part of the green infrastructure network; and managing surface water run -off. Drainage 
features such as permeable surfaces, swales, filter strips, rainwater gardens and soak -
aways are encouraged.  
5.7.6  All public realm schemes will nee d to prioritise pedestrians over other modes, and must be 
designed to ensure the minimum amount of street clutter such as road signs and bollards.  
56 | P a g e  
 Manual for Streets II (amongst many other documents) offers further guidance in this 
regard and should be con sidered when designing proposals.  
5.7.7  The design of public realm in gateway locations will be of particular importance and should 
‘announce’ the area / space to people entering or passing. Development at gateway 
locations will also improve the visibilit y and attractiveness of the Borough. Attractive 
gateway design can be achieved through a number of ways, including the use of high 
quality and different materials.  
5.7.8  Whilst development proposals should be comprehensive and include proposals for 
surrou nding public realm improvements, the Borough Council will use developer 
contributions to ensure appropriate levels of contribution for wider public realm 
improvements within the Borough’s centres. Developer contributions that seek provision of 
new and / or  improved public realm within the Borough’s three main centres will be sought 
from developments within the centre boundaries, as well as development outside of the 
relevant boundaries that has an impact on the centres.  
5.7.9  The Borough Council may also s eek developer contributions for public realm schemes and 
improvements that are located outside of the main centres. Developer contributions sought 
on developments outside of the Borough’s main centres will not be sought speculatively; 
they will be sought f or known of or planned public realm schemes. For developments 
occurring within the Borough’s main centres, play and open space contributions will be 
utilised for public realm improvements.  
5.7.10  Any developer contributions sought will be in accordance wit h the Borough Council’s 
Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning Document.  Further advice will also be 
available in the Borough Council’s Public Realm Strategy Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
Policy 10  Public Realm  
All proposals for large scale dev elopment and / or change must incorporate high quality public 
realm on -site and / or contribute towards public realm improvements off site. All proposals that 
propose new public realm or impact upon the existing public realm must ensure that the pedestrian  
is prioritised over other modes of transport and that materials and design are of the highest 
standards.  
Development proposals that seek to provide public realm schemes, as identified within the Area 
Action Plan Guidance will be, in principle, supported. The following schemes will be encouraged;  
- Further improvements to the public realm within the centres of Wigston, Oadby and South 
 Wigston;  
- Improvements to the public transport facilities within the centres of Wigston, Oadby and 
 South Wigston; and  
- Extension and improvement of The Lanes in Wigston town centre.  
All public realm redevelopment or improvements should follow the principles and guidance set out 
in the Public Realm Strategy Supplementary Planning Document.   
57 | P a g e  
 The Borough Council will use developer contributions as necessary to ensure appropriate 
contributions to wider public realm improvements, both within the Borough’s main centres and 
outside of the centres.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
58 | P a g e  
 Chapter Six – Housing Delivery  
Housing Choices  
6.1.1  The NPPF suggests that local planning authorities should deliver a wide choice of high 
quality homes; they should widen opportunities for home ownership and create sustainable, 
inclusive and mixed communities. The Council also wants to provide the most app ropriate 
housing solutions for all of its existing population, as well as those future populations 
aspiring to live within the Borough.  
6.1.2  The Council will use the most up to date housing evidence base, including the Housing and 
Economic Development Nee ds Assessment, to identify the size, type, tenure and range of 
housing that is needed within the different communities within the Borough. Specific note 
will be taken of the need for bungalows and retirement accommodation within the Borough. 
Historically t he Borough has seen very little new provision of retirement accommodation or 
bungalows, and would therefore, in principal, actively support the development of 
bungalows in appropriate locations.   
6.1.3  New housing development should not only be ‘fit for p urpose’ for its inhabitants, it should 
also be located in sustainable locations, close by to key services and facilities and should 
protect and exploit opportunities for sustainable transport use. As well as being situated 
within sustainable locations, any  residential proposals (including change of use, subdivision 
or new build) will need to reflect the character of the local area and should not be ‘out of 
place’; for example it would be inappropriate to propose sub -division to flats of an existing 
resident ial property in an area characterised by family housing, likewise it would be 
inappropriate to propose development of a substantial detached dwelling in an area that is 
predominately characterised by smaller terraced or semi -detached dwellings. Proposals 
that seek to deliver new homes that are in character within the area it is located will be, in 
principle, positively supported.  
6.1.4  The Council is committed to providing new homes that are ‘fit for purpose’ and are 
appropriate for modern living and requi rements. The Council will require all new homes, 
regardless of type or tenure, to be of a size that allows sufficient space for all of its 
proposed inhabitants to live comfortably and sustainably.   
6.1.5  In particular, proposals for conversion, change of use, and / or sub -division of existing 
properties into flats / apartments must be of an appropriate size suitable for modern living 
standards. Given that the Council has recently received a number of proposals for  the 
conversion, change of use, and / or s ub-division of existing properties into residential units, 
which are not of a size that is appropriate for modern living, the Council requires that any 
proposal for conversion, change of use and / or sub -division takes into account the 
Governments Technica l Housing Standards.  
Policy 11  Housing Choices  
All residential development should contribute towards delivering a mix of dwelling types, tenures 
and sizes that meet the identified needs (and / or demand) of the communities within the Borough. 
It is expect ed that all new residential development proposals demonstrate how they contribute to 
achieving the identified needs as set out within the Housing and Economic Development Needs 
Assessment.   
59 | P a g e  
 In addition, on all new large scale residential developments (11 d wellings and more) the applicant 
should liaise with the Council to ascertain the most appropriate housing mix.  
Where a development is otherwise acceptable but an independent viability appraisal demonstrates 
that certain policy standards cannot be achieved , the Council will work with the applicant to 
consider whether there are alternative approaches that would deliver the desired policy outcomes. 
If the Council requires its own independent viability assessments to verify outcomes of the 
applicants assessmen t, it will be at the applicants cost.  
The Council will support the development of bungalows, student halls of residence, specialist care 
accommodation, elderly care accommodation and retirement accommodation that meets an 
identified need and is proposed in  appropriate sustainable locations.  
All residential proposals will need to reflect the character of the area in which they are located. 
Sub-division of plots and / or existing residential properties that are considered to be ‘out of 
character’ within the l ocale will be refused, unless the benefits of any proposed development are 
considered to outweigh the negative impact.  
To ensure that new residential development promotes healthy living and dwellings are of the 
appropriate size for its proposed occupants;  (unless there is a demonstrable reason for not doing 
so) all new dwellings should provide sufficient space for kitchen, dining, bedroom, and living 
facilities, and should include appropriate levels of internal storage.  
All residential proposals for conve rsions, sub -division and / or changes of use will be considered on 
a case by case basis, and must take into account the Government’s Technical Housing Standards.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
60 | P a g e  
 Housing Density  
6.2.1  The Borough of Oadby and Wigston  is a small, compact, urban authority area that is 
directly adjacent to and shares a boundary with Leicester City. Its urban areas also sit 
entirely within the Leicester PUA.  
6.2.2  With the authority area being compact in size and being majority urban in nature, building 
new homes to higher densities is key. Being relatively small in size (to put the size of the 
Borough into context, when looking at extent of the realm measurements in hectares, (on 
the 31st December 2013) the Office for National Statistics  suggested that out of the 406 UK 
Local Authority Districts, the Borough of Oadby and Wigston is the 11th smallest; however 
when discounting the eight London Borough’s within the eleven it is the 3rd smallest behind 
the Isles of Scilly and Watford) the Bor ough area has a finite supply of land on which 
development can be situated, therefore making the most efficient use of this land is 
paramount.  
6.2.3  To ensure the development of new homes is concentrated within the most appropriate and 
sustainable locatio ns, the Council is seeking a higher density within the town centre of 
Wigston and the district centres of Oadby and South Wigston. Seeking higher densities 
within built up centre locations will concentrate residential development close to essential 
service s and jobs, and will reduce the need to travel by motor vehicle.  
6.2.4  Concentrating housing within the more urbanised areas of the Borough will positively affect 
the local economy as there will be more people closely located to existing retail, service 
and leisure facilities. The Council is aware that a higher figure would not be appropriate 
throughout the entire Borough area, therefore, through this Plan is reducing the density 
figure on a ‘sliding’ scale outside of the main centre boundaries. This is to allow for flexibility 
relating to location, as well as responding to the distinct character areas of the Borough.  
6.2.5  It must be noted that if development occurs outside of the Leicester PUA, once complete, 
the full extent of the development becomes part  of the Leicester PUA and therefore would 
be subject to different policy.   
Policy 12  Housing Density  
The Council is committed to delivering new homes in an effective and efficient manner. The 
Council is also committed to locating people close to much need ed services and facilities as well 
as jobs. To ensure that the Borough provides the required number of homes for its communities, 
the Council will adopt the following density targets on all new development sites that involve the 
provision of new homes.  
Proposed development sites that have a gross site size of 0.3 hectares and larger and are located 
within the town centre boundary of Wigston or the district centre boundaries of Oadby and South 
Wigston will be required to achieve an average density of at leas t 50 dwellings per hectare.  
Proposed development sites that have a gross site size of 0.3 hectares and larger and are located 
outside of the town centre boundary of Wigston or district centre boundaries of Oadby and South 
Wigston, but within the Leicester PUA will be required to achieve an average density of at least 40 
dwellings per hectare.   
61 | P a g e  
 Proposed development sites that have a gross site size of 0.3 hectares and larger and are not 
situated within any of the above locations will be required to achieve an  average density of at least 
30 dwellings per hectare.  
Where a development is otherwise acceptable but an independent viability appraisal  and / or a an 
independent character and design appraisal demonstrates that the required density cannot be 
achieved, t he Council will work with the applicant to consider whether there are alternative 
approaches that would deliver the desired policy outcomes. If the Council requires its own 
independent viability assessments to verify outcomes of the applicants assessment, it will be at the 
applicants cost.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
62 | P a g e  
 Affordable Housing  
6.3.1  The Borough of Oadby and Wigston  is a relatively unique local authority area compared to 
other local authority areas within the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area. 
There are three distinct settlement areas all of which have very different socio -economic 
profiles as well as land values. In general, Oadby has the highest land values of the three 
settlements, with Wigston having the second highest and South Wigston the lowest.  
6.3.2  According to the latest Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment that has 
been undertak en for the Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area the Borough 
has an identified Affordable Housing need. The Council has also identified delivery of 
affordable housing as one of its priorities because it recognises the important role it plays in 
providing homes for all within the community. Because of this, the Council required specific 
detailed evidence base relating to affordable housing provision within the Borough area.  
6.3.3  The Council therefore commissioned an Affordable Housing Viability Assessment that 
sought to provide the Council with evidence relating to an appropriate affordable housing 
threshold by which to require affordable housing provision on a development site and an 
appropriate percentage of affordable housing provision should a development proposal 
meet the prescribed threshold. The Council’s Core Strategy sought provision of affordable 
housing on all sites of 10 or more dwellings; therefore this was taken as the starting point 
for the assessment.  
6.3.4  The assessment was under taken by Andrew Golland Associates and concluded that 
although there was evidence to suggest that the affordable housing site threshold could be 
set lower than the Core Strategy’s threshold of 10, national policy and guidance sets the 
threshold at 11 or mo re. Although there was evidence to suggest a lowering of the previous 
threshold, it was concluded that the Council would use the nationally set threshold 11 or 
more when requiring affordable housing provision on a residential development site.  
6.3.5  Relat ing to the provision of affordable units on a development site once the threshold was 
met, the assessment concluded that a split target should be sought due to the large 
difference in land values in different parts of the Borough. The assessment suggested the 
following splits should be applied to each of the Borough’s settlements.  
- 10 per cent of the total number of units should be affordable for sites located within 
 the settlement of South Wigston,  
- 20 per cent of the total number of units should be affordable for sites located within 
 the settlement of Wigston, and  
- 30 per cent of the total number of units should be affordable for sites located within 
 the settlement of Oadby.    
6.3.6  The provision o f Starter Homes on ‘qualifying’ sites will be done so in conformity with the 
national government guidance and policy at the time of consideration of the planning 
proposal. The Housing and Planning Act 2016 suggests that affordable housing includes 
starter homes within its definition. The Act also sets out the definition of a starter home. For 
the purposes of this local policy, the definition for starter homes will be consistent with that 
set out within the Housing and Planning Act 2016.  
6.3.7  Further infor mation relating to the provision targets and site thresholds of Affordable 
Housing can be found in the Council’s latest Affordable Housing Viability Assessment. The 
policy and supporting text should also be read in conjunction with the Planning Obligations   
63 | P a g e  
 policy contained in this Plan and the Developer Contributions Supplementary Planning 
Document.  
Policy 13  Affordable Housing  
The Council is committed to the provision of appropriate housing for the whole community, 
therefore will require affordable housing  on all new residential developments of 11 dwellings or 
more to meet identified local need.  
Affordable housing will be required at the following minimum targets which have been informed by 
the Council’s current Affordable Housing Viability Assessment.  
- Oadby – 30 per cent of the total number of units  
- Wigston (including Kilby Bridge) – 20 per cent of the total number of units  
- South Wigston – 10 per cent of the total number of units  
A cumulative approach to affordable housing on a residential site will a pply regardless of the 
number of different associated planning applications.  
There is no maximum number of affordable housing units that can be provided on a site. Also the 
11 dwelling threshold does not restrict proposals providing affordable housing on s ites of fewer 
than 11 units.  
Proposals for residential development that meet the 11 dwelling threshold but do not provide any 
affordable housing will be refused unless an appropriate off -site contribution is provided in lieu of 
the required number.  
Where a  development is otherwise acceptable but an independent viability appraisal demonstrates 
that certain policy standards cannot be achieved, the Council will work with the applicant to 
consider whether there are alternative approaches that would deliver the desired policy outcomes. 
If the Council requires its own independent viability assessments to verify outcomes of the 
applicants assessment, it will be at the applicants cost.  
With the provision of affordable housing remaining a priority for the Council, sh ould a site be 
proposed for 100 per cent of the units classed as affordable homes, the Council may take a flexible 
approach to other developer contributions.  
Regarding the tenure split of affordable housing the Council will generally seek 80 per cent 
affordable rent and 20 per cent shared ownership, however will respond to local need at the time of 
consideration of a relevant planning proposal.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
64 | P a g e  
 Self Build and Custom Build  
6.4.1  The Self Build and Custom Housebuilding  Act 2015 places a duty on the Council to keep a 
register of individuals and associations of individuals who wish to acquire serviced plots of 
land to provide self -build and custom house building projects and to place a duty on certain 
public authorities t o have regard to these registers when carrying out planning and other 
functions.  
6.4.2  The Council will ensure that a list is maintained of all those who have registered an interest 
in Self Build and Custom Housebuilding and will notify such if an appropr iate plot of land 
becomes available.  
6.4.3  Through the planning application process, the Council will actively support the provision of 
Self Build and Custom Build plots if there is a need to do so.  
Policy 14  Self Build and Custom Build  
To ensure that the  housing mix within the Borough reflects the needs of its communities, the 
Council will encourage the provision of Self Build and Custom Build serviced plots on all large (11 
dwellings or more) scale residential development.  
In line with national legislati on, the Council will keep a register of individuals and associations of 
individuals who wish to acquire serviced plots of land to bring forward Self Build and Custom Build 
housing projects.  
The Council will also consider proposals for the provision of Self  Build and Custom Build serviced 
plots on smaller sites (10 dwellings or less) located within the urban area of the Borough should 
the register of individuals and associations of individuals suggest a need.  
It is expected that all Self Build and Custom Bui ld serviced plots will be provided to the market with 
at least outline planning permission for residential development. All other appropriate and relevant 
planning permissions will be required prior to any development taking place on the provided plots.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
65 | P a g e  
 Urban Infill Development  
6.5.1  The NPPF sets out the 12 core planning principles, one of which being to encourage the 
effective use of land by reusing land that has been previously developed, provided that it is 
not of high environmental value. The definition of previously developed land excludes 
residential garden land or any other open amenity space around buildings. The majority of 
previously developed land within the Borough is situated within the built up urban areas. It 
is this land that ca n be subject to urban infill development proposals.  
6.5.2  Urban infill development is classed as development occurring on sites located within the 
defined urban area of the Borough, usually situated between existing buildings. Paragraph 
53 of the NPPF sugg ests that local planning authorities should resist inappropriate 
development of garden land that would, for example cause harm to the local area.  
6.5.3  With the Borough being relatively compact and urban in nature, appropriate infill 
development has consi stently come forward year on year and it makes a valuable 
contribution towards the Council’s provision of, both, residential and other uses. Through 
local planning policy, the Council will manage inappropriate infill development that has a 
detrimental impa ct on the locale in which it is proposed. The Council will also manage 
development that seeks to split existing residential plots.  
6.5.4  Although, in principle the Council would encourage proposals that seek appropriate infill 
development, any proposal wou ld need to be suitably situated and be of a sustainable 
design and construction. All development proposals would also need to conform to all other 
relevant policies within this Plan.  
6.5.5  The Council’s Landscape Character Assessment sets out guidance for each of the Urban 
Character Areas of the Borough and should be taken into account in any development 
proposals.  
Policy 15  Urban Infill Development  
Within the urban areas of the Borough, proposals for infill development on previously developed 
land that ar e of high quality design, improve the character of the locale, do not have any adverse 
effect on / or loss of amenity to adjacent properties or nearby properties, and do not cause 
unacceptable noise, will in principle be considered favourably.  
Any proposal  for development on residential garden land or any other open amenity space around 
buildings will not be permitted unless it conforms to the guidance set out within the Council’s 
Landscape Character Assessment.  
Proposals that seek to split existing residen tial plots and propose development on the garden land 
of and / or open amenity space of existing plots will not be granted planning permission unless the 
proposal sits comfortably, is consistent with, in character with, and respects the direct existing 
street scene in which it is situated. The Council will not accept development proposals that ‘over 
develop’ a site from its original intended or existing use.  
Development proposals would also need to illustrate high quality design and use of materials that 
are consistent with the character of the area and the existing properties in the direct area.  
  
66 | P a g e  
 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
6.6.1  It is important to provide for the accommodation needs of Gypsies, Travellers and 
Travelling Showpeople within the wider context of meeting identified local housing needs. 
There are distinct differences in the culture and way of life of Gypsies and Travellers, and 
Travelling Showpeople. For this reason Planning Policy for Traveller Sites (DCLG, 2015) 
provides two s eparate definitions:  
Gypsies and Travellers:  
‘Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including such persons who on 
grounds only of their own or their family’s or dependants’ educational or health needs or old age 
have ceased to tr avel temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling 
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such.’  
Travelling Showpeople:  
‘Members of a group organised for the purposes of holding fairs, circuses or shows (whether or not 
travelling together as such). This includes such persons who on the grounds of their own or their 
family’s or dependants’ more localised pattern of trading, educational or health needs or old age 
have ceased to travel temporarily, but excludes Gypsies and Travellers as defined above.’  
6.6.2  A Gypsies’ and Travellers’ Accommodation Needs Assessment has been prepared in 
partnership with other authorities in Leicester and Leicestershire to help understand the 
latest accommodation needs for Gypsies and Travelle rs, and Travelling Showpeople within 
the Leicester and Leicestershire local authorities involved. Oadby and Wigston Borough 
Council was one of the local authorities involved.  
6.6.3  The needs assessment mentioned above has an identified need for the Borough of 0 
(zero), both for static and transit pitches.  
6.6.4  This criteria based policy for the provision of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling 
Showpeople should be used to guide the a llocation of sites to meet identified needs where 
they are identified. The policy seeks to ensure that sites are accommodated in sustainable 
locations with access to a range of essential services, such as education, healthcare, 
welfare, shops, water and se werage facilities, where possible.  
Policy 16  Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople  
The Council will identify sufficient land to accommodate Gypsy and Traveller needs should 
evidence suggest a need to do so. Should a need be identified that require s the identification of 
land for Gypsy and Traveller pitches, the following criteria will apply:  
- Sites should be accessible, by a range of transport modes, to essential local services and 
facilities, including shops, schools and GP surgeries.  
- Sites sho uld preferably be located within or adjacent to the Leicester PUA.  
- Sites should have formal safe access to the highway network, and should have sufficient 
parking provision on site.  
- Sites should be (or have the opportunity to be) served by adequate wat er and sewerage 
services / facilities.   
67 | P a g e  
 - Sites should not be located within Flood Zones 2 or 3.  
- Sites should not be situated on contaminated land or within areas with poor ambient air 
quality.  
- Sites should be incorporated and integrated into the surrou nding area through high quality 
design.  
- Sites will not have an unacceptable impact on adjoining / neighbouring properties and / or 
land uses.  
- Sites will not have adverse impacts on environmentally sensitive areas, areas of historic or 
heritage interest , or areas of landscape character importance.  
Any proposal for Gypsy and Traveller site provision should also conform to current national policy 
and guidance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
68 | P a g e  
 Chapter Seven – Allocations and Regeneration Opportunity 
Areas  
Kilby  Bridge Settlement Envelope  
7.1.1  Kilby Bridge is the Borough’s only rural settlement and is located in the floodplain of the 
River Sence, in the southern most part of the Borough. The settlement currently contains 
uses that are not complementary to the ex isting character of the settlement and rural area. 
Therefore, it is important that only appropriate development, such as small scale residential 
(up to 40 new additional homes across the whole settlement envelope), leisure, tourism and 
canal based developm ent occurs within the settlement in the future.  
7.1.2  Within the proposed Settlement Envelope (as illustrated in the Council’s Adopted Policies 
Map), small scale regeneration masterplans should be prepared for any proposed 
development and should take acco unt of the local environs, including The Grand Union 
Canal, Limedelves Site of Special Scientific Interest, Barn Pool Meadow Local Wildlife Site 
and its associated Regionally Important Geological Site and linkages between the Wigston 
Direction for Growth a nd Kilby Bridge.  
7.1.3  Development proposals should take into account the potential impact of climate change on 
water resources, water quality and on the level of flood risk posed. Development should be 
sustainable without increasing the risk of flooding e lsewhere. The Environment Agency’s 
Flood Zone maps indicate that the north and west of the settlement is at risk of flooding and 
is within or in close proximity to a Flood Zone 3 area. Any proposal for the development of 
this site will require consultation  with the Environment Agency and should be accompanied 
by a Flood Risk Assessment to demonstrate compliance with sequential and exception 
tests where appropriate.  
7.1.4  The River Soar and Grand Union Canal Strategy suggested that Kilby Bridge, together wit h 
South Wigston or Blaby, could become South Leicestershire’s ‘Waterway Hub’ and that 
there are possibilities to unlock the leisure and tourism potential in this area. The Council 
would in principle encourage the development of a marina within the Kilby Br idge area, 
along the canal.  
7.1.5  Proposals that seek to accommodate small scale A1, A2, A3 and/or A4 uses that are 
related to the canal use and / or small craft workshops or similar, where the products which 
are made and sold on site, would be in principl e supported. Proposal to encourage 
recreational uses for local residents, cyclists and equine and small scale diversification 
activities such as small rural business and leisure uses may also be appropriate, provided 
the supportive infrastructure can be ac commodated on site. Small scale residential 
proposals will also be deemed acceptable, although the proposal should fundamentally 
seek to be complementary to the existing surroundings and sensitive to existing landscape 
and historic features. Any developmen t must ensure that there is no significant detrimental 
impact on the existing highway network.  
Policy 17  Kilby Bridge Settlement Envelope  
The Council will consider small scale development proposals within the defined Settlement 
Envelope of Kilby Bridge. An y residential development proposed within the defined envelope 
should be small scale (up to 40 new additional homes across the whole settlement envelope) and 
delivered at a minimum of 30 dwellings per hectare.   
69 | P a g e  
 All development proposals will need to take account of the rural and historic landscape, as well as 
the distinctive character of the Grand Union Canal Conservation Area and views across open 
countryside. All proposals must give careful consideration to the  proposed scale of the 
development and in particular, take account of the impact that any scheme may have upon this 
rural ‘gateway’ into the Borough.  
The key objectives of the Kilby Bridge Settlement Envelope are to:  
- Maintain the open, attractive, and r ural setting;  
- Retain and enhance public access to the Grand Union Canal; River Sence; and the Kilby -
Foxton Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI);  
- Conserve and enhance the Grand Union Canal Conservation Area;  
- Deliver small scale sustainable resi dential development(s) that will provide a range of 
housing types, unit sizes and tenures whilst retaining the distinctive landscape and historic 
character through designing attractive schemes that will complement this gateway location;  
- Protect the exist ing local economy, as well as to enhance it through delivering small scale 
outdoor leisure, recreation and tourism development; and,  
- Give consideration to the incorporation of small scale ‘starter’ units for suitable rural 
 businesses.  
The Council will encourage early engagement with regards to any potential scheme, together with 
the submission of a detailed Masterplan illustrating the proposed scale, design, layout, mix of 
dwellings, tenure and an appreciation for how the wider issues including transpor t, accessibility 
and mitigation of potential impacts will be taken into account.  
All development proposals within Kilby Bridge Settlement Envelope will need to give consideration 
to other relevant policies within this Plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
70 | P a g e  
 Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area and Oadby Cemetery Allocation  
Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area  
7.2.1  Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area is formed of two distinct parts; the former 
Stoughton Grange Farm Park, to the north of Gar tree Road and the greenfield land to the 
south of Gartree Road and the west of Stoughton Road. The former farm park is currently 
utilised by a number of small independent businesses. The Stoughton Grange Direction for 
Growth area forms a direct extension t o the Leicester PUA to the north of Oadby and 
supports the role of Oadby district centre as the Borough’s second largest centre which is a 
key aspiration of the Council and a spatial objective within this Plan.  
7.2.2  The growth area is situated in one of t he most northerly parts of the Borough. The growth 
area is adjacent to large areas of former park land and formal gardens to the north that 
were associated with the former Stoughton Grange Hall. These form a particularly 
important characteristic in establi shing the setting and the character of the area and must 
be protected and enhanced.  
7.2.3  The entire growth area has historically been designated as land within the Green Wedge; 
however the Council’s most recent Green Wedge Review has identified the Direct ion for 
Growth area as potential release land. A Green Wedge Review was undertaken by the 
Council due to the need for additional growth.  
7.2.4  To the north and west of the growth area, land is designated as Countryside and Green 
Wedge outside the Borough in Harborough District. The Green Wedge designation will 
remain to the east of the site that is currently in use as the University of Leicester’s playing 
fields as well as arable land. Part of the growth area consists of the proposed transport 
route (known  formerly as the Eastern District Distributor Road). This proposed transport 
route will be maintained as part of any development on this growth area.  
7.2.5  The growth area is also adjacent to a number of privately owned buildings that have 
statutory listin gs. Grange Cottage, Lodge Cottage and South Lodge are all Grade II listed 
buildings. To the north east of the site in Harborough District is Stoughton Conservation 
Area, a scheduled monument and numerous Listed Buildings. These heritage assets will 
need to  be taken into account and protected through any proposed development of the 
growth area.    
7.2.6  The Council has allocated the Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area for a residential 
led mixed use development consisting of up to 300 new homes. For th e greenfield land 
area to the south of Gartree Road, the Council would expect two access points, one from 
Gartree Road to the north and one from Stoughton Road to the east. For the land area to 
the north of Gartree Road, at least one access point onto Gart ree Road would be expected.  
7.2.7  Due to the size of the Direction for Growth area, detailed transport assessments will be 
required to assess the impact on traffic generation (specifically generated by the proposal 
site) on the key junctions within the vic inity of the site, specifically at Stoughton Road / 
Harborough Road, Gartree Road / Stoughton Road, Shady Lane / Gartree Road, Manor 
Road / Stoughton Road / Manor Road Extension, and Stoughton Drive South / Gartree 
Road. Such specific work will be the land  promoter’s responsibility. Any detailed transport 
assessment should use the South East Leicestershire Transport Study as its starting point, 
and should take into account the necessary mitigation measures identified by the study. 
Subject to the outcomes of  this specific transport assessment work and collaboration with  
71 | P a g e  
 Leicestershire County Council Highways department (and Leicester City Council Highways 
department, where relevant), off site transport infrastructure or financial contributions 
towards off sit e transport infrastructure will be required to make the development 
sustainable. Required Infrastructure relating to this growth area will be that agreed by 
Leicestershire County Council Highways department and the Borough Council.  
7.2.8  The land area to t he north of Gartree Road will be mixed use and will consist of new small 
scale residential, and a mix of small scale A1, A2, A3, A4 and any other appropriate small 
scale uses. .  
7.2.9  The size of the development would require other specific infrastructure;  the requirements 
are set out in the policy below and include;  
- 30 per cent affordable housing provision  
- contribution towards an existing and / or new community facility building within Oadby.  
- provision towards new education facilities, and  
- onsite open spac e, consisting of allotments, sports pitches, play areas and structural 
landscaping  
7.2.10  Development proposals should take into account the potential impact of climate change on 
water resources, water quality and on the level of flood risk posed. Developm ent should be 
sustainable without increasing the risk of flooding elsewhere. The Environment Agency’s 
Flood Zone maps indicate that the northern most part of the site is at risk of flooding and is 
in close proximity to a Flood Zone 3 area. Any proposal for  the development of this site will 
require consultation with the Environment Agency and should be accompanied by a Flood 
Risk Assessment to demonstrate compliance with sequential and exception tests where 
appropriate.  
7.2.11  The Council will require provis ion of self and custom build homes as part of the delivery of 
300 new homes. There is currently 5 individuals on the Council’s self and custom build 
register that have suggested Oadby (or anywhere within the Borough) as being an 
appropriate location for a self and custom build plot. The Council would also actively 
encourage the provision of a mix of residential house types, including bungalows and flats.  
7.2.12  Recreational uses for local residents cyclists and, equine and small scale diversification 
activi ties such as small rural business and leisure uses may also be appropriate, provided 
the supportive infrastructure can be accommodated on site. Any proposal should 
fundamentally seek to be complementary to the existing surroundings and sensitive to 
existin g landscape features.  
7.2.13  The Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area is identified on the Council’s Adopted 
Policies Map.  
Oadby Cemetery Allocation  
7.2.14  This direction for growth area also includes a separate allocation for cemetery and burial 
uses. The land allocation is a direct extension of the existing cemetery and burial allocation, 
allocated by the Council within the previous Saved Local Plan and Core Strategy.  
7.2.15  The existing cemetery and burial space within the Borough, is due to reach  capacity within 
the Plan period, therefore the Council is allocating this land to meet future need. Should a 
cemetery or burial proposal for the allocation site come forward it would need to be  
72 | P a g e  
 sufficiently evidenced and justified. Evidence would need to detail the current and proposed 
ground conditions, the size and scale of any development, as well as its need, impact and 
use. Access into the proposed site, as well as any impact on the direct highway network 
would also need to be assessed against any pro posal put forward. Such assessment(s) 
would be required to support any masterplan proposal or planning application submission.  
7.2.16  The Oadby Cemetery Allocation is identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
Policy 18  Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area and Oadby Cemetery 
Allocation  
Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth area  
The Council will allocate land to the north of the Borough in Oadby, for the Stoughton Grange 
Direction for Growth area.  
The Council will co nsider new development proposals that seek to create a sustainable, well 
designed and high quality development that is sensitive to its surroundings and will not have a 
detrimental impact on the surrounding Green Wedge and Countryside and will conserve and  better 
reveal the historic significance of the site including its listed buildings, and archaeological remains, 
in particular those relating to the former Stoughton Grange Hall and surviving elements of its 
designed landscape and planting.  
Any developmen t proposed within this growth area would require the production of a detailed 
masterplan. The following elements will be required on -site or via an off -site contribution where 
stated:  
- safeguarding of the potential transport route (former Eastern District  Distributor Road).  
- at least 300 new homes, of which at least 30 per cent should be affordable.  
- land area to the north of Gartree Road will be mixed use and will consist of new small scale 
residential, and a mix of small scale A1, A2, A3, A4 and any ot her appropriate small scale 
uses.  
- at least two vehicular access points, one off Gartree Road and one off Stoughton Road, for 
the land area to the south of Gartree Road.  
- at least one access point off Gartree Road for the land area to the north of Gartre e Road.  
- off-site contribution towards an existing and / or new community facility building in Oadby.  
- off-site contribution towards new education facilities.  
- onsite open space, consisting of allotments, sports pitches, play areas and structural 
landsc aping in accordance with the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities policy of 
this Plan.  
- provision of Self Build and Custom Build plots, to meet the identified need at the time of 
planning application submission.  
- provision of an appropriate number  of bus stops and associated infrastructure, including 
bus shelters and information display boards onsite as well as off site, to allow for this 
sustainable method of public transport.   
73 | P a g e  
 - provision of any other associated infrastructure required to bring th e site forward 
sustainably, including cycle ways and footpaths onsite as well as off site, and     
- off site transport infrastructure or financial contributions towards off site transport 
infrastructure will be required to make the development sustainable .   
Any proposal for development of this growth area will be required to conform to all other relevant 
policies set out within this Plan. Any proposal would also be required to submit a detailed Transport 
Assessment as part of any planning application to e nsure that Leicestershire County Council 
Highways Department can fully assess any traffic / transport implications stemming from the 
development.  
The Stoughton Grange Direction for Growth Area is identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies 
Map.  
Oadby Ceme tery Allocation  
The Plan allocates land to the north of the Borough in Oadby for cemetery and burial uses.  
Any cemetery or burial proposal for the allocation site would need to be sufficiently evidenced and 
justified in terms of ground conditions and its size, scale, need, impact and use. The impact on the 
direct highway network would also need to be assessed a gainst any proposal put forward. The 
Oadby Cemetery Allocation is identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
74 | P a g e  
 Oadby Sewage Treatment Works  
7.3.1  The Oadby Sewage Treatment Works (Sui Generis Use Class) is currently in active use by 
Severn Trent Water, but it has been demonstrated to the Council that the works will 
become surplus to requirements over the lifespan of this Plan. Due to this, the Plan 
allocates this land area for employment use development. The land area will form an 
exten sion to the existing Kenilworth Drive Identified Employment Area and is illustrated on 
the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
7.3.2  Any proposal for redevelopment of the site, will be required to appropriately assess 
biodiversity, ecology, flood risk and cont amination, and will need to mitigate (if necessary). 
Any proposal will also need to ensure adequate vehicular access arrangements, as well as 
promote sustainable transport modes. A transport assessment will also be required to 
assess the impact on the loca l road network close to the site.  
7.3.3  The Oadby Sewage Treatment Works is approximately 2.67 hectares in size and is located 
adjacent to Kenilworth Drive Identified Employment Area; Leicester Racecourse; the 
Borough Council’s Depot; and, Leicestershire C ounty Council’s Recycling and Household 
Waste Site. The site is also adjacent to the Oadby and Wigston Green Wedge. Access is 
possible from the existing road off the B582 Wigston Road, or via a limited access entrance 
in the south -east corner of the site.  
Policy 19  Oadby Sewage Treatment Works  
The Council will allocate the site for employment land use development (use classes B1, B2 or 
B8). The land area will form an extension to the existing Kenilworth Drive Identified Employment 
Area and is illustrated on  the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
Any proposal for redevelopment must seek to create a sustainable, well designed and high quality 
scheme. The applicant will be required to produce a masterplan  illustrating how the wider issues 
including accessibility, impacts on the local highway network, impacts upon the surrounding Green 
Wedge, impacts on flood risk and mitigation of potential contamination will be taken account of and 
mitigated if necessary.  
Any proposal should seek provision of an appropriate number of bus stops and associated 
infrastructure, including bus shelters and information display boards onsite as well as off site, to 
allow for this sustainable method of public transport.  
Any proposa l should seek provision of any other associated infrastructure required to bring the site 
forward sustainably, including cycle ways and footpaths, onsite as well as off site.  
Off site transport infrastructure or financial contributions towards off site tra nsport infrastructure 
may be required to make the development sustainable.  
All development proposals will need to give consideration to other relevant policies within this Local 
Plan.  
 
 
  
75 | P a g e  
 Wigston Direction for Growth area  
7.4.1  The Wigston Direction for Gro wth area forms a direct extension to the Leicester PUA to the 
south east of Wigston. The Wigston Direction for Growth area was originally defined within 
the Council’s Core Strategy. In 2016, a scheme for 450 new homes and 2.5 hectares of 
new employment lan d (and associated other infrastructure) was granted planning 
permission by the Council. The granted permission included the provision of two access 
points, one to the north, directly on to Newton Lane and one to the south, directly on to 
Welford Road. Both  points of access consist of a roundabout. For the purposes of this 
Local Plan, this granted permission for the Wigston Direction for Growth area forms ‘Phase 
1’. 
7.4.2  As well as the above mentioned, Phase 1 includes;  
- 20 per cent (90 new dwellings) afford able housing provision  
- a new community facility building  
- provision towards new education facilities, and  
- onsite open space, consisting of allotments, sports pitches, play areas and structural 
landscaping  
7.4.3  The location of the Wigston Direction for Grow th area was chosen due to its proximity to the 
Borough’s main town centre of Wigston and its public transport links into Leicester City. 
Supporting the role of Wigston as the Borough’s main town centre directly contributed 
towards the Vision and Spatial Ob jectives of the Core Strategy. This is still a key aspiration 
of the Council and forms a spatial objective within this Plan. Further development at the 
Wigston Direction for Growth area will continue to support this.  
7.4.4  This Local Plan allocates additio nal land within the Wigston Direction for Growth area to 
accommodate further new homes (600 homes) and further new employment 
accommodation (2.5 hectares) (Phase 2). Through the development of both Phase 1 and 
Phase 2 of this Direction for Growth area, the  Council is expecting the delivery of 
approximately 1,000 new homes and in the region of 5 hectares of new employment land. 
The cumulative size of such a development would require other specific infrastructure; the 
requirements are set out in the policy be low, and include;  
- provision of  a new primary school  
- formation of a new local centre  
- provision of a new community facility building, and  
- provision of outdoor sports space and open space  
7.4.5  The elements mentioned have previously been subject to a public  consultation in the form 
of a masterplan produced by the land promoters.  
7.4.6  The provision of a new primary school onsite will be achieved through close collaboration 
between the land owner / developer and Leicestershire County Council’s education 
department. The new primary school will be provided to the specification agreed by 
Leicestershire County Council’s education department and will include the appropriate 
provision of vehicular and cycle parking and access associated to this specific use.  
7.4.7 The onsite local centre, new community facility building, primary school and outdoor sports 
and open space provision should be located within the same area, to create a ‘community’ 
hub at the heart of the development. It would be expected that the comm unity facility  
76 | P a g e  
 building would incorporate changing facilities directly related to the provision of outdoor 
sport, and would be built to the standards and specification as agreed by the Borough 
Council and Sport England. Sport England guidance, for example Village and Community 
Halls Design Guidance Note, should be taken into account through the design stage of the 
community facility building.  
7.4.8  The local centre would consist of a minimum 3 units, to ensure that it meets the Council’s 
definition of a lo cal centre. With the hub being at the heart of the development it is expected 
that the units provided as part of the local centre would consist of A1, A3 and A4 uses as 
defined by the Town and Country Planning Use Classes Order. The hub area will also 
include the appropriate provision of vehicular parking and access associated to these 
specific uses. It is also expected that the hub area will have high quality pedestrian links 
with the wider development, as well as good public transport links with the rest of the 
Borough and beyond.  
7.4.9  There may be opportunity to consolidate the school building and community facility building, 
provided that the two uses could operate independently from one another.  
7.4.10  It should be noted that the Council is aware that such a cumulative approach to the 
development could require amendments to the existing Section 106 agreement relating to 
Phase 1. The Council will work collaboratively with the land owner to amend the Section 
106 as deemed necessary.  
7.4.11  The delivery o f approximately 1,000 new homes and 5 hectares of employment land will 
contribute positively to the delivery of the Plan period targets, as set out in the Spatial 
Strategy for Development in the Borough Policy 2.  
7.4.12  Due to the size of the Direction fo r Growth area (both phases) detailed transport 
assessments will be required to assess the impact on traffic generation (specifically 
generated by the proposal site) on the key junctions within the vicinity of the site, including 
the junction at Welford Roa d / Bull Head Street / Moat Street / Newton Lane, the junction at 
Bull Head Street / Wakes Road / Oadby Road, and the junction at Bushloe End / Long 
Street / Moat Street. Such specific work will be the land promoter’s responsibility. Any 
detailed transport  assessment should use the South East Leicestershire Transport Study as 
its starting point, and should take into account the necessary mitigation measures identified 
by the study. At least two accesses (at least those already granted planning permission) 
into the site will be required to accommodate the level of vehicle movement, not only for 
residential use but also vehicle use associated with the employment land. Such specific 
work will be the land promoter’s responsibility. Subject to the outcomes of thi s specific 
transport assessment work and collaboration with Leicestershire County Council Highways 
department, off site transport infrastructure or financial contributions towards off site 
transport infrastructure could be required to make the development sustainable. Required 
infrastructure relating to this growth area will be that agreed by Leicestershire County 
Council Highways department and the Borough Council.  
7.4.13  This growth area is situated within easy walking distance of the settlement of Kilby Bridge 
and the leisure opportunities associated with the Grand Union Canal and River Sence. It 
will relate directly to the Strategic Objectives of promoting healthy lifestyles by encouraging 
walking and cycling subject to creation of appropriate cycle ways  and pedestrian routes 
within the development that link to Kilby Bridge.   
77 | P a g e  
 7.4.14  The provision of new housing located close to new employment directly relates to the 
Spatial Objectives that seek new employment opportunities within the Borough that has 
bette r access to the highway network, and the Council seeking to increase the accessibility 
of the Borough, as well as promoting more sustainable modes of transport.  
7.4.15  The Council will require provision of self and custom build homes as part of the delive ry of 
1,000 new homes. There is currently 4 individuals on the Council’s self and custom build 
register that have suggested Wigston (or anywhere within the Borough) as being an 
appropriate location for a self and custom build plot. The Council would also a ctively 
encourage the provision of a mix of residential house types, including bungalows and flats.  
7.4.16  Phase 2 of the Wigston Direction for Growth area is identified on the Council’s Adopted 
Policies Map.  
7.4.17  Subject to appropriate testing, in parti cular highway and transport infrastructure capacity, 
and liaison with the Borough Council and Leicestershire County Council Highways 
department, should evidence suggest a need to do so in the future, further development 
could occur within this growth area beyond this Plan period, subject to the development 
being sensitive to the countryside areas that surround it and sustainable and appropriate in 
size and facility provision. This will be Plan led and will be considered through a future 
review of this Plan.  
Policy 20  Wigston Direction for Growth Area  
The Council will seek to expand the current Wigston Direction for Growth area. The Council will 
allocate further land at the Wigston Direction for Growth area for ‘Phase 2’ development.  
Through the Council’s previous Plan and subsequent granted planning permission, ‘Phase 1’ of the 
Direction for Growth area in Wigston consists of 450 new homes and 2.5 hectares of new 
employment land.  
In ‘Phase 2’, this Plan allocates land for at least 60 0 new homes and in the region of 2.5 hectares 
of employment land.  
Development proposed within ‘Phase 2’ of the Wigston Direction for Growth area is in addition to 
‘Phase 1’ and will require the production of a detailed masterplan. The following elements wi ll be 
required on -site or via an off -site contribution where stated:  
- at least 600 new homes, which at least 20 per cent should be affordable.  
- in the region of 2.5 hectares of new employment land.  
- a new primary school.  
- a roundabout (vehicular) site access from Welford Road.  
- a link road through the site allowing all parts of the site (including Phase 1) to be accessed 
from Newton Lane and Welford Road.  
- formation of a new Local Centre – that contributes towards the provision of A1, A3 or A4 
uses.  
- a community facility building (including changing facilities).   
78 | P a g e  
 - onsite open space, consisting of allotments, sports pitches, play areas and structural 
landscaping in accordance with the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities policy of 
this Local Pla n. 
- provision of Self build and Custom Build plots, to meet the identified need at the time of 
planning application submission.  
- provision of an appropriate number of bus stops and associated infrastructure, including 
shelters and information display boa rds on -site as well as off -site, to allow for this 
sustainable method of public transport, and  
- provision of any other associated infrastructure required to bring the site forward 
sustainably, including cycle ways and footpaths, onsite as well as off site . 
Any proposal for development of ‘Phase 2’ will be required to conform to all other relevant policies 
set out within this Local Plan. Any proposal would also be required to submit a detailed Transport 
Assessment as part of any planning application to ensu re that Leicestershire County Council 
Highways Department can fully assess any traffic / transport implications stemming from the 
development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
79 | P a g e  
 Cottage Farm Direction for Growth area  
7.5.1  The Cottage Farm Direction for Growth area forms a direct extension to the Leicester PUA 
and is situated towards the south east of Oadby, along the A6. The growth area in its 
entirety will consist of up to 400 new homes (and associated other infrastructure ), however 
150 new homes have already been granted planning permission. The granted permission 
provides for a single traffic light controlled access onto the A6. For the purposes of this 
Plan, this granted permission for the Cottage Farm Direction for Grow th area forms ‘Phase 
1’. 
7.5.2  As well as the abovementioned, ‘Phase 1’ includes;  
- 30 per cent (45 new dwellings) affordable housing provision  
- provision towards new education facilities, and  
- onsite open space, consisting of allotments, sports pitches, play areas and structural 
landscaping  
7.5.3  The Cottage Farm Direction for Growth area supports the role of Oadby district centre as 
the Borough’s second largest centre which is a key aspiration of the Council and a spatial 
objective within this Plan.  
7.5.4  This Local Plan allocates additional land at the Cottage Farm Direction for Growth area to 
accommodate a further 250 new homes (Phase 2).  
7.5.5  Due to the size of the Direction for Growth area, detailed transport assessments will be 
required to assess the im pact on traffic generation (specifically generated by the proposal 
site) on the key junctions within the vicinity of the site, specifically at Glen Gorse 
Roundabout, Glen Road / Florence Wragg Way Roundabout, Glen Road / Ash Tree Road, 
and Glen Road / Harb orough Road / London Road / Waldron Drive. Such specific work will 
be the land promoter’s responsibility. Any detailed transport assessment should use the 
South East Leicestershire Transport Study as its starting point, and should take into 
account the nec essary mitigation measures identified by the study. Subject to the outcomes 
of this specific transport assessment work and collaboration with Leicestershire County 
Council Highways department, off site transport infrastructure or financial contributions 
towards off site transport infrastructure could be required to make the development 
sustainable. Required Infrastructure relating to this growth area will be that agreed by 
Leicestershire County Council Highways department and the Borough Council.  
7.5.6  It should be noted that the Council is aware that such a cumulative approach to the 
development could require amendments to the existing Section 106 agreement relating to 
‘Phase 1’. The Council will work collaboratively with the land owner to amend the Section  
106 as deemed necessary.  
7.5.7  The delivery of up to 400 new additional homes will contribute positively towards the 
delivery of the Plan period target, as set out in the Spatial Strategy for Development in the 
Borough Policy 2.  
7.5.8  The Council will req uire provision of self and custom build homes as part of the delivery of 
Phase 2. There is currently 5 individuals on the Council’s self and custom build register that 
have suggested Oadby (or anywhere in the Borough) as being an appropriate location for a  
self and custom build plot. The Council would also actively encourage the provision of a mix 
of residential house types, including bungalows and flats.   
80 | P a g e  
 7.5.9  The cumulative size of the development would require other specific infrastructure; the 
requireme nts are set out in the policy below and include;  
- provision of affordable housing at 30 per cent  
- contribution towards an existing and / or new community facility in Oadby, for example 
Coombe Park pavilion  
- provision towards new education facilities, and  
- onsite open space, consisting of allotments, sports pitches, play areas and structural 
landscaping.  
7.5.10  Due to the sites location adjacent to the Council owned Coombe Park recreation ground, 
there may be possibility to extend and refurbish this existing fa cility rather than locate open 
space or sports provision in another location within the growth area. Any extension of the 
Coombe Park recreation ground would need to be done so in collaboration with the Council 
and would need to include, an extension to th e existing recreation ground, an extension 
and refurbishment to the existing pavilion and an extension to the existing parking 
provision. The Council would require improved pedestrian routes from the development into 
Coombe Park and the education facilitie s beyond. A new road access would also be 
encouraged into Coombe Park from any proposed new development.  
7.5.11  The entire growth area is located within close proximity to the existing Oadby and Wigston 
Green Wedge. Due to the proposed development expansio n of this area, the Council has 
extended the extent of the existing Green Wedge to bound the south west of the growth 
area to ensure (amongst other justified reasons) that there is no future coalescence of the 
settlements of Wigston and Oadby. A Green Wedg e Review was undertaken by the Council 
due to the need to accommodate additional growth. The full extent of both of the Borough’s 
Green Wedges are illustrated on the Council’s Adopted Policies map.  
7.5.12  Phase 2 of the Cottage Farm Direction for Growth a rea is identified on the Council’s 
Adopted Policies Map.  
Policy 21  Cottage Farm Direction for Growth area  
This Local Plan will seek to expand the current Cottage Farm site (‘Phase 1’) and form the Cottage 
Farm Direction for Growth area. The Council will allocate further land to the south east of Oadby, 
for ‘Phase 2’ development.  
In ‘Phase 2’, this Plan allocat es land for up to 250 new additional homes.  
The Council will consider new development proposals that seek to create a sustainable, well 
designed and high quality development that is sensitive to its surroundings and will not have a 
detrimental impact on th e surrounding Green Wedge and Countryside.  
Development proposed within ‘Phase 2’ of the Cottage Farm Direction for Growth area is in 
addition to ‘Phase 1’ and will require the production of a detailed masterplan. The following 
elements will be required on -site or via an off -site contribution where stated:  
- at least 250 new additional homes, of which at least 30 per cent should be affordable.  
- vehicular access to the growth area will be directly off the A6.  
- a link road through the site allowing all par ts of the site (including ‘Phase 1’) to be 
accessible.   
81 | P a g e  
 - off-site contribution towards a community facility building in Oadby and / or the extension 
and refurbishment of Coombe Park pavilion, including further car parking.  
- improved pedestrian access int o Coombe Park from the development.  
- onsite open space, consisting of allotments, sports pitches, play areas and structural 
landscaping in accordance with the Open Space, Sport and Recreation Facilities policy of 
this Local Plan.  
- off-site contribution t owards new education facilities.  
- provision of Self Build and Custom Build plots, to meet the identified need at the time of 
planning application submission.  
- provision of an appropriate number of bus stops and associated infrastructure, including 
bus sh elters and information display boards on -site as well as off -site, to allow for this 
sustainable method of public transport, and  
- provision of any other associated infrastructure required to bring the site forward 
sustainably, including cycle ways and foo tpaths, on -site as well as off -site.      
Any proposal for development of ‘Phase 2’ will be required to conform to all other relevant policies 
set out within this Local Plan. Any proposal would also be required to submit a detailed Transport 
Assessment as part of any planning application to ensure that Leicestershire County Council 
Highways Department can fully assess any traffic / transport implications stemming from the 
development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
82 | P a g e  
 Chapter Eight – Economic Prosperity  
8.1.1  The national government is committed to securing economic growth in order to create jobs 
and prosperity by building on the country’s inherent strengths. The national government is 
also committed to meeting the twin challenges of global competition and of a low carbon 
future.  
8.1.2  Promoting balanced economic growth is one of the key elements of delivering sustainable 
development. This Plan seeks to make the Borough a more sustainable place to live by 
creating a balance between homes, jobs, retail development, green infr astructure, and 
education.  
8.1.3  The NPPF indicates that planning policies should be positive, promote competitive town 
centre environments and set out policies for the management and growth of centres over 
the plan period.  
8.1.4  The Council’s Economic Reg eneration Strategy sets out an economic vision and plan, for 
future economic development across the Borough. It also acts as a framework for driving 
economic development and regeneration locally. It will help enable the realisation of 
funding opportunities  by demonstrating that the Council has ambitious aspirations based on 
factual evidence.  
8.1.5  The Council is ambitious with its plans for the future and wants to create prosperity and 
better quality of life for all of its residents and businesses; it recog nises how a successful 
and sustainable economy can have a positive impact upon the quality of life of residents 
and businesses.  
8.1.6  The Leicester and Leicestershire Business Survey (2015) reflect the views of local 
businesses within the Borough.  This pr ovides an annual audit of business conditions 
across the Borough as follows:  
 56% of the Borough’s businesses expect to start offering new products or services, the 
highest of all the Leicestershire districts.  
 35% of the Borough’s businesses expected genera l business conditions to improve.  
 40% of the Borough’s businesses are quite or very likely to take on further apprentices in 
the future, the highest of all the Leicestershire districts.  
 81% of the Borough’s businesses expect an increase in sales turnover i n the next 12 
months the highest of all the Leicestershire districts.  
 72% of the Borough’s businesses expect their business to grow over the next 12 months.  
 57% of the Borough’s businesses plan to train or up skill staff in the next 12 months.  
 10% of the B orough’s businesses are looking to relocate.  
 
 
 
 
  
83 | P a g e  
 Delivering Retail  
8.2.1  The NPPF requires local planning authorities to recognise town centres as the heart of their 
communities and pursue policies to support their viability and vitality. Local planning 
authorities are expected to objectively identify sites for retail land. Ensuring town centres 
are recognised and protected. Identifying sufficient land to meet the retail needs of the 
Borough is positively achieved through this Plan.  
8.2.2  The National Pla nning Practice Guidance (PPG) suggests that local planning authorities 
should plan to support town centres in generating local employment, promoting beneficial 
competition within and between town centres, and creating attractive, diverse places where 
peopl e want to live, visit and work.  
8.2.3  Town centres act as a key locations for a diverse range of uses such as retail, leisure, 
commercial, office, tourism, cultural activities, community facilities and also provide an 
important, sustainable location for ho using.  
8.2.4  The main town centre within the Borough is Wigston. This Plan seeks to reinforce the role 
of Wigston as the Borough’s main town centre. The Plan also seeks to positively reinforce 
the roles of Oadby and South Wigston as a district centres. Loc al policy will strive to ensure 
the existing blend of facilities is maintained and improved within each centre as well as 
supporting mixed use development that includes retail, employment, residential, 
community, leisure, culture and tourism facilities.  
8.2.5 Wigston town centre and the centres of Oadby and South Wigston have the highest 
concentrations of retail provision within the Borough.  
8.2.6  In terms of retail provision within the Borough, a ‘town and district centre first’ approach will 
be applied. Proposals for main town centre uses should be prioritised within the town or 
district centres, however, some flexibility will be allowed for edge of centre locations if the 
main centres cannot accommodate the retail provision proposed. Only if suitable sit es are 
not available within the main centre or edge of centre locations should out of town sites be 
considered.   
8.2.7  The NPPF also requires local planning authorities to apply the sequential test to planning 
applications for main town centre uses that a re not proposed in existing centres and are not 
in accordance with an up -to-date Local Plan.  
New Retail Provision  
8.2.8  In 2016 the Council commissioned Nathaniel Litchfield & Partners (NLP) to undertake a 
Retail Capacity Study for the Borough, to serve as  local evidence to support local planning 
policy.  
8.2.9  New forms of retailing have emerged in recent years as an alternative to more traditional 
high-street shopping. Home/electronic shopping has expanded considerably with increasing 
growth in the use of personal computers/tablets/mobile phones and the internet.  
8.2.10  According to the NLP report, online shopping has the potential to be a significant threat to 
the retail centres within the Borough as it removes the potential barrier of having to travel to 
physical retail stores.   
84 | P a g e  
 8.2.11  The NLP study’s household survey results suggest that 3.6% of households in Oadby and 
Wigston Study Area did their last main food and grocery shopping via the internet 
(collection point/home delivery), and 3.8% of households did most of their comparison 
shopping via the internet, TV or catalogue.  
8.2.12  One of the key areas of the Study was the setting out of current convenience and 
comparison retail capacity in Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston and the potential capacity 
for additional convenience and comparison retail floorspace over the Plan period to 2031. 
The results for potential capacity for additional retail floorspace are shown below.  
Wigston Town Centre  
8.2.13  Quantitative capacity for additional convenience and compar ison retail floorspace.  
Year  Convenience sq.m 
(net)  Comparison sq.m 
(net)  Total sq.m (net)  
2016  297 0 297 
2021  341 322 663 
2026  454 1,105  1,559  
2031  554 1,980  2,534 (1,169)  
Nathaniel Lichfield & Partners Retail Capacity Study (2016)  
8.2.14  The table above indicates that throughout the Plan period there is not a significant 
quantitative capacity for convenience floorspace in Wigston. The capacity peaks at 554 
sq.m (net) by 2031. Put in context, the identified capacity is equivalent to a small sc ale 
foodstore unit. In terms of additional capacity for comparison retail goods floorspace in 
Wigston, in the short term, only 322 sq.m (net) has been identified up to 2021. However, 
longer term, the capacity increases to 1,980 sq.m (net) by 2031. It shoul d be noted that at 
the time of writing the retail capacity report the former Coop retail unit within Bell Street, 
Wigston was unoccupied. The report suggests that should the unit be reoccupied for retail 
purposes, the capacity would reduce by 1,365 sq.m. S ince the time of writing, the unit has 
been reoccupied for retail use, therefore the overall capacity for additional retail floorspace 
within Wigston has reduced from 2,534 sq.m to 1,169 sq.m.  
Oadby District Centre  
8.2.15  Quantitative capacity for addition al convenience and comparison retail floor space.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
85 | P a g e  
 Year  Convenience sq.m 
(net)  Comparison sq.m 
(net)  Total sq.m (net)  
2016  0 0 0 
2021  0 212 212 
2026  0 750 750 
2031  0 1,351  1,351  
Nathaniel Lichfield & Partners Retail Capacity Study (2016)  
8.2.16  The table above shows that that there is 0 (zero) quantitative capacity for convenience 
retail floorspace in Oadby in the short, medium or long term, up to 2031. Due to this, there 
is no demonstrable requirement to proactively plan for new convenience floo rspace in 
Oadby district centre up to the end of the plan period. However, it would be appropriate for 
the Council to identify land within town centre locations to deal with retail unit ‘churn’. In 
terms of potential capacity for additional comparison reta il floorspace in Oadby district 
centre, the table shows that in the short term to 2021 there is not a significant capacity. 
However, over the long term this capacity does increase to a more significant 1,351 sq.m 
by 2031. The overall capacity for additiona l retail floorspace in Oadby is 1,351 sq.m.  
South Wigston District Centre  
8.2.17  Quantitative capacity for additional convenience and comparison retail floor space.  
Year  Convenience sq.m 
(net)  Comparison sq.m 
(net)  Total sq.m (net)  
2016  0 0 0 
2021  0 59 59 
2026  0 207 207 
2031  0 373 373 
Nathaniel Lichfield & Partners Retail Capacity Study (2016)  
8.2.18  The table above indicates that there is 0 (zero) capacity for additional convenience goods 
floorspace in South Wigston district centre up to 2031. Simila rly, there is very limited 
capacity for additional comparison retail floorspace. The quantitative potential capacity for 
new comparison goods floorspace is projected to be 373sq.m by 2031. The overall capacity 
for additional retail floorspace in South Wigs ton is 373 sq.m.  
Local Centres  
8.2.19  The NPPF does not define a local centre; however, the retail capacity report suggests that 
local centres might include a range of small shops of a local nature, serving a small 
catchment. Typically, it might include, a mongst other shops, a small supermarket, a 
newsagent, sub -post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a hot -food 
takeaway and launderette.   
86 | P a g e  
 8.2.20  The retail capacity report sets out and an overall capacity for retail floorspace  across all of 
the Borough’s local centres of 81 sq.m.  
8.2.21  The study, however states that lack of quantitative capacity should not be a barrier to new 
retail provision in local centres coming forward, if proposals will bring about improvement to 
the ret ail offer.  
Policy 22  Delivering Retail  
Retail development will be encouraged and permitted in the defined policy areas of the town centre 
and district centres, as well as the Borough’s local centres.  
The town and district centres of the Borough will be the  focus for new additional retail floorspace, 
maintaining the Borough’s current hierarchy and market share between centres.  
The following identified additional overall retail capacities in net floorspace up to 2031 will be 
sought within each of the centres . 
- Wigston – 1,169 sq.m  
- Oadby – 1,351 sq.m  
- South Wigston – 373 sq.m  
- Local Centres – 81 sq.m  
Retail development will be encouraged of a scale appropriate to the needs of the local area served 
by these centres. Development will be subject to local pla nning, traffic and environmental 
considerations and the needs of people who live in or near the proposal areas. Proposals seeking 
higher retail provision than those set out above would need to be evidenced and justified and 
would need to set out that there  would not be any detrimental impacts to the centre in which it is 
situated.  
In considering proposals for new retail development, the Borough Council will apply the sequential 
and impact test as specified in the National Planning Policy Framework and Natio nal Planning 
Practice Guidance. It will be essential that any new development does not have an adverse effect 
on existing centres within the Borough. New development should be integrated within existing 
infrastructure.  
Where a proposal fails to satisfy the  ‘town and district centre first’ approach and / or the sequential 
test or is likely to have significant adverse impact on the centre, it will not be permitted.  
Proposals for retail development within the town centres would need to follow the principles as  set 
out within the Area Action Plan Guidance document.  
 
 
 
 
  
87 | P a g e  
 Retail Hierarchy  
8.3.1  Paragraph 23 of the NPPF requires local planning authorities to define a network and 
hierarchy of centres that is resilient to anticipated future economic changes. It states that, 
local planning authorities should recognise town centres as the heart of their communities 
and to pursue policies to help support their viability and vitality.  
8.3.2  In order to plan positively to promote the vitality and viability of the town  centres, the 
Council has identified a local retail hierarchy for the Borough that sets out the role and 
function of centres. The presumption will be that any proposals for a main town use will 
have to follow the ‘sequential test’.  
8.3.3  For the purpose of  this policy, the definition of town centre uses will be consistent with the 
definition set out in the NPPF (Annex 2). Main town centre uses include; retail development 
(including warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment faciliti es the 
more intensive sport and recreation uses (including cinemas, restaurants, drive -through 
restaurants, bars and pubs, night -clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling 
centres, and bingo halls); offices; arts, culture and tourism develo pment (including theatres, 
museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities); and, residential.  
8.3.4  This Plan identifies Wigston as a town centre and Oadby and South Wigston as district 
centres.  
8.3.5  The following definitions have been used to produce the retail hierarchy for the Borough.  
8.3.6  Town centres; will usually be the second level of centre, after city centres, and in many 
cases they will be the principal centre in a local authority area.  
8.3.7  District centres; typically comprise groups of shops often containing at least one 
supermarket or superstore, and a range of non -retail services such as banks, building 
societies and restaurants as well as local public facilities such as library.  
8.3.8  Local centres; typically compri se a range of small shops of a local nature, serving a small 
catchment. This might include, amongst other shops, a small supermarket, a newsagent, 
sub-post office and a pharmacy. Other facilities could include a hot -food takeaway and 
launderette. In rural areas, large villages may perform the role of a local centre.  
8.3.9  The Spatial Objectives and Spatial Strategy place a great deal of emphasis on the role of 
the Borough’s town and district centres in delivering the Local Plan and therefore it is 
important  that the retail hierarchy for the Borough compliments the retail hierarchy that 
exists within the Leicester Principal Urban Area and in South Leicestershire. This will 
ensure that the various centres can relate to one another spatially, maintain their vit ality 
and viability whilst providing a different offer to the local community.  
Policy 23  Retail Hierarchy  
The role of Wigston as the Borough’s main town centre and Oadby and South Wigston as district 
centres as well as specified local centres (identified b elow) will be preserved and enhanced.  In 
order to enhance the existing blend of facilities and promote competitive town and district centres, 
proposals for appropriate town centre uses, including, retail, employment, residential, community, 
leisure, cultu re and tourism uses will be supported.   
88 | P a g e  
 Retail development should take place at a scale appropriate to the size and function of the centre 
within which it is to be located. To guide this approach, the following retail hierarchy is defined:  
Main Town Centre  
- Wigston  
District Centres  
- Oadby  
- South Wigston  
Local Centres  
- Old Oadby, London Road, Oadby  
- Glen Road / Highcroft Avenue, Oadby  
- Rosemead Drive, Oadby  
- Severn Road, Oadby  
- Brabazon Road, Oadby  
- Leicester Road, Wigston  
- Little Hill, Wigston  
- Kelmarsh Avenue, Wigston  
- Queens Drive, Wigston  
- Gloucester Crescent, South Wigston  
The Borough Council will promote a mix of appropriate uses within these defined centres with 
active street frontages at ground floor level.  
The Borough Council will also  seek to retain and where necessary, identify new small scale local 
shopping opportunities to meet the everyday needs of the local people.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
89 | P a g e  
 Local Impact Threshold  
8.4.1  Paragraph 26 of the NPPF states that:  
‘when assessing applications for retail, l eisure and office development outside of town centres, 
which are not in accordance with an up -to-date Local Plan, local planning authorities should 
require an impact assessment if the development is over a proportionate, locally set floorspace 
threshold’ .  
8.4.2  In the ‘Ensuring the vitality of town centres’ section of the PPG it states that in setting a 
locally appropriate threshold, it is important to consider:  
- the scale of proposals relatives to the town centres;  
- the existing viability and vitality of town centres;  
- cumulative effects of recent developments;  
- whether town centres are vulnerable;  
- likely effects of development on any town centre strategy; and  
- the impact on any other planned investment.  
8.4.3  Where an application is likely to have significa nt adverse impact it should not be permitted.  
8.4.4  The NPPF paragraph 24 requires local planning authorities to apply a sequential test to 
planning applications for main centre uses that are not in an existing centre and not in 
accordance with an up -to-date Local Plan. It is appropriate to identify locally set thresholds 
for the scale of edge -of-centre and out of centre retail, office and leisure development which 
should be subject to the assessment of the impact criteria set out by paragraph 26 of the 
NPPF. 
8.4.5  For the purpose of this policy, the definition of an ‘edge of centre’ location will be consistent 
with that defined within the NPPF (Annex 2). The definition is -  
‘for retail purposes, a location that is well connected and up to 300 metres of th e primary shopping 
area. For all other main town centre uses, a location within 300 metres of a town centre boundary. 
For office development, this includes locations outside the town centre but within 500 metres of a 
public transport interchange. In determ ining whether a site falls within the definition of edge of 
centre, account should be taken of local circumstances’ . 
8.4.6  An ‘out of centre’ location means a site that is located outside of the centre boundary and is 
not located within edge of centre. It does not mean outside of the urban area.  
8.4.7  Due to the compact nature of the centres within the Borough, the NPPF threshold of 2,500 
sq m. gross is considered to be inappropriate. If the NPPF threshold were to be used, the 
scale of a single development proposal that would be not subject to an impact test, would 
be larger than the entire development plan capacity projections and could have a significant 
detrimental effect towards the vitality of the centre.  
8.4.8  The retail capacity study undertaken for the Borough, illustrates locally set Impact 
Thresholds for each of the centres. For both Wigston town centre and Oadby district centre 
a locally set threshold of 1,500 sq.m was deemed appropriate. For South Wigston, the 
locally set threshold deemed appropr iate was lowered to 500 sq.m due to its size.  
  
90 | P a g e  
 Policy 24  Local Impact Threshold  
Applications for retail, leisure and office development outside of a defined centre, which is not in 
accordance with this Plan, will require an impact assessment if the develop ment is over the 
following floorspace thresholds:  
- Wigston Town Centre – 1,500 s.qm gross floorspace  
- Oadby District Centre – 1,500 s.qm gross floorspace  
- South Wigston District Centre – 500 s.qm gross floorspace  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
91 | P a g e  
 Delivering Economic Prosperity  
8.5.1  The Council sets ambitious plans for the future of the Borough to create a better quality of 
life for all its residents.  It recognises how a successful and sustainable economy can have 
a positive impact upon the quality of life of residents and businesses  across the Borough.  
8.5.2  Paragraph 14 of the NPPF acknowledges the concept and principles of sustainable 
development in Local Plan making. The NPPF requires that local planning authorities 
should positively seek opportunities to meet the development nee ds of their local 
communities.  
8.5.3  The Borough Council, together with all of the other Leicester and Leicestershire local 
authorities has produced a Leicester and Leicestershire Housing and Economic 
Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA) to inform all loca l planning policy within 
Leicester and Leicestershire.  
8.5.4  According to the HEDNA, over the period 2011 to 2031, baseline employment forecasts 
show that the job increase will be a negative 200 jobs within the Borough, however, that the 
Functional Econom ic Market Area (FEMA) as a whole is forecast to increase by over 
68,000 jobs during the same period.  
8.5.5  The HEDNA identifies that the Borough of Oadby and Wigston has the smallest economy in 
the FEMA in terms of employment levels and GVA. This largely r eflects the function of the 
area which is a largely residential location on the edge of Leicester. In terms of GVA growth 
per annum forecast, the percentage for the period 2011 to 2036 is 0.3 per cent lower than 
the growth seen for the period 1993 to 2010;  figures are 1.6% and 1.9% respectively.  
8.5.6  As of 2015, around 20,300 jobs were located within the Borough, which is less than the 
1991 figure of 23,000. This reflects decreases in the manufacturing sector (and to a lesser 
extent financial services). D ecreases have been partly offset by growth in public sector 
employment, (particularly education and healthcare) and growth in the arts and recreation 
sector.   
8.5.7  Despite a reduction in employment numbers, the manufacturing sector still has a strong 
representation within the Borough, as does the education, arts and recreation and 
wholesale sectors. However, the area has a relatively small representation in the national 
growth sectors of professional, scientific and technical, and administrative and suppo rt. This 
could influence future economic growth potential.  
8.5.8  Although there has been a decline in overall employment numbers since 1991, the HEDNA 
uses past development trends and current development demand data to identify 
employment land needs for th e period 2011 to 2031. The need identified in the HEDNA 
also takes account of the Borough’s role in the Leicester and Leicestershire Functional 
Economic Market Area.  
8.5.9  For the period up to 2031, the HEDNA concludes that there is an employment land need  
within the Borough. Employment land requirements are as follows:  
- B1a/b need is 1 hectare  
- B1c/B2 need is 0 (zero)  
- Small Scale B8 need is 4 hectares  
8.5.10  Small scale B8 is defined as units of less than 9,000 sq.m in size.   
92 | P a g e  
 8.5.11  It must be noted that when  referring to ‘employment land’ or ‘employment unit’ this Plan is 
referring to land or units that are within the Use Classes (as defined within the Town and 
Country Planning Use Classes Order) B1a, B1b, B1c, B2 and B8. It is not referring to any 
use that e mploys people. The uses associated with each of the B Class uses mentioned 
above are as follows:  
B1a)  Office other than a use within Class A2 (Financial and Professional Services)  
B1b)  Research and development of products or processes  
B1c) For any industr ial process which can be carried out in any residential area without causing 
detriment to the amenity of the area  
B2) Industrial process other than that falling within Class B1  
B8) Use for storage or as a distribution centre  
8.5.12  Further to the HEDNA,  the Council commissioned an Employment Land and Premises 
Study (ELPS), which sought to calculate employment land use needs for the Borough, 
using very local information and data. The HEDNA figures were used as the starting point 
for the ELPS work. The ELP S sets out the following employment land use needs.  
Moderate Growth Model Need  
- B1a/b need is 0.25 hectares  
- B1c/B2 need is 2.45 hectares  
- Small scale B8 need is 0.10 hectares  
High Growth Model Need  
- B1a/b need is 0.59 hectares  
- B1c/B2 need is 5.79 hectares  
- Small Scale B8 need is 0.22 hectares  
8.5.13  The model outputs (need) illustrated above do not include a 5 year buffer. The ELPS 
advises that a 5 year buffer should be added to the model outputs. The below illustrates the 
model outputs including the 5 year bu ffer. 
Moderate Growth Model Need  
- B1a/b need is 0.31 hectares  
- B1c/B2 need is 3.06 hectares  
- Small scale B8 need is 0.13 hectares  
High Growth Model Need  
- B1a/b need is 0.74 hectares  
- B1c/B2 need is 7.24 hectares  
- Small Scale B8 need is 0.27 hectares  
8.5.14  Over  the years, the Identified Employment Areas within the Borough have seen some level 
of decline, with suggestions that some existing units are not necessarily fit for modern 
employment purposes. There have also been changes of use that are not within the B Use 
Class use on Identified Employment Areas. With the identified employment areas being of a  
93 | P a g e  
 particular age, there are also units that are coming to the end of their limited economic life 
and are in need of redevelopment, refurbishment and / or improvemen t. The employment 
land allocated within this Plan takes account of the refurbishment and redevelopment need.   
8.5.15  Provision of employment land within the Borough will help to reduce out -commuting and 
promote sustainable local communities.  
8.5.16  Throu gh allocation of land, the Council will ensure that the appropriate amount and types of 
employment land is provided and made available in locations that balance the demands of 
the market with the capacity of infrastructure. The sites will be provided in lo cations that not 
only seek to deliver sustainable communities but also conserve and enhance the 
environment and heritage assets. To ensure that the right amount and types of employment 
land is provided, in the most sustainable locations, the Council will:  
- Safeguard existing and committed employment sites / land which are of the right quality 
and suitably located in relation to infrastructure.  
- Provide additional employment sites at the Wigston Direction for Growth area to the south 
and east of Wigston.  Th is will allow for the growth as well as relocation of businesses.  
- Provide additional employment land adjacent to the existing Identified Employment Area of 
Kenilworth Drive, Oadby. This will allow for the growth as well as relocation of businesses.  
- Provid e additional employment land adjacent to the existing Identified Employment Area of 
Magna Road, South Wigston. This will allow for the growth as well as the relocation of 
businesses.  
- Provide additional employment land within the district centre of Oadby an d the town centre 
of Wigston.  
- Support the enhancement of skills in the local workforce through improved opportunities for 
education and training to provide a more dynamic and flexible labour market.  
8.5.17  All land allocations are set out within the Spatia l Strategy and other relevant planning policy 
within this Plan. All land allocations are identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
94 | P a g e  
 Protecting Identified Employment Areas  
8.6.1  The Identified Employment Areas situated within the Borough a re illustrated on the 
Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
8.6.2  Identified Employment Areas, once lost, can be difficult to replace. Any proposal that seeks 
a loss of Identified Employment Area land should be considered very carefully. Any 
proposal which invol ves the loss of any of the employment land uses defined in paragraph 
8.5.11, would need to be strongly justified in the context of the high importance of retaining 
and expanding the local economy and the creation of jobs. It is imperative that the Council 
provides land on which businesses can locate, grow and evolve.  
8.6.3  In order to maintain the required level of employment land to meet the needs of the local 
economy, the Council will, in addition to allocating new land for employment use 
development, pro tect its Identified Employment Areas from non B class land uses which are 
better located in other areas of the Borough.  
8.6.4  The Council does not wish to inhibit, in anyway, the ability of existing firms to expand, 
therefore will look upon redevelopment or expansion of premises on identified employment 
areas (for appropriate uses only) positively. The Council will support redeve lopment of sites 
which would lead to an improvement in the quality of employment floorspace that is suited 
to modern day or identified needs.  
8.6.5  The Council is aware that national policy and guidance, suggests that planning policies 
should avoid the lon g term protection of sites allocated for employment use where there is 
no reasonable prospect of a site being used for that purpose.  
8.6.6  Bearing this in mind, the Council has a hierarchy of employment site categories. Each of 
the Identified Employment A reas within the Borough have been assessed and have been 
classified within a category. The site categories are ‘Core’, ‘Base’ and ‘Release’. Each of 
the three categories are defined within the Council’s Employment Sites Supplementary 
Planning Document and the Employment Land and Premises Study.  
8.6.7  Identified Employment Areas that are classified as ‘Core’, are the most important 
employment areas within the Borough, perform well and are predominately within B Class 
Use. Any proposal for development of a n on B Class Use on Identified Employment Areas 
classified as ‘Core’ will not be permitted. Identified Employment Areas that are classified as 
‘Base’ are still important employment areas within the Borough, but allow for a level of 
flexibility of non B Class  Use development, subject to a set out specific criteria.  
8.6.8  None of the Identified Employment Areas within the Borough are classed within the 
‘Release’ category.  
8.6.9  Consistent with Policy 2 Spatial Strategy for Development within the Borough within  this 
Plan, this policy allocates 0.55 hectares of employment land at Magna Road, South 
Wigston. The allocation is a continuation of an existing employment land proposal which 
has been identified in previous Council Plans.  
 
 
  
95 | P a g e  
 Policy 25  Protecting Identifie d Employment Areas  
Identified Employment Areas (illustrated in the Council’s Adopted Policies Map) will be protected 
from inappropriate development, redevelopment and change of use. The Council will also seek to 
enhance the identified areas through appropr iate development.  
In accordance with guidance set out in the Council’s Employment Sites Supplementary Planning 
Document and the Employment Land and Premises Study, the ‘Core’ Identified Employment Areas 
will be safeguarded for B1a, B1b, B1c, B2 and B8 use s only. Any change of use from a B class use 
will not be permitted.  
Proposals to change the use of land or buildings within ‘Base’ Identified Employment Areas from 
B1a, B1b, B1c, B2, or B8 use will only be considered acceptable if they clearly demonstrate that 
the alternative use (s):  
- will not have an adverse impact on any other employment use(s) in the identified 
employment area in which it is located;  
- will not significantly reduce the overall supply and quality of employment land and premises 
within t he locality;  
- will deliver economic regeneration benefits to the site and/or area or there will be a 
significant community benefit which outweighs the impact;  
- will involve a vacant building for which there is clear and robust evidence of proactive 
marke ting (a minimum of twelve months), with registered commercial agents at a 
reasonable price, to demonstrate that there is no realistic prospect for continued 
employment use; and,  
- The site/premises are no longer suitable or reasonably capable of being rede veloped for 
employment purposes.  
This Plan allocates 0.55 hectares of employment use land (B1, B2 and / or B8 use) adjacent to 
Magna Road Identified Employment Area in South Wigston. The allocation is illustrated on the 
Adopted Policies Map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
96 | P a g e  
 Sustainable Transport and Initiatives  
8.7.1  The Council is committed to encouraging sustainable travel patterns through all 
development proposals.  
8.7.2  The principle of sustainable transport is well established through national planning 
guidance, policies  and various sub regional policies and guidance. The Council is also 
committed to encouraging sustainable methods of transport.  A key principle in achieving 
sustainable travel patterns and transport methods is the implementation of travel plans for 
develo pments that have a significant traffic impact. Accordingly, travel plans will be 
expected in support of all development proposals.  
8.7.3  It is essential that all new development can be successfully integrated into existing 
transport and highways infrastruc ture and has minimal detriment to the local area. In line 
with the Borough’s Spatial Strategy, new development is to be directed to the most 
sustainable locations, for example, the town and district centres, the Leicester PUA and the 
three Direction for Gr owth areas.  
8.7.4  The Direction for Growth areas are deemed the most sustainable locations for development 
outside of the town and district centres and the Leicester Principal Urban Area, when set in 
the context of the overall Spatial Strategy for the Boro ugh. The Direction for Growth Areas 
are located directly adjacent to the existing Leicester PUA and have direct site access onto 
main existing highway routes.  
8.7.5  The Department for Transport states that economic growth is one of the biggest challenges 
for transport. Transport’s role in this is hugely important – getting people to work and to 
services such as education and healthcare providers, as well to leisure activities and shops, 
is crucial to quality of life and wellbeing.  
8.7.6  Whilst accepting tha t good transport is vital to a successful thriving economy with greater 
mobility, evidence stresses the need to balance the increasing demand for travel against 
protecting the environment and heritage assets as well as improving people’s quality of life. 
The Spatial Strategy for the Borough achieves this aim by ensuring access to the strategic 
road network outside of the Borough, such as the M1, M69 and A14, is as easy and 
efficient as possible. It also encourages development and use of public transport lin ks 
which will increase capacity on the highway network.  
8.7.7  Leicestershire County Council’s guidance document, the 6Cs Design Guide aims to 
achieve the delivery of high quality development. It includes car parking standards that 
apply to any proposals fo r development in the Borough, including those arising through the 
Local Plan process. All new development proposals should take account of the 6C’s Design 
Guide document as well as other relevant policies in this Plan.  
8.7.8  This Policy will contribute tow ards the spatial objectives relating to public transport in the 
Borough which include improving east west public transport links between South Wigston, 
Wigston and Oadby, and establishing fast and frequent public transport to key services, 
facilities and t he retail centre of Leicester.  
8.7.9  The Spatial Strategy focuses development within the town and district centres, the 
Leicester PUA and the Direction for Growth areas, and directly supports the achievement of 
transport related spatial objectives by ensu ring that growth occurs in the locations most 
closely linked to public transport routes, services and facilities. To achieve the spatial  
97 | P a g e  
 strategy and spatial objectives, the Council will work alongside Leicestershire County 
Council Highways Department on a ll new transport related topics, as well as Leicester City 
Council Highways Department as and when there is a need to do so, for example through 
transport development or development that has cross boundary impacts.  
8.7.10  South Wigston Railway Station prov ides links to Nottingham, Derby and London via 
Leicester and direct links to Nuneaton and Birmingham. Increasing the number of rail 
services stopping at South Wigston could boost the use of rail as a method of public 
transport by those living and working i n the Borough. The Council would support this 
principle.  
8.7.11  Travel Plans aim to ensure the delivery of sustainable transport objectives including 
‘smarter choices’, the reduction of car usage and the increased use of public transport, 
walking and cycli ng as part of new development. They should be submitted alongside any 
development application that is likely to have significant transport implications. A Transport 
Assessment and/or a Travel Plan will be required to accompany all applications for major 
development.  
8.7.12  This policy enables the protection of routes that will allow the future expansion and 
enhancement of transport infrastructure in the Borough. The Potential Transport Route 
(former EDDR) in Oadby is one such link. The Potential Transport R oute has been 
safeguarded within the Borough for a number of years but has yet to be built out. Current 
evidence base suggests that should the route be built out, there would be a positive benefit 
to the existing routes linking Gartree Road and the A6 in O adby.  
8.7.13  Leicestershire County Council, as the local highway authority, wishes to see the continued 
safeguarding of this route within the Borough. This is because the County and City highway 
authorities face significant challenges in continuing to dev elop local transport systems. At a 
strategic level this includes, amongst other things, supporting and delivering housing and 
economic growth, improving peoples' access to services whilst reducing impacts on the 
environment and seeking to minimise the effe cts of climate change.  
8.7.14  Leicestershire County Council and Leicester City Council are considering future transport 
policy and strategy through their Local Transport Plans. The Highways Authority considers 
that the completion of a route along the pote ntial transport route in Oadby could help to 
meet strategic challenges and address local issues.  
Policy 26  Sustainable Transport and Initiatives  
All new development should be located and designed to; reduce the need to travel by the private 
motor vehicle; enhance the safety of pedestrians and other road users; encourage the use of 
cycling as a sustainable mode of transport; and, improve accessibility for residents, particularly in 
locations where there is poor transport choice and availability.  
In all new d evelopment, proposals must consider the highways and transport infrastructure 
requirements needed to support and service the proposed development. There will also be a need 
to demonstrate that adequate capacity currently exists or will be provided through appropriate 
mitigation that meets necessary infrastructure requirements.  
Where new development is considered to be of a significant scale or type, a transport assessment 
and/or a travel plan, will be required.   
98 | P a g e  
 The Potential Transport Route will be safegua rded by this Plan. The route is identified on the 
Adopted Policies Map.  
Support will be given for the following sustainable transport initiatives.  
- High quality public transport links between the Wigston Direction for Growth area, Wigston 
town centre and Leicester City Centre;  
- High quality public transport links between the two Oadby Direction for Growth areas, 
Oadby district centre and Leicester City Centre;  
- A new public transport interchange in Wigston town centre to facilitate changes between 
north -south and east -west journeys;  
- Appropriate works to the highway to improve safety and ease of movement and to 
recognise the contribution the highway can make to the overall appearance of the public 
realm;  
- Innovative schemes for public car parking in the  centres of Wigston, Oadby and South 
Wigston which comply with Leicestershire County Council parking standards. Schemes 
should make efficient use of land as well as achieve high quality inclusive design;  
- Innovative and high quality public realm schemes t hat improve pedestrian access and 
movement throughout the Borough;  
- Protection of existing cycle routes and provision of new well designed cycle routes;  
- Electric car charging points in all new car parking facilities;  
- Cycle parking in all new developme nt; 
- Improved bus facilities in the Borough; and  
- Appropriate levels of disabled car parking in all proposals involving car parking provision.  
The Borough Council and Leicestershire County Council Highways Department (as well as 
Leicester City Council’s  Highway Department where relevant) will use developer contributions as 
necessary to fund off -site works where new or improved infrastructure is required to address the 
impacts of development proposals.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
99 | P a g e  
 Chapter Nine – Town and District Centre Development  
9.1.1  The NPPF suggests that Local authorities should recognise town and district centres as the 
heart of their communities and pursue policies that support their vitality and viability. They 
should also (amongst other things), promote competit ive centres that provide customer 
choice and a diverse retail offer that reflect the individuality of each centre.  
9.1.2  The Council will seek to retain and enhance the existing town centre of Wigston, the 
existing district centres of Oadby and South Wigst on and the existing local centres. 
Through this Plan the Council sets out policies that seek to plan positively for the future of 
each centre and encourage economic activity and inward investment.  
9.1.3  In 2013, the Council adopted its Town Centre Area Act ion Plans (DPD) for the town centre 
of Wigston and district centre of Oadby. The Area Action Plan set out a number of 
development management policies as well as policies relating to town and district centre 
growth and regeneration. Since its adoption, the area action plan has been fundamental in; 
bringing forward large scale public realm regeneration works; encouraging large scale retail 
refurbishment; and the obtaining of government funding towards, and the production of 
Local Development Orders. The Area Action Plan has also been instrumental in 
encouraging town centre living and the provision of new homes within the key centres in the 
Borough.   
9.1.4  This Plan will supersede the policies set out within the Town Centres Area Action Plan, 
however due to th e positive impact the Area Action Plan document has had, the Council 
wish to retain its supporting information, its objectives and its relevant masterplans as 
guidance. The Area Action Plan document illustrates one (viable) way in which the town 
and distri ct centre redevelopment can be delivered. The scale of development and the mix 
of development set out within this Plans Spatial Strategy for the town centre of Wigston and 
the district centre of Oadby has been subject to viability testing, so have the Area  Action 
Plan masterplans. All have been found to be deliverable and viable. Upon adoption of this 
Plan, the Town Centres Area Action Plan will be titled the ‘Area Action Plan Guidance’ 
document.  
9.1.5  With the help of European Regional Development Fund con tributions, the Council, recently, 
has been able to undertake extensive public realm improvement works in the town centre of 
Wigston and the district centre of Oadby. The works have been successful in not only 
improving the aesthetics of each centre, but h as also contributed towards increasing 
shopper dwell time as well as economic spend. Throughout this Plan period and beyond, 
the Council will continue to seek ongoing improvements to the public realm in each of the 
three key centres, as well as each of the  local centres.  
9.1.6  The NPPF suggests that in producing development plans, local planning authorities should, 
in addition to defining the extent of the town centres and the primary shopping area, define 
primary and secondary frontages within designated c entres, and set policies that make 
clear which uses will be permitted in such locations. The NPPF glossary indicates that 
primary frontages are likely to include a high proportion of retail uses which may include 
food and drink, clothing and household good s. Secondary frontages provide greater 
opportunities for a diversity of uses such as restaurants, cinemas and businesses.  
9.1.7  The NPPF also sets out the following definition:   
100 | P a g e  
 Primary Shopping Area  
‘Defined area where retail development is concentrated ( generally comprising the primary and 
those secondary frontages which are adjoining and closely related to the primary shopping 
frontage)’.  
9.1.8  The NPPF requires planning policies for town centres to be positive, promote competitive 
town centre environmen ts and set out policies for the management and growth of the 
centres over the plan period.  
9.1.9  With regard to the location for new retail, leisure and other town centre uses (as defined in 
the NPPF), the Council will adopt the ‘sequential approach’ as se t out in the NPPF. For 
retail, leisure and other town centre use development the first preference is town, district or 
local centre sites, (where suitable sites are available), followed by edge -of-centre sites, and 
only then out -of-centre sites will be con sidered. The edge -of-centre and out -of centre sites 
should be highly accessible by all means of transport, particularly walking and cycling and 
be well connected to the town, district or local centre, as a preference location.  
9.1.10  Paragraph 23 of the NP PF states that planning authorities should define the extent of the 
primary shopping areas based on a clear definition of primary and secondary frontages in 
designated centres. The primary shopping areas for Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston 
centres, as wel l as the primary and secondary shopping frontages are illustrated on the 
Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
101 | P a g e  
 Primary Shopping Frontages  
9.2.1  The prime function of the town centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston  is as 
shopping locations. To maintain a vibrant and successful core to the centres, it is important 
to maintain a high proportion of retail units.  Too many non -A1 retail uses within the town 
and district centres, especially in the primary shopping areas will compromise the retail 
function of the town by diluting the overall supply of retail floor space. Thus, the Council has 
specified retail percentages in planning policy for each of the key centres within the 
Borough, and will always seek to adhere to th is policy approach. However, it is 
acknowledged that there may be circumstances where more of a mix of uses within such 
locations could have positive impacts; but any proposal would need to contribute towards 
and enhance the vitality and viability of the c entre.  For example A2, A3, A4, D1 and D2 
uses including cafes, restaurants, bars, community centres, libraries, and council offices 
could demonstrate significant regeneration benefits.  In these cases, a robust and 
evidenced argument will need to be put f orward that will justify the proposal in regeneration 
terms and prove the contribution that it will make to the vitality and viability of the centre.  
Simply filling a vacant A1 unit ‘because it is empty’ would not be a robust enough reason to 
diverge from  planning policy.  
9.2.2  Whilst the principle of the policy remains the same for each town, the percentages are 
different to reflect the baseline position as surveyed in 2016. This is shown in detail in the 
table below.   
The Oadby and Wigston Retail Capac ity Study (2016) identified that 69% of primary frontages 
within Wigston were in A1 retail use and 60% in Oadby.  
Type of Uses  Wigston 
Primary 
Frontage   Oadby 
Primary 
Frontage   National 
Average  
 No. of units  Percentage  No. of units  Percentage  Percentage  
A1 Use  67 69 %  52 60 %  57 %  
A2 Use  12 13 %  15 17 %  12 %  
A3, A4, A5  6 6 % 12 14 %  20 %  
Other Uses  2 2 % 3 4 % - 
Vacant  10 10 %  4 5 % 9 % 
Total  97 100 %  86 100 %   
* Data extracted from Experian Goad Plans and site surveys detailed in the Council’s Retail Capacity study  
9.2.3  With future redevelopment it may be necessary to review the primary frontages to ensure 
that they reflect appropriately new development and ma intain the right levels of retail and 
non-retailer occupancy within these areas.  
9.2.4  Through the annual monitoring process the Council will track the A1 percentages to ensure 
that the primary frontage policy is performing and is appropriate. Primary fron tages are 
defined on the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.  
Policy 27  Primary Shopping Frontages  
At ground floor level the primary shopping frontages in the Borough’s town and district centres are 
identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies Map. To ensure th at retail (A1) remains the primary 
use within the primary shopping frontages, development will only be permitted for non -A1 uses in 
the following circumstances:   
102 | P a g e  
 - Where at least 70 per cent of all units within the primary frontages in Wigston  town centre 
are in A1 use;  
- Where at least 90 per cent of all units within the primary frontage in Bell Street (Wigston) 
are in A1 use;  
- Where at least 65 per cent of all units within the primary frontages in Oadby district centre 
are in A1 use; and  
- Where no more than three consecutive units are in non A1 use within any primary frontage.  
For the district centre of South Wigston, development will only be permitted for non A1 uses where 
no more than three consecutive units are in non A1 use within the di strict centre boundary.  
For clarity, in defining three consecutive units, interruptions such as roads are not taken into 
account. All of the units situated within a primary frontage (or centre boundary in case of South 
Wigston) are seen as continuous.  
Proposals that do not conform to these requirements will not be permitted unless significant 
regeneration benefits can be robustly demonstrated and evidenced.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
103 | P a g e  
 Secondary Shopping Frontages  
9.3.1  Secondary shopping frontages provide opportunities for a higher proportion of non -retail 
uses which support and complement the predominately retail function of the primary 
frontages. Through this policy the Council, promotes a mix of uses within secondary 
shopping frontages, especially those non -retail uses that provide services which 
complement retail. Whilst seeking to promote a mix of uses, the Council will still ensure that 
the retail character and function of its main centres is preserved by still havi ng a good 
proportion of A1 units present within its secondary shopping frontages and within its local 
shopping areas.  
9.3.2  Secondary frontages need to accommodate a range of commercial uses, for example 
banks and buildings societies and other services th at contribute to a successful town 
centre.  They, together with primary frontages, need to accommodate other uses such as 
cafes and bars which will help diversify the town, making it a more welcoming shopping 
destination as well as increasing dwell times.   
9.3.3  The over concentration of similar facilities within the retail areas can have a detrimental 
impact on the town, for example a row of bars or takeaways that may have noise, anti -
social behaviour and traffic implications. The Council will managed suc h by taking a 
pragmatic approach to the location of similar uses.  
9.3.4  Most secondary frontages mark the outer edges of a town or district centre and can sit 
alongside residential property. The protection of existing residential amenity (or amenity of 
proposed new residential development) should be taken into consideration when making 
any new planning application.  
9.3.5  With future redevelopment it may be necessary to review the secondary frontages to 
ensure that they reflect new development opportunitie s and they maintain the right balance 
of retail and non -retail occupancy within the Borough’s key centres.   
9.3.6  Through annual monitoring the Council will audit the uses located within secondary 
frontages.  
Policy 28  Secondary Shopping Frontages  
At the g round floor level of secondary frontages, as identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies 
Map, planning permission will be granted for class A1, A2, B1, D1 and D2 uses.  Use classes A3, 
A4 and A5 will also be permitted provided that they do not adversely i mpact upon the vitality and 
viability of the town as a whole.  Where proposals would result in an over -concentration of similar 
uses that would harm vitality, viability, local amenity, including residential amenity, or safety, 
planning permission will not be granted.  
The Council will not permit any of the uses mentioned above if a proposal meant that there were 
three or more of the same uses in a consecutive row.  
For clarity, in defining a consecutive row, interruptions such as roads are not taken into acc ount. All 
of the units situated within a secondary frontage are seen as continuous.  
 
  
104 | P a g e  
 Town Centre Boundaries  
9.4.1  National policy and guidance, as well as this Plan seek to encourage ‘town centre use’ 
development within the town centre boundary of Wigston  and the district centre boundaries 
of Oadby and South Wigston. Focusing opportunities within the core of the town and district 
centres, with a balance of development types including retail, commercial, leisure, 
residential, civic and public realm, will en sure the centres function for longer during the day. 
This will be achieved through town centre living, increased footfall and more attractive 
centres. Increasing the number of people that live and visit the centres, will not only 
positively affect the loca l economy, but will also improve security; through natural 
surveillance.  
9.4.2  The concentration of development within the town and district centre boundaries will 
promote the vitality and viability of the town and district centres and sustainable 
communi ties.  
9.4.3  Through the retail capacity work that Nathaniel Lichfield undertook, the existing town and 
district centre boundaries were reviewed. The review illustrated that no change was 
required to the existing town and district centre boundaries.  
9.4.4  The town and district centre boundaries will therefore continue to be drawn tightly. This will 
deliver a well defined focussed core that contains the majority of existing and proposed 
town centre use floor space.  This also ensures that any retail developm ent on the edge of 
the centres that could undermine the vitality and viability of the centres - and therefore 
achievement of the spatial objectives and the vision - is resisted.  
Policy 29  Town and District Centre Boundaries  
This Plan sets tight boundaries for the centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston to ensure 
that ‘town centre uses’ are focussed and are within close proximity to one another.  Retail, leisure, 
commercial and other town centre use proposals will be direc ted as appropriate towards primary 
and secondary frontages and allocated sites for development.  
The town and district centre boundaries are illustrated on the Adopted Policies Map.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
105 | P a g e  
 Other Areas within the Town and District Centre Boundaries but be yond the Primary 
and Secondary Frontages  
9.5.1  These areas are in predominantly residential use and therefore change of use to residential 
is likely to be acceptable in principle subject to other policies in this Plan and national policy 
and guidance.  Sig nificant change from this residential character is likely to harm residential 
amenity and should therefore be discouraged.  Whether a development is considered 
significant in its impact will depend on its context.  The focus for all commercial 
development should be the core of the town or district centre, i.e. primary and secondary 
frontages, and the allocated sites.  
9.5.2  The masterplans for the town and district centres clearly define key areas for development 
and how these will contribute towards meeting  approximate levels of development. Allowing 
significant development (i.e. major applications) outside of these areas may compromise 
the ability of implementing the masterplans and should therefore be resisted unless the 
applicant can fully justify their p osition to a standard which is acceptable to the Council and 
can demonstrate why it cannot be located within the areas for redevelopment.  
9.5.3  If ‘town centre use’ development does occur within areas currently defined as ‘other areas 
within the town centr e boundary’ or within land areas allocated for town and district centre 
redevelopment / development, their development will result in their ground floor uses 
becoming part of the primary and secondary frontages, the frontages illustrated on the 
Adopted Pol icies Map will be amended to reflect this.  
9.5.4  Development proposed anywhere within the town or district centre boundary that 
compromises the fulfilment of masterplans and/or Local Development Orders will not be 
permitted.  
Policy 30  Other Areas within th e Town and District Centre Boundary but beyond 
the Primary and Secondary Frontages  
Within the town and district centre boundaries but beyond the primary and secondary frontages, 
proposals for change of use to residential will be considered favourably.  Proposals for other 
appropriate town centre uses such as offices or community faciliti es will also be considered 
favourably.  
Proposals for change of use of buildings to uses that would be better located within the core of the 
town centre (particularly A1 retail uses) must demonstrate why they cannot be located within a 
primary or secondary  frontage, and will only be granted planning permission if it can be 
demonstrated to a standard which is acceptable to the Council that they will not result in any harm 
to the vitality and viability of the town, as well as local amenity considerations.  
Significant development proposals within these areas that could contribute to the delivery of the 
masterplans and Local Development Orders that are not situated on allocated land will have to 
justify to a standard which is acceptable to the Council why they are not located in allocated areas. 
Any development proposals that compromise the fulfilment of the masterplans and / or Local 
Development Orders will not be permitted.  
Where appropriate, the ecological value of proposed sites for development and opportuni ties for 
habitat enhancement should be sought.   
  
106 | P a g e  
 Use of Upper Floors within the centres of Wigston, Oadby and South Wigston  
9.6.1  The active use of upper floors of town and district centre properties, which are often left 
vacant or used inefficiently to s upport ground floor uses, can contribute towards the vitality 
and viability of the town centre.  Suitable uses can include office space and residential use. 
Applications for taxi offices at upper floor will be subject to the relevant taxi policy.  
9.6.2  Proposals for change of use will be subject to other Local Plan policy requirements, and 
key considerations will include achieving safe and appropriate access and servicing to the 
upper floors whilst not compromising design and safety at ground floor levels.  Any 
entrances at ground floor within the primary or secondary frontage will need to be of a high 
standard of the design and not be a blank frontage.  
Policy 31  Use of Upper Floors within the Centres of Wigston, Oadby and South 
Wigston  
Proposals for the cha nge of use of floorspace above ground floor level to residential, office and 
other appropriate services or community uses, which contribute to the centre’s vitality and viability, 
will be considered favourably.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
107 | P a g e  
 Shop Fronts  
9.7.1  For the purpose of this policy ‘shop fronts’ refer to any unit falling within Use Class A1, A2, 
A3, A4, A5, D1 (located in a designated centre), D2 (located in a designated centre) and 
Sui generis (located within a designated centre). New shop fronts shoul d improve the 
appearance of the street scene and should be designed and use materials appropriate to 
the building and the local vicinity. This is relevant to all shop fronts whether it is a building 
within a Conservation Area or a town or district centre o r in neither.   
9.7.2  Corporate branding and signage will not always be appropriate and in sensitive locations 
(for example within and adjoining Conservation Areas) applicants will be encouraged to use 
alternative designs and approaches that are in keeping  with the local area. The colours 
used for shop fronts should be consistent with the local area in which it is located and 
should not be stark in contrast.  
9.7.3  In order to ensure a high standard of shop front design, all proposals will require detailed 
elevation drawings of the proposed shop front (to include shutter detail if required in 
accordance with the policy sets out in this Plan) in relation to the building within which it is 
to be located, as well as showing adjacent shop fronts and buildings for  contextual 
purposes.  
9.7.4  Retention of facades above shop fronts or shop fronts as a whole that are considered to be 
of high quality, or have special, architectural or historic interest will be encouraged, 
especially within Conservation Areas.  Further guidance is set out in the Borough Council’s 
Conservation Areas Supplementary Planning Document.  
9.7.5  Whilst the attractiveness of a building should not be compromised, consideration should be 
given to natural surveillance and safety and security when de signing new shop fronts.  This 
also applies to the size and height of any canopies which should not compromise 
pedestrian or vehicular safety or visibility.   
9.7.6  Many premises such as banks and betting shops, and some A1 units, may have blank 
frontages which can be unattractive in the street scene, and such proposals will not be 
permitted.  All commercial premises within the centre will need to present well designed, 
attractive, open, active and welcoming frontages to help contribute to the vitality and 
viability of the centre.  
9.7.7  Cafes, restaurants and bars may seek space on the pavement for tables and chairs.  Such 
use requires planning permission and a licence from the Council and / or Highways 
Authority.  In many parts of the town and district cen tres this will be wholly appropriate and 
encouraged, for example on wide pavements (such as in Oadby) and in pedestrianised 
areas such as Bell street in Wigston, as these will add to the centres vitality. The role of the 
public highway is to allow the publ ic to pass and re -pass and this principle along with safety 
considerations will be key in determining applications accordingly.  
Policy 32  Shop Fronts  
Proposals for the installation or replacement of shop fronts will be assessed against the following 
criter ia:   
108 | P a g e  
 - All proposals should improve the appearance, and be designed within the scale and 
architectural character, of the building within which they are located and the local 
vernacular.  
- All shop fronts should remain within their existing structural open ings and be framed with 
fascia signs.  
- Adjacent shop fronts should be separated by a pilaster, matching the building. Original 
pilasters should be retained where they exist and where practicable. All original features, 
such as iron columns, timber, ornam ental brackets or carved stonework, will be preserved 
or restored where practicable.  
- All canopies should be retractable and sited below the fascia.  
- All shop fronts must present an open and active frontage to the street.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
109 | P a g e  
 Security Shutters  
9.8.1  Security shutters can be an integral feature to building security.  However, if poorly 
designed, they can also have a detrimental impact on the street scene by the creation of 
blank and ‘dead’ frontages. Shutters that are partially transpare nt can help maintain an 
element of openness to the street scene.    
9.8.2  External shutters and shutter housing in Conservation Areas unless designed appropriately 
can have a significant detrimental effect. The effect can be on the appearance, the integrity 
of the buildings themselves (there may be cases where locating shutters externally may be 
more appropriate to ensure that the integrity of listed buildings or buildings within 
conservation areas is retained) and also the character of the area and as such should be 
carefully and sensitively designed to ensure that any such nega tive impact is avoided.  
Reference should be made to the Borough Council’s Conservation Areas Supplementary 
Planning Document accordingly.   
9.8.3  Shutters that sit behind the main glazed frontage and behind the fascia will be actively 
encouraged as these are less intrusive and can help to maintain a higher quality 
appearance.  
Policy 33  Security Shutters  
In order to avoid the potential negative impacts of the appearance of security shutters (including 
roller shutters), all proposals that require their insta llation will be assessed against the following 
criteria:  
- The applicant must satisfy the Council that the type of security shutter they are proposing is 
the most appropriate for the locale in which it is situated.  
- Shutters should not obscure any archit ectural detail or historic interest.  
- Shutter boxes should, wherever possible, be hidden within the structure of the building or 
behind shop fascias, so as not to affect the character and architecture of the building.  
- Shutters must be perforated with n o more than 60% of the shutter being solid.  
- Shutters should be colour powder coated or painted, or stainless steel.  
Special consideration will be given to the installation of shutters in Conservation Areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
110 | P a g e  
 Car Parking  
9.9.1  The Leicestershire County Council ‘6C’s Design Guide sets out variety of design guidance 
relating to travel including car parking standards to promote sustainable communities.  
9.9.2  The PPG states that local authorities should seek to improve the quality of parking in town 
centres so that it is convenient, safe and secure, including appropriate provision for 
motorcycles and bicycles. The guidance also suggests that appropriate parking charges 
should be set that do not undermine the vitality of town centres .  
9.9.3  The PPG recommends that if setting local parking standards for residential and non -
residential development, local planning authorities should take into account:  
- the accessibility of the development;  
- the type, mix and use of development;  
- the availa bility of and opportunities for public transport;  
- local car ownership levels; and  
- an overall need to reduce the use of high -emission vehicles.  
9.9.4  The availability of car parking in key areas and centres has a major influence on the choice 
of means of tr ansport.  
9.9.5  For all new car parking development, (in addition to requirements of high quality design and 
security and appropriate proportions of disabled and motorcycle parking spaces), electric 
charging points should be introduced for an agreed number of spaces to encourage 
electrical vehicle use. The technology should also be future proofed to ensure that further 
parking spaces can be converted in the future.   
9.9.6  All new car parks should include secure motorcycle and bicycle parking provision close  to 
their main entrances.   
9.9.7  The quality of car parking is imperative to the success of the Borough’s centres. Car 
parking should therefore be provided in accordance with adopted standard sets out by the 
Leicestershire 6 C’s Design Guide.  
9.9.8  It is important to maintain the right balance between providing sufficient parking spaces and 
encouraging access by alternative modes of transport to the private car, especially 
considering the town and district centre locations and the relative ease of access t o a 
choice of travel mode and ranges of facilities and services within walking distance.   
9.9.9  All proposals will be expected to be supported by evidence that justifies the associated 
parking provision accordingly.  
9.9.10  New car parks will also be expe cted to be supported by a management and security regime 
to a standard which is acceptable to the Borough Council and the Local Highway Authority 
with evidence either at application stage or required through a condition(s).  
Policy 34  Car Parking  
The Counci l will ensure that there is adequate provision of car parking spaces and facilities across 
the Borough. All new development proposals will be required to provide car parking and servicing 
space in accordance with the parking standards set out in the Leices tershire 6 C’s Design Guide 
(or equivalent).    
111 | P a g e  
 The parking standards should be seen as a guide for developers and any variation from these 
standards should be supported by robust evidence in the form of a transport statement.  Where 
appropriate, some flexi bility could be factored into the standards in relation to the specific local 
circumstances.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
112 | P a g e  
 Taxis  
9.10.1  Taxis offer a valuable contribution to a choice of travel mode and for many are vital modes 
of travel. However, their control offices are could be operational 24 hours a day and waiting 
vehicles and customers can have significant noise, pollution and traff ic generation impacts 
which can be to the detriment of neighbouring uses, especially when located in a residential 
area. These impacts will be carefully considered as part of the evaluation of any taxi rank or 
taxi office proposals.  
9.10.2  Proposals for a  private hire waiting area in the centre of Wigston and or the centres of 
Oadby and / or South Wigston would be supported where a need is demonstrated.  
Policy 35  Taxis  
Proposals for the use of premises for the control and administration of hackney carriages or private 
hire vehicles will be considered against the following criteria:  
- The proximity of the site to the core of the town or district centre.  
- The impact on any premises within the vicinity of the site, in particular those in residential 
 use. 
- The ability of the local highway network to accommodate the additional traffic generated.  
- The availability of off -street parking provision within close proximity to the site for all 
vehicles to be operated from the base.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
113 | P a g e  
 Hot Food Takeaways  
9.11.1  Hot food takeaways can contribute to both daytime and evening economies of town 
centres, district centres and local centres, but could also generate a range of detrimental 
impacts including anti -social behaviour, litter, highway safety con cerns and impacts upon 
upper floor uses. This policy seeks to minimise such impacts, whilst acknowledging the 
contribution that hot food takeaways can make. For the purposes of this policy hot food 
takeaways refer specifically to Use Class A5 as define wit hin the Town and Country 
Planning Use Classes Order.  
9.11.2  All proposals will be expected to include details of extraction including its design, because 
in many cases, external extraction such as vents and chimneys can have significant 
detrimental impact s on the overall design as well as local character. Design, including 
extraction will be considered as part of the planning application itself and not be a 
requirement of a planning condition(s).  
Policy 36   Hot Food Takeaways  
To avoid the potential signifi cant adverse impact of hot food takeaways, all such proposals will be 
assessed against the following criteria:  
- Any proposal for a hot food takeaway, particularly a change of use from an existing A1 use, 
will be assessed for its impact on the vitality and  viability of the frontage or block of units of 
which it forms part of. Any proposal which is likely to damage the primary retail function of a 
block or frontage will not be permitted.  
- Where hot food takeaways are already present within the vicinity, the  cumulative effect / 
impact of any proposal will be taken into account. Where a number of takeaways occur that 
are already causing problems in terms of unacceptable traffic generation and deterioration 
in the amenity of the area, planning permission will n ot be permitted if the proposal will 
increase the nuisance.  
- In all cases, account will be taken of the effects of the proposal on the amenity of the area, 
with particular regard to the proposed opening hours, the impact of noise, public health, 
disturban ce, design (including ventilation), smell and litter, traffic generation, parking 
problems and highway safety.  
Where significant adverse effects are likely to occur, the proposal will not be permitted.  
In some cases there may be circumstances where any adv erse impacts or effects of a proposal 
could be reduced by the introduction of conditions personal to that permission. Where this is not 
possible, permission will not be permitted.  
Any proposal for a hot food takeaway will be subject to other local planning  policies within this 
Plan.  
 
 
 
  
114 | P a g e  
 Chapter Ten – Protected Places  
Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
10.1.1  The Borough of Oadby and Wigston  has a number of nationally and locally designated sites 
including Regionally Important Geological Sites (RIGS), Sites of Special Scientific Interest 
(SSSI) and other valuable wildlife sites. These areas are invaluable to the Borough and will 
be protected from development. Any development proposals that have a significant 
negative impact on important areas or result in significant habitat loss within the Borough 
will not be permitted for development. If a development proposal has a less significant 
impact t hat can be mitigated through appropriate mitigation measures, for example habitat 
re-creation, the proposal will not be refused from the outset and discussion will take place 
between the applicant, the Council and other external stakeholders, for example t he 
Woodland Trust, the Environment Agency and Natural England.  
10.1.2  Local Wildlife Sites (LWS), Candidate Local Wildlife Sites (cLWS) and Potential Local 
Wildlife Sites (pLWS) are non -statutory designated sites that occur within the Borough 
which have b een designated due to the significance of the species and habitats present.  
10.1.3  Much of the biodiversity in the Borough exists on undesignated sites or non -priority 
habitats. However, the biodiversity value of these sites will be appropriately considere d in 
all planning proposals and decisions, commensurate with their relative ecological status.  
10.1.4  A number of legally protected species and their habitats occur throughout the Borough. 
Where there is a reasonable likelihood that protected species, or the habitats upon which 
they depend, may be affected by a development proposal, planning applications will not be 
validated until survey information has been submitted that shows the presence (or 
otherwise) and extent of the species or habitat that may be impacted.  
10.1.5  With trees not only providing habitats for local wildlife, but also improving the health and 
well being of its residents and visitors, they will be protected where appropriate to do so. 
The Council will not allow any development proposal that has a detrimental impact on 
veteran trees or ancient woodland, without proper discussion with the Woodland Trust. Any 
development proposals that require mitigation will be required to submit the mitigation 
proposals to the Council and get them approve d by the Council and the Woodland Trust.  
10.1.6  All proposals for new development will need to comply with the recommendations as set 
out in the Council’s Extended Phase One Habitat Survey, as well as the relevant national 
policies and those set out in thi s Plan. Policy guidance set out within the Landscape 
Character Assessment will also need to be taken account of within any development 
proposal, as there will be important landscape features noted within the document that will 
need conserving and enhancing . 
Policy 37  Biodiversity and Geodiversity  
The Council will look to support development proposals that proactively seek a net gain and:  
- Conserve, protect and enhance biodiversity and geodiversity through minimising loss of 
valued features in the landscape , such as, hedgerows, woodland, trees, ponds and 
wetland.  
- Conserve and protect irreplaceable woodland, such as ancient woodland or veteran trees.   
115 | P a g e  
 - Mitigate for any loss of valuable assets through applying measures for reinstatement, 
replacement or on/of f site compensatory work that will enhance or recreate those habitats 
in circumstances when loss of the original habitat is unavoidable through development; 
and, 
- Explore opportunities to restore, enhance, create or connect with established natural 
habita ts as an integral feature of the proposed scheme.  
Where development will have known detrimental impacts or cause lasting harm to the natural 
habitats in that location, where appropriate, the Council will seek to compensate for that loss 
through effective conditions in the planning decision or by seeking developer contributions to 
contribute towards off site mitigation measures.  
Working in collaboration with developers, as well as local and national agencies with ecological 
and geological expertise, the Co uncil will seek to identify, conserve, protect and enhance natural 
assets, so that habitats and species can thrive and help to create rich biodiversity within the 
Borough for future generations to enjoy.  
The Council will also seek to protect trees with Tre e Preservation Orders associated to them. All 
proposals should also take account of the guidance set out in the Council’s Tree Strategy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
116 | P a g e  
 Climate Change, Flood Risk and Renewable Low Carbon Energy  
10.2.1  In accordance with the Borough’s Spatial Strategy, new developments should be seeking 
innovative ideas to be more sustainable and also, wherever possible, they should be 
located within sustainable locations where there is greater access to services and adequate 
public transport.  
10.2.2  Climate change is a global problem requiring local action. This Plan will provide the 
platform for Oadby and Wigston Borough Council to address the issue through strategic 
planning over the Plan period. The Council will strive to deliver meaningful developme nt 
and land uses that contribute towards the Government’s targets to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and increase electricity production from renewable resources.  
10.2.3  Paragraph 93 of the NPPF states that:  
‘Planning plays a key role in helping shape pla ces to secure radical reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions, minimising vulnerability and providing resilience to the impacts of climate change, and 
supporting the delivery of renewable and low carbon energy and associated infrastructure. This is 
central to the economic, social and environmental dimensions of sustainable development’.  
10.2.4  The Council, together with all public and private sector agencies, has a responsibility to 
plan for and implement a strategic approach that will:  
- Ensure new developmen ts adapt to, and mitigate for, the potential impact of climate change 
upon the natural and built environment;  
- Increase the energy efficiency of all new developments and major refurbishment, thus 
reducing carbon emissions; and,  
- Proactively seek to utilise m ore renewable and low carbon energy solutions within the 
Borough.  
10.2.5  The proactive management of flood risk is one of the most important ways of managing the 
predicted more intensive rainfall and other extreme weather events as a result of climate 
change. Some potential impacts of climate change that would have an effect of the 
Borough’s water environment include:  
- Increased flood risk due to wetter winters and more frequent destructive storms;  
- Strain on water availability due to drier, longer summers; and 
- Expectation that rain storms will be heavier and more prolonged. Where heavy rain cannot 
be absorbed fast enough by land this leads to localised flooding and potential flash floods.  
10.2.6  The Council’s Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (2014) was prepared in liaison with the 
Environment Agency and in accordance with the requirements of the NPPF. The aim of the 
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment is to provide sufficient information for the applic ation of 
the Sequential Test and to identify whether application of the Exception Test is likely to be 
necessary. The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment involves a broad scale assessment of 
areas at risk of flooding within the Borough, be it fluvial or other forms of flooding and 
includes advice on sustainable drainage techniques and other flood risk solutions. The 
study also predicts likely increased flooding risk in these areas due to climate change.  
10.2.7  Within the Borough there are two main occurrences of Flood Zone 2 and 3; one along the 
River Sence corridor (which is a tributary of the River Soar), adjacent to the Grand Union 
Canal to the south of the Borough; and, one along The Wash Brook corridor which flows  
117 | P a g e  
 west to east between north Wigston and Oad by. There is one further occurrence along the 
Evington Brook corridor north of Oadby and Stoughton Grange. The Strategic Flood Risk 
Assessment has helped inform the spatial development strategy for the Borough and is the 
basis on which the Sequential and E xception Tests will be applied.  
10.2.8  A site -specific flood risk assessment is required for; proposals of 1 hectare or greater in 
Flood Zone 1; all proposals for new development (including minor development and change 
of use) in Flood Zones 2 and 3, or i n an area within Flood Zone 1 which has critical 
drainage problems (as notified to the local planning authority by the Environment Agency); 
and, where proposed development or a change of use to a more vulnerable class may be 
subject to other sources of flo oding.  
10.2.9  Appropriate management of the natural environment and major watercourses in the 
Borough such as the Grand Union Canal and River Sence corridor is essential to help 
reduce flood risk. The creation of new habitats, the planting of appropriate t rees, and the 
creation of new woodland will be sought as they can help reduce the danger of both fluvial 
and surface water flooding.  
10.2.10 The Strategic Flood Risk Assessment offers guidance on how to manage the floodplains in 
the Borough.  
Policy 38  Climate Change, Flood Risk and Renewable Low Carbon Energy  
New development proposals in the Borough will need to achieve nationally prescribed sustainable 
building standards for energy efficiency; take into account the potential risks and impacts of climate 
change; and, seek to ensure that the prospect of flood risk is minimised through appropriate 
mitigation measures.  
Climate Change  
The Council will expect all development proposals to make use of sustainable resources and seek 
to reduce their impact upon cli mate change by meeting high standards of sustainable design and 
construction.  
The Council will also expect all major -scale planning applications, including refurbishments (11 or 
more residential units or 1,000+ square metres of floor area) to be accompani ed by a Sustainability 
/ Energy Statement demonstrating how (potential) harmful emissions will be reduced by addressing 
issues, including:  
- Energy efficiency;  
- Water conservation;  
- Sourcing of construction materials;  
- Giving consideration to site orien tation aspects of a scheme;  
- Promoting sustainable means of transport;  
- Sustainable waste management solutions (during and post -construction); and,  
- The feasibility of integrating renewable energy solutions into the development.   
118 | P a g e  
 The level of detail re quired will depend upon the scale and complexity of the application and will be 
determined through collaboration with the Council.  
Flood Risk  
New development proposals in the Borough should take into account the potential impact of 
climate change on water  resources, water quality and on the level of flood risk posed, as detailed 
in the Council’s latest Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) and by the Environment Agency.  
Development in areas that would be at risk from flooding should be avoided unless it can be 
demonstrated that:  
- Appropriate land at lower risk is not available (and this has been evidenced through the 
application of the National Planning Policy Framework Sequential Test);  
- There are national policies or other material considerations permitting development of that 
nature on land with a high risk of flooding;  
- There are exceptional reasons for development to take place in that location; and,  
- The localised and cumulative risk of flooding can be fully mitigated through careful design 
and engineering methods.  
A detailed Flood Risk Assessment will be required for all development proposals greater than 1 
hectare in size situated within a Flood Zone 1 and all development proposals regardless of size 
situated in Flood Zone 2 or 3, or in an area within Flood Zone 1 which has critical drainage 
problems. The assessment should identify the necessary mitigation and adaptation measures 
which should:  
- Aim to avoid or reduce the risk of flooding and harm from it by ensuring the sequential 
approach has been taken and the development is safe for the lifetime of the development 
and will not increase flood risk to others;  
- Where appropriate, include suitable habitat creation and not cause detriment to existing 
habitats and species; and  
- Demonstrate ho w such measures form an intrinsic part of the overall development.  
Development should proactively manage surface water run -off through the promotion of 
sustainable drainage techniques and positive land management, including the use of permeable 
surfacing.  
Development of previously developed sites should be accompanied by a desktop study to identify 
any potential contamination. If there is potential for contamination to be present on site, further 
more detailed investigation will be required to ensure that contaminants are not mobilised through 
development and enter groundwater supplies or watercourses.  
Renewable / Low Carbon Energy  
Unless it can be demonstrated by an applicant not to be feasible or viable, all developments 
greater than 1 hectare in size wil l be required to incorporate on -site renewable energy generation 
or on -site provision of buildings that reduce the need for non renewable energy use.   
119 | P a g e  
 The Council will provide support for renewable or low -carbon energy schemes, subject to the 
following cons iderations:  
- The degree to which the scale and nature of a proposal impacts on the landscape, 
particularly having regard to the Borough’s Landscape Character Assessment;  
- The degree to which the proposal has demonstrated any environmental, economic and 
social benefits of a scheme as well as how any environmental or social impacts have been 
minimised (e.g. visual, noise or smell);  
- The impact on designated sites on European, national and local biodiversity and geological; 
and, 
- The impact on the amenity  of residents and other interests of acknowledged importance, 
including the historic environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
120 | P a g e  
 Sustainable Drainage and Surface Water  
10.3.1  Traditional drainage is designed to move surface water run -off as rapidly as possible to a 
discharge point; either a watercourse or soak away. This approach has a number of 
harmful effects because run -off from impermeable surfaces can increase the risk of flooding 
downstream, as well as causing sudden rises in water levels and flow rates in 
wate rcourses. In addition, by diverting rainfall to piped systems, water does not soak into 
the ground, depleting ground water and reducing flows in watercourses in dry weather.  
10.3.2  Surface water run -off can contain contaminants such as oil, organic matter and toxic 
metals. Although often at low levels, cumulatively they can result in poor water quality in 
rivers and groundwater, affecting biodiversity, amenity value and potential water 
abstraction. After heavy rain, the initial run -off is often highly pollu ting. 
10.3.3  The theory that sits behind Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) is that they seek to 
replicate the natural movement of water from a development by reducing flood risk, 
improving water quality and often create desirable features that can make t owns and cities 
more attractive places to live in by enhancing the quality of life. In addition, the European 
Water Framework Directive requires careful management of water resources through 
sustainable protection of water quality. SuDS offer an interestin g and cost effective solution 
in delivering the Directive’s requirements.  
10.3.4  According to the PPG:  
‘Sustainable drainage systems are designed to control surface water run -off close to where it falls 
and mimic natural drainage as closely as possible. T hey provide opportunities to:  
- Reduce the causes and impacts of flooding;  
- Remove pollutants from urban run -off at source; and,  
- Combine water management with green space with benefits for amenity, recreation and 
wildlife’.  
10.3.5  As well as the provision of SuDS, the creation of new habitats, the planting of appropriate 
trees, and the creation of new woodland will be sought as they can also help reduce the 
danger of both fluvial and surface water flooding.  
Policy 39  Sustainable Dra inage and Surface Water  
The Council will expect all proposals, including refurbishments (11 or more residential units or 
1,000+ square metres of floor area) to incorporate appropriate Sustainable Drainage Systems in 
accordance with the latest National Stan dards for Sustainable Drainage Systems and in agreement 
with the Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) for Leicestershire.  
All schemes should be informed by specific catchment and ground characteristics, and they will be 
required to consider wider ranging iss ues relating to long -term management, adoption and 
maintenance of SuDS.  
Where development proposals are received in areas known to be susceptible to surface water 
flooding issues, appropriate management and mitigation schemes will be required.   
Developer s will be encouraged to submit proposals that incorporate solutions to reduce the risk of 
flooding from the outset.   
121 | P a g e  
 Culture and Historic Environment Assets  
10.4.1  The NPPF requires local authorities to “set out in their Local Plan a positive strategy for t he 
conservation and enjoyment of the historic environment”.  As well as conservation, the 
Council recognises that there will be opportunities to enhance the historic character of the 
Borough through well managed and well designed developments.  
10.4.2  The c onservation and the sensitive re -use of significant assets in regeneration and 
development proposals can act as an important catalyst, adding significant social, 
economic and environmental value, as well as contributing positively to the quality and 
charac ter of new development in the Borough.  
10.4.3  Listed buildings are of national importance, representing the best of our historic and 
architectural built heritage. The Borough of Oadby and Wigston contains 37 listed buildings 
or structures and it is vital that any works affecting them or other buildings of local 
importance is guided by appreciation for their importance. In addition to nationally listed 
buildings, the Borough also has a number of locally significant buildings. The buildings of 
local signific ance are held within a locally derived list (see Appendix 3). The buildings 
contained on this list are also subject to the below policy as well as national planning policy 
and guidance.  
10.4.4  There is a presumption in favour of retaining and preserving bo th nationally listed and 
locally listed buildings and features of architectural or historic interest. In order to do this, 
the best approach is often viewed as securing their future and then keeping them in active 
use.  
Policy 40  Culture and Historic Envir onment Assets  
The Council will seek to conserve and enhance the Borough's unique cultural identity, as well as its 
significant heritage and historic character through the identification and protection of designated 
and non -designated heritage assets.  
The B orough’s heritage assets include:  
- Conservation Areas;  
- Nationally and locally listed buildings and significant monuments;  
- Non-designated heritage assets;  
- The character of the historic cores in the Borough;  
- Landscape features, including ancient woo dlands and veteran trees;  
- Field patterns;  
- Watercourses;  
- Drainage ditches and hedgerows of visual, historic or nature conservation value;  
- Archaeological sites and remains; and,  
- Historic parks and gardens.  
  
122 | P a g e  
 Leicestershire, Leicester and Rutland Historic Landscape Characterisation, as well as the 
Leicestershire and Rutland Historic Environment Record will be taken into account when 
development proposals are being considered. The Council’s Conservation Area Supplementary 
Planning Document and speci fic Conservation Area Appraisals will also be taken account of when 
development proposals are being considered.  
All development proposals should seek to safeguard, conserve or enhance both designated and 
non-designated heritage assets and their settings, a s well as the character and setting of areas of 
acknowledged significance.  
Development should respect and respond proportionately to non -designated heritage assets and 
their settings, where possible, avoiding their loss or damage. The degree of protection afforded to 
a heritage asset will reflect its level of historic value or significance.  
Where development is likely to have a significant adverse impact on designated heritage assets 
and their settings and cannot be avoided or they cannot be preserved in si tu, the development will 
not be permitted, unless there are substantial public benefits, which outweigh that harm or loss.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
123 | P a g e  
 Development in Conservation Areas  
10.5.1  The Council’s Conservation Areas Supplementary Planning Document identifies the 
boundaries for the Borough’s nine Conservation Areas. In addition to this, there is also the 
Grand Union Canal Conservation Area which runs along the route of the Canal from east to 
west in the south of the Borough. This Conservation Area, h owever is County Council 
designated, therefore any development proposals affecting the area would need to take 
account of the relevant policies and guidance that the County Council produce.  
10.5.2  The ten designated Conservation Areas in the Borough are li sted below and are shown on 
the Council’s Adopted Policies Map:  
- All Saints Conservation Area, Wigston  
- London Road and Saint Peters Church Conservation Area, Oadby  
- Midland Cottages Conservation Area, South Wigston  
- North Memorial Homes and Framework Knitters  Conservation Area, Oadby  
- Oadby Court Conservation Area, Oadby  
- Oadby Hill Top and Meadowcourt Conservation Area, Oadby  
- South Wigston Conservation Area, South Wigston  
- Spa Lane Conservation Area, Wigston  
- The Lanes Conservation Area, Wigston  
- The Grand Union C anal Conservation Area, (runs through the south of the Borough, east to 
west)  
10.5.3  Conservation Areas exist to assist the conservation and enhancement of areas of particular 
architectural or historic interest. Legislation requires that special attention is paid to this 
objective in exercising planning control and, therefore, the Borough Council has prepared 
Conservation Area Appraisals and management plans for all of its designated Conservation 
Areas. The character of Conservation Areas is often the produ ct of various elements such 
as the mixture and style of buildings, the extent and form of open spaces and other natural 
elements such as trees and hedges.  
10.5.4  The demolition of buildings within Conservation Areas can have a damaging effect by 
removing s tructures that contribute to their character or leaving unsightly gaps in the built -
up area. Hence, as with listed buildings, it is appropriate to employ a presumption in favour 
of retention. Development will not be permitted if it adversely impacts buildi ngs, open 
spaces or uses which contribute towards the character of a Conservation Area.  
10.5.5  Where a building or space makes little or no contribution to the street scene within a 
Conservation Area and adversely affects the setting of the Conservation Ar ea, demolition or 
redevelopment may be considered appropriate where detailed plans for the site’s 
regeneration are able to demonstrate that the proposed scheme will conserve, protect and 
enhance the character of the area.  
Policy 41  Development in Conserva tion Areas  
The Council will only permit new development in Conservation Areas provided it will conserve and 
enhance the character and prevailing quality of the area.  
Development will not be permitted where: -  
124 | P a g e  
 - Development would prejudice the essential features of the Conservation Area, including 
historic settlement patterns, relationships between buildings, the arrangement of open 
areas and their enclosure, or significant natural or heritage features;  
- The detailed design of proposed buildings, includi ng height, density, mass, layout, 
proportions, or materials would not respect the character of an area;  
- The development would prejudice the setting and surroundings of a Conservation Area or 
spoil the inward or outward views; and,  
- Development would pre judice the local distinctiveness, appearance or the ambience of a 
Conservation Area.  
In order to determine the effect of proposed building and engineering works in Conservation Areas, 
the Council will require the submission of detailed plans and will not g rant outline planning 
permission, unless they contain sufficient supporting information by which the impact of the 
proposed development on the character and appearance of the Conservation Area can be judged.  
At the Council’s discretion, on all major propo sals for developments of 11+ dwellings or 1,000+ 
square metres floor space, the developer may be required to submit additional detailed design 
codes or statements, in accordance with the respective Conservation Area Appraisals, to fully 
demonstrate the imp acts that the proposed scheme will have.  
Demolition in a Conservation Area  
Within Conservation Areas, permission for development involving demolition or substantial 
demolition will not be granted unless it can be demonstrated that:  
- The structure to be d emolished makes no material contribution to the special character or 
appearance of the Conservation Area;  
- The structure is wholly beyond repair or incapable of beneficial use; or  
- The removal of the structure and its subsequent replacement with a new b uilding and/or 
open space would lead to the enhancement of the Conservation Area.  
New Shop Fronts and Advertisements in Conservation Areas  
The Council will not permit new shop fronts or advertisement displays in a Conservation Area 
unless it can be demonst rated that:  
- The proposed design is sympathetic to the character and appearance of the Conservation 
 Area;  
- The proposed design respects the scale, proportions, character and materials of 
construction of the upper part of the relevant building and adjoin ing buildings within the 
street scene in general; or,  
- The proposed approach incorporates traditional materials where the age and character of 
the building makes this appropriate.  
Internally illuminated advertisement fascias or projecting signs will not b e permitted, except in 
exceptional circumstances.   
125 | P a g e  
 The Council will not support applications for additional signs that would result in a proliferation of 
advertisement material on any individual building or group of buildings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
126 | P a g e  
 Green Wedges  
10.6.1  The purpose of the Green Wedges situated within the Borough is to protect important areas 
of open land which influence development form and have a positive effect on people’s 
health and well being. The Green Wedge policy seeks to retain  and where possible 
enhance important areas of open land that meet the criteria, as set out.  
10.6.2  There are currently two Green Wedges situated within the Borough, both of which cross 
administrative boundaries into neighbouring Local Authority areas.  
10.6.3  The Oadby and Wigston Green Wedge spans the administrative boundary with Leicester 
City to the north west. The green wedge in its entirety is just shy of 210 hectares, with the 
Borough’s designation being circa 168 hectares in size and separating th e urban settlement 
areas of Oadby and Wigston entirely. The green wedge runs north west to south east from 
Leicester City out towards the open countryside to the south of Oadby and east of Wigston. 
As well as farm land and open countryside the green wedge comprises of many appropriate 
leisure activity uses including sports grounds and training facilities, a racecourse, a golf 
course and a country park.  
10.6.4  The Oadby, Thurnby and Stoughton Green Wedge is situated to the north east of Oadby 
and crosses adm inistrative boundaries with Leicester City and Harborough District. The 
overall area of the green wedge is circa 467 hectares. The Borough’s designation makes 
up approximately 93 hectares of the total designation size. The area of green wedge that 
lies wit hin the Borough runs from a north west to south easterly direction and begins at the 
Borough boundary close to the B582 Gartree Road and extends out towards the 
countryside to the north of Manor High School in Oadby. Land uses currently situated within 
the Borough’s green wedge area include sports pitches, open fields and a private hospital.  
10.6.5  With the Borough being relatively compact and urban in nature, Green Wedges are 
extremely important; they play major roles in shaping the character of the enviro nment and 
help stimulate leisure and tourism whilst improving residents and visitors quality of life.  
10.6.6  As well as guiding development form and effecting residents positively, Green Wedges are 
key green areas within the Borough’s Green Infrastructure network and support the 
Borough’s biodiversity. The Green Wedges within the Borough act as important strategic 
green infrastructure corridors linking green areas within the urban area to the countryside 
as well as other key strategic green infrastructure c orridors such as the Grand Union Canal 
and railway corridors.  
10.6.7  For the purposes of this Plan the Council has released areas of green wedge to provide 
land for future development. To ensure that the most appropriate areas were released, the 
Council u ndertook a Green Wedge Review, that assessed both of the Borough’s green 
wedges in their entirety against a Leicester and Leicestershire wide agreed methodology.  
10.6.8  Any development proposed that may have an effect on the Green Wedges within the 
Borough  will also need to ensure that it conforms to the policy recommendations as set out 
in the Council’s latest Landscape Character Assessment. All development needs to respect 
the character of its surroundings and should be sympathetic to the local landscape.  
10.6.9  For avoidance of doubt, the green wedge designation boundaries within the Borough are 
identified on the Council’s Adopted Policies Map.   
127 | P a g e  
 Policy 42  Green Wedges  
Green Wedges protect important areas of green land within the Borough and seek to retain these 
areas as open and undeveloped.  
The objectives of all Green Wedges situated within the Borough are to:  
- Prevent the merging of settlements;  
- Guide development form;  
- Provide a ‘green lung’ between the urban area and the countryside; and  
- Act as a  recreational resource.  
Due to the open and undeveloped nature of the Green Wedges, the Council will allow uses that are 
consistent with the following.  
- Agriculture, horticulture and allotments not accompanied by retail development;  
- Outdoor leisure, rec reation and sporting facilities;  
- Forestry and bodies of water;  
- Footpaths, bridleways and cycle ways; and,  
- Burial grounds.  
The Council will support proposals that retain and enhance public access into the Borough’s Green 
Wedges, as well as proposals t hat retain and enhance the role that the Green Wedges play in the 
Borough’s Green Infrastructure Network and its biodiversity.  
Road proposals or dedicated public transport routes within the Borough that are evidenced as 
being required will only be acceptab le where it has been proven that there are no alternative routes 
outside of the Green Wedge. Any proposal that has an effect on the Green Wedge should provide 
appropriate mitigation measures to ensure that any adverse effects on the Green Wedge are kept 
minimal.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
128 | P a g e  
 Countryside  
10.7.1  In line with the Spatial Strategy for the Borough, where possible, development shall 
primarily be focussed within the town and district centres, the Leicester PUA  and Direction 
for Growth areas to minimise development in the countryside. As set out in Chapter 7 of 
this Plan, land previously designated as countryside adjoining the Leicester PUA  will be 
released to accommodate future growth.  
10.7.2  This policy provi des protection against inappropriate development in the countryside and 
establishes the criteria for the types of development that may be appropriate. New 
development in the countryside will only be permitted where a justifiable need can be 
demonstrated co nsistent with the principles set out in paragraph 55 of the NPPF. Where 
development does take place in the countryside, it must be sympathetically designed and 
located so as to provide as little disturbance as possible to the open nature of the 
countryside  and to protect the various Green Infrastructure asset that it supports.  
10.7.3  Although the Borough of Oadby and Wigston is predominantly urban, land to the south and 
east within the local authority boundary plays an important role in providing the reside nts of 
the Borough and the wider Leicester PUA  access to open countryside. The majority of the 
Borough’s population live within the built up areas around the centres of Wigston, Oadby 
and South Wigston. However, it is also imperative that where appropriate , necessary forms 
of development to meet the needs of residents in the more rural areas are supported.  
10.7.4  As a small and predominately urban Borough, the landscape plays a major role in shaping 
the character of our environment, both through stimulating  leisure and tourism and 
supporting the overall ‘quality of life’. The Oadby and Wigston Landscape Character 
Assessment  identifies a number of landscape character areas across the Borough and it is 
important that both the quality and distinctive character istics of these areas are conserved 
and enhanced when new development occurs. Therefore, in order to ensure that any new 
development respects this character and enhances it, new development affecting the 
countryside should relate well to the existing lands cape and be sympathetic to its 
surroundings.  
10.7.5  The extent of the Countryside within the Borough will be identified on the Council’s Adopted 
Policies Map.  
Policy 43  Countryside  
Land outside of the Leicester PUA , defined limits to development, direction  for growth areas and 
Green Wedges will be defined as Countryside.  
The openness and intrinsic qualities of the Countryside will be protected. The Borough Council will 
promote good management of the Countryside whilst allowing it to adapt to the identified  needs of 
the community.  
Some forms of development may be required in the Countryside. Development justified as 
necessary in the Countryside must be appropriate in terms of layout, scale, height, materials, form, 
impact and siting.  
Development should not adversely affect landscape, wildlife, the ecological, geological, 
environmental, archaeological or historic resources of the specific site and the surrounding areas.   
129 | P a g e  
 Any development proposal causing adverse impacts in the Countryside will only be permitted  
where there is a justifiable need which outweighs these impacts and where a Landscape Character 
Assessment has been undertaken to ensure that all detrimental impacts that a development may 
cause have been assessed and can be mitigated.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
130 | P a g e  
 Landscape and Character  
10.8.1  Together with the Council’s Conservation Area Appraisals, the Borough Council’s 
Landscape Character Assessment helps to assist the Council in ensuring that development 
proposals in the most distinctive urban and rural  character areas in the Borough are not 
only informed by and sympathetic to townscape and landscape character, but also, they 
contribute towards the regeneration, restoration, maintenance and conservation of the 
areas affected.  
10.8.2  It is important for the Council to recognise and to protect the Borough's most distinctive and 
attractive landscapes through careful and consistent planning policies. The Borough 
contains ten Conservation Areas, as well as a number of nationally and locally listed 
buildings a nd important urban and rural character areas.  
10.8.3  Landscape Character Assessments, Conservation Area Appraisals, Management Plans, 
Development Briefs and Supplementary Planning Documents support the Council in 
preserving and enhancing all areas with di stinctive landscape character in the Borough.  
10.8.4  These tools are particularly useful when the Council receives a development proposal in an 
area where landscape and character is pertinent and applicants are able to prepare 
relevant supporting evidence  setting out how the impacts of the proposed development will 
be managed and mitigated.  
10.8.5  The Borough’s Landscape Character Assessment identifies that the Borough is made up of 
a series of urban and rural character areas. Each area is significant for its own unique 
blend of character and the Council will seek to ensure that wherever possible, d evelopment 
proposals retain and / or enhance the surrounding quality. For example, Oadby Arboretum 
Urban Landscape Character Area is locally significant and valued due to its distinctive 
character of having large plot sizes and attractive, leafy, suburbs.  
Policy 44  Landscape and Character  
All development proposals within the Borough will be considered against the need to conserve and 
enhance the distinctive landscapes in the Borough. The Council will seek to ensure that all 
development proposals reflect th e prevailing quality, character and features such as settlement 
patterns, important views, open spaces and significant natural habitats.   
Development proposals will only be permitted where it is in keeping with the area in which it is 
situated. Developmen t proposals that are contrary to the policy guidance as set out within the 
Council’s Landscape Character Assessment, the Conservation Areas Supplementary Planning 
Document and / or the Conservation Area Appraisals will not be approved.  
Development proposa ls that have a potential impact on nationally designated areas or features of 
landscape and cultural significance will not be permitted.  
 
 
 
  
131 | P a g e  
 Local Green Space  
10.9.1  The NPPF introduced a Local Green Space (LGS) designation. The LGS designation is a 
way t o provide special protection against development for green open areas of particular 
importance to local communities.  
10.9.2  Paragraph 76 of the NPPF suggests that local communities should be given the opportunity 
to identify green areas of particular impor tance to them through local and neighbourhood 
plans. It also suggests that the designation would have a high degree of protection from 
new development due to its local importance. Importantly national planning policy makes it 
clear that this designation sh ould be consistent with wider planning policy for the area and 
should complement investment in the provision of new homes, employment opportunities 
and other essential services.  
10.9.3  Paragraph 77 of the NPPF specifies that LGS designation will not be ap propriate for most 
green areas or open space. Further, the designation should only be used in the following 
circumstances:  
- Where the green space area is in reasonably close proximity to the community it serves;  
- Where the green area is demonstrably special  to a local community and holds a particular 
local significance, for example because of its beauty, historic  significance, recreational 
value (including as a playing field), tranquillity or richness of its wildlife; and  
- Where the green area concerned is local in character and is not an extensive tract of land.  
10.9.4  Whilst the NPPF establishes the concept of LGS designation and provides some guiding 
principles, it leaves it to local authorities, in partnership with local communities to determine 
how to implement this at the local level.  
10.9.5  All areas designated as Local Green Space are identified on the Adopted Policies Map.  
Policy 45  Local Green Space  
Any development proposal which will result in the loss of a site designated as Local Green Space 
on the Adopted Policies Map will not be permitted, unless the harm of losing the asset is 
significantly outweighed by the benefits of the proposed development.  
Proposals put forward to the Council for Local Green Space designation will be assessed against 
the criteria set out within national planning policy.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
132 | P a g e  
 Chapter Eleven – Delivery Plan  
Infrastructure and Developer Contributions  
11.1.1  Developer contributions (sometimes also referred to as planning obligations) are used to 
address specific planning issues arising from a development scheme that cannot be 
mitigated through planning conditions. Developer contributions are set out in legal 
agreements under the provisions of Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 
1990 (as amended). They may be a greed between the Council, the County Council, 
landowners and developers, or, they may also be unilaterally proposed by a landowner and 
agreed by the Council.  
11.1.2  Depending upon the size and density of new development, very often, it puts pressure on 
existing local infrastructure because of the inevitable population increase, which in turn 
creates additional demand on services and facilities. Therefore, development proposals will 
need to identify what impact they are likely to have upon the surrounding a rea and where 
necessary, the funding towards or provision of the necessary infrastructure to mitigate that 
impact. This will need to be agreed to ensure the delivery of sustainable growth now and in 
the future.  
11.1.3  Examples of infrastructure items, ser vices or facilities that may be delivered to mitigate the 
impact of new development could include, but is not limited to, the following:  
- affordable or specialist housing needs;  
- open space and play facilities;  
- sporting, recreation and leisure facilities;  
- local education provision;  
- allotment provision;  
- highways and public transport improvements / provision;  
- healthcare provision and social services;  
- utility services;  
- telecommunications, particularly superfast broadband;  
- local waste management and recycling ; 
- environmental works, including protection and enhancement of local biodiversity, the 
cultural and historic environment and other local green spaces, tree planting and green 
infrastructure enhancement projects;  
- new provision of and/or improvements to com munity buildings;  
- public art or public realm (including street lighting) enhancements in key locations;  
- cemetery provision;  
- crime prevention and community safety initiatives;  
- water and drainage facilities; and,  
- flood protection schemes.  
11.1.4  The Council has developed an Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) that will contain a ‘live’ 
infrastructure project list. The document seeks to identify all local and strategic 
infrastructure deemed necessary to support sustainable delivery of growth in the Borough 
over the plan period to 2031. Joint working with neighbouring local authorities and other 
agencies such as utility companies or service delivery partners will be a key element to 
identify and to successfully deliver necessary infrastructure.   
133 | P a g e  
 11.1. 5 Historically, the Council has relied upon the negotiation of Section 106 Agreements in order 
to secure developer contributions or their equivalent to help to fund the delivery of local 
infrastructure. However, since the Community Infrastructure Levy Regu lations came into 
force, as well as further restrictions imposed upon local authorities by the National Planning 
Policy Framework and the ongoing changes to the National Planning Practice Guidance, 
the collection and use of developer contributions is becom ing more and more restricted.   
11.1.6  Therefore, in the meantime, all developer contributions to be sought by the Council will be 
carefully assessed and monitored to ensure that they meet the statutory tests included 
within paragraph 204 of the National P lanning Policy Framework and in accordance with 
the limitations placed upon pooling, as set out in the Community Infrastructure Levy 
Regulations, as well as guidance set out in the National Planning Practice Guidance.  
Viability  
11.1.7  Should the developer consider that the level of contributions required would render the 
scheme financially unviable, sufficient information must be provided on an ‘open book’ 
basis to enable the viability of the scheme to be comprehensively assessed. The 
assessment must be pro vided to the Council with the submission of the relevant planning 
application. If material changes to the scheme are made after the submission of the viability 
appraisal, a revised version of the appraisal should be submitted, together with an 
explanation of the changes to the proposal.  
11.1.8  The Council’s Planning Control Case Officer will procure an independent review by a 
viability expert to scrutinise any submitted viability evidence, if it is felt that there is a need 
to do so. The applicant will be required to pay for this assessment and for any other 
associated costs that arise.  
Community Infrastructure Levy  
11.1.9  The Council has assessed the option of developing a Community Infrastructure Levy 
charging schedule. The assessment deemed that negotia ting planning obligations through 
the Section 106 process would still be the most appropriate and viable method for the 
Council. The Council will continue to assess the viability of adopting a Community 
Infrastructure Levy charging schedule and will update  the Developer Contributions 
Supplementary Planning Document accordingly, should circumstances change.  
Cross Boundary Contributions  
11.1.10 Due to the location of the Borough, directly adjacent to the local authority areas of 
Leicester City, Harborough Dis trict and Blaby District, development that occurs within the 
Borough could have negative impacts on the infrastructure in these other local authority 
areas. The same can be said for development that occurs within any of the mentioned local 
authorities; it could have negative impacts within the Borough.  
11.1.11 As an example, the two main arterial highway routes (the A6 and B5199) that link 
Harborough District to Leicester City from the south, run continuously through the Borough, 
therefore any development that increases traffic volumes on these two routes could have a 
negative impact upon the infrastructure within the Borough.  
11.1.12 Through collaborative working, including liaison with Leicestershire County Council, any 
development that has an impact with in the Borough will be required to contribute towards  
134 | P a g e  
 the provision of and / or financial contribution towards necessary mitigation infrastructure 
measures.  
Policy 46  Infrastructure and Developer Contributions  
Developer contributions will be used by the Co uncil to deliver the infrastructure required to facilitate 
sustainable growth. This may include (but is not limited to) measures to mitigate the impacts of 
development and to meet the costs of providing required on and off site infrastructure, as identifie d 
in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan, and other measures to make new growth acceptable in planning 
terms.  
All contributions sought through Section 106 agreements will be in accordance with the Community 
Infrastructure Levy Regulations and will therefore be: 
- necessary to make the development acceptable in planning terms;  
- directly related to the development; and  
- fairly and reasonably related in scale and kind to the development.  
For all new development proposals, it will be necessary to consider both the isolated and 
cumulative impact that they may have upon the surrounding infrastructure network and / or any 
cross boundary detrimental impact they have also.  
Any development that has an impact within the Borough will be required to contribute towar ds the 
provision of and / or financial contribution towards necessary mitigation infrastructure measures.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
135 | P a g e  
 Chapter 12  Monitoring Framework  
12.1.1  The purpose of this Chapter is to identify the key indicators that will be used to monitor the 
delivery of the Local Plan and its Objectives, through measuring the performance of the 
related key policies.  
12.1.2  The key indicators identified will be monitored by the Council on, at least, an annual basis 
through the production of the various monitori ng documents, including the Annual 
Monitoring Report (AMR). Monitoring the performance of policies within the Local Plan is 
critical, due to the planning and building profession being fluid and ever changing. Policies 
need to be appropriate and relevant in  order to deliver the objectives of the Local Plan. 
Each of the Objectives and their relevant policies and targets are set out in the schedules 
below.  
12.1.3  It must be noted that although monitoring will be undertaken on at least an annual basis, 
not all indicators are annually set targets. However, regular monitoring will give a clear 
picture of one off events or ongoing problems / issues.  
12.1.4  If monitoring indicates that further action is needed in order to accomplish an Objective, the 
policies contai ned within this Plan will be assessed and updated where necessary.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
136 
 Spatial 
Objective  Key relevant 
policies  Other related policies  Target(s)/ Threshold(s)  Potential risk(s) 
to delivery  Possible action if target is not 
met 
Spatial 
Objective 1: 
Regeneration 
of town and 
district centres  Policy 2 Spatial 
Strategy for the 
Borough; Policy 
22 Delivering 
Retail  Policy 3; Policy 8.2; 
Policy 23; Policy 24; 
Policy 26; Policy 27; 
Policy 28; Policy 29; 
Policy 30; Policy 31; 
Policy 32; Policy 33; 
Policy 34; Policy 35; 
Policy 36; and, Policy 
46 Provision of new homes, retail 
use space and B1 employment 
use space within the 
Borough’s three main centres.  
 
Ensure levels of vacant units 
remain low and areas of public 
realm are regenerated.  Economic 
downturn or 
continued 
growth in 
‘online’ retail 
shopping.  
 
Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  
 
Growth of out of 
Borough retail 
centres.  
 
Unplanned 
growth.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Reduction in 
public transport 
services, within 
or close to  the 
Borough’s main 
centres.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Investigate potential funding 
streams for redevelopment  
and / or regeneration.  
 
If appropriate to do so, bring 
forward other sites allocated 
within the Plan sooner than 
envisaged.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
housing, employment and 
retail opportunities through 
active promotion of sites.  
 
Spatial 
Objective 2: 
Wigston town 
centre  Policy 2 Spatial 
Strategy for the 
Borough; Policy 
22 Delivering 
Retail  Policy 3; Policy 6; 
Policy 10; Policy 12; 
Policy 23; Policy 24; 
Policy 26; Policy 27; 
Policy 28; Policy 29; 
Policy 30; Policy 31; 
Policy 32; Policy 33; 8,250 sqm of new office 
floorspace (2011 – 2031)  
 
1,169 sqm of additional retail 
floorspace (2011 – 2031)  
 
129 new residential units Economic 
downturn or 
continued 
growth in 
‘online’ retail 
shopping.  
 Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor p erformance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising  
137 
 Policy 34; P olicy 35; 
Policy 3; Policy 40; 
Policy 41; and, Policy 
46 (2011 – 2031)  
 
At least the number of existing 
car parking spaces (2011 – 
2031)  
 
70 per cent of all units within 
the primary frontages in 
Wigston town centre are in A1 
use (2011 – 2031)  
 
90 per cent of all units within 
the primary frontage in Bell 
Street (Wigston) are in A1 use 
(2011 – 2031)  
 
Proposed development sites 
that have a gross site size of 
0.3 hectares and larger and 
are located within the town 
centre boundary of Wigston 
will be required to achieve an 
average density of at least 50 
dwellings per hectare  Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  
 
Growth of out of 
Borough retail 
centres.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Reduction in 
public transport 
services, within 
or close to the 
Borough’s main 
centres.  with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Investigate potential funding 
streams for redevelopment 
and / or regeneration.  
 
If appropriate to do so, bring 
forward other sites  allocated 
within the Plan sooner than 
envisaged.  
 
If appropriate to do so, lower 
retail unit percentages within 
the relevant locations.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
retail opportunities through 
active promotion of sites.  
 
Spatial 
Objective 3: 
Oadby  district 
centre  Policy 2 Spatial 
Strategy for the 
Borough; Policy 
22 Delivering 
Retail  Policy 3; Policy 6; 
Policy 10; Policy 12; 
Policy 23; Policy 24; 
Policy 26; Policy 27; 
Policy 28; Policy 29; 
Policy 30; Policy 31; 
Policy 32; Policy 33; 
Policy 34; Poli cy 35; 
Policy 3; Policy 40; 
and, Policy 46  800 sqm of new commercial 
floorspace (2011 – 2031)  
 
1,050 sqm of additional retail 
floorspace  (2011 – 2031)  
 
76 new residential units (2011 
– 2031)  
 
At least the number of existing 
car parking spaces (2011 – 
2031 ) 
 Economic 
downturn or 
continued 
growth in 
‘online’ retail 
shopping.  
 
Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  
 
Growth of out of 
Borough retail Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Investigate potential funding 
streams for redevelopment 
and / or regeneration.   
138 
 65 per cent of all units within 
the primary frontages in Oadby 
district centre are in A1 use 
(2011 – 2031)  
 
Proposed development sites 
that have a gross site size of 
0.3 hectares and larger and 
are located within the district 
centre boundary of Oadby wi ll 
be required to achieve an 
average density of at least 50 
dwellings per hectare  centres.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Reduction in 
public transport 
services, within 
or close to the 
Borough’s main 
centres.   
If appropriate to do so, bring 
forward other sites allocated 
within the Plan sooner than 
envisaged.  
 
If appropriate to do so, lower 
retail unit percentages wit hin 
the relevant locations.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
retail opportunities through 
active promotion of sites.  
Spatial 
Objective 4: 
South 
Wigston 
centre  Policy 2 Spatial 
Strategy for the 
Borough; Policy 
22 Delivering 
Retail  Policy 3; Policy 6; 
Policy 10; Policy 12; 
Policy 23; Policy 24; 
Policy 26; Policy 27; 
Policy 28; Policy 29; 
Policy 30; Policy 31; 
Policy 32; Policy 33; 
Policy 34; Policy 35; 
Policy 3; Policy 40; 
Policy 41; and, Policy 
46 373 sqm of additional retail 
floorspace (2011 – 2031)  
 
Proposed de velopment sites 
that have a gross site size of 
0.3 hectares and larger and 
are located within the district 
centre boundary of South 
Wigston will be required to 
achieve an average density of 
at least 50 dwellings per 
hectare  Economic 
downturn or 
continued 
growth in 
‘online’ retail 
shopping.  
 
Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  
 
Growth of out of 
Borough retail 
centres.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Reduction in 
public transport 
services, within 
or close to the 
Borough’s main Identify the problem  and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Investigate potential funding 
streams for redevelopment 
and / or regeneration.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
retail opportunities through 
active promotion of sites.  
  
139 
 centres.  
Spatial 
Objective 5: 
Improved 
employment 
opportunities  Policy 19 – Oadby 
Sewage 
Treatment Works; 
Policy 20 – 
Wigston Direction 
for Growth Area; 
Policy 25 – 
Protecting 
Identified 
Employment 
Areas.  Policy 2; Policy 3; 
Policy 6; Policy 10; 
Policy 26; Policy 46.  At least 8 hectares of new 
employment use land provided 
during the Plan period.  Economic 
downturn  
 
Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  
 
Unplanned 
growth of out of 
Borough 
industrial 
centres.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Severn Trent 
decides to keep 
the site in use, 
rather than 
cease its current 
use. 
 
Site becomes 
unattractive to 
the market for 
employment 
development.  
 
Site releasing 
infrastructure 
delays.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Investigate potential funding 
streams for redevelopment 
and / or regeneration.  
 
If appropriate to do so, bring 
forward other sites that are not 
allocated within the Plan but 
become available for 
employment development.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
employment opportunities 
through active promotion of the 
site. 
 
Spatial 
Objective 6: 
Accessible Policy 26 – 
Sustainable 
Transport and Policy 2; Policy 5; 
Policy 6; Policy 10; 
Policy 17; Policy 18; No specific targets are 
contained within this Plan.  Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
  
140 
 transport links  Initiatives  Policy 19; Policy 20; 
Policy 21; Policy 46.   
Tightening o f 
finance 
availability.  
 
Reduction in 
public transport 
services.  Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers, and public 
transport stakeholders.  
 
Investigate potential funding 
streams for redevelopment 
and / or regeneration.  
Spatial 
Objective 7: 
Growth of the 
Leicester PUA  Policy 2 Spatial 
Strategy for the 
Borough; Policy 
12 – Housing 
Density  Policy 3; Policy 6; 
Policy 13; Policy 14;  
Policy 15; Policy 18; 
Policy 19; Policy 20; 
Policy 21; Policy 25; 
Policy 26; Policy 38; 
Policy 40;  Policy 46.  250 + 768 new residential units 
(2011 – 2031)  
 
Proposed development sites 
that have a gross site size of 
0.3 hectares and larger and 
are located  outside of the town 
centre boundary of Wigston or 
district centre boundaries of 
Oadby and South Wigston, but 
within the Leicester PUA will 
be required to achieve an 
average density of at least 40 
dwellings per hectare.  Economic 
downturn  
 
Unforeseen 
physic al 
constraints.  
 
Unplanned 
growth of out of 
Borough 
residential 
development.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Site becomes 
unattractive to 
the market for 
residential 
development.  
 
Site releasing 
infrastructure 
delays.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
If appropriate to do so, bring 
forward other sites allocated 
within the Plan sooner than 
envisaged.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
development opportunities 
through active promotion.   
141 
  
Land values 
drop 
considerably 
meaning 
developers 
begin to build at 
lower densities.  
Spatial 
Objective 8: A 
balanced 
housing 
market  Policy 11 – 
Housing Choices; 
Policy 13 – 
Affordable 
Housing; Policy 
16 – Gypsies, 
Travellers and 
Travelling 
Showpeople  Policy 2; Policy 5; 
Policy 12; Policy 15; 
Policy 17; Policy 18; 
Policy 20; Policy 21; 
policy 46  Proposed development sites 
that have a gross site size of 
0.3 hectares and larger and 
are not situated  within any of 
the above locations will be 
required to achieve an average 
density of at least 30 dwellings 
per hectare.  Economic 
downturn  
 
Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  
 
Unplanned 
growth of out of 
Borough 
residential 
development.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Site becomes 
unattractive to 
the market for 
residential 
development.  
 
Site releasing 
infrastructure 
delays.  
 
Land values 
drop Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor perf ormance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
If appropriate to do so, bring 
forward other sites allocated 
within the Plan sooner than 
envisaged.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
develop ment opportunities 
through active promotion.   
142 
 considerably 
meaning 
developers 
begin to build at 
lower densities.  
Spatial 
Objective 9: 
Healthy 
lifestyles  Policy 5 – 
Improving Health 
and Wellbeing; 
Policy 7 – 
Community 
Facilities; Policy 8 
– Green 
Infrastructure; 
Policy 9 – Open 
Space, Sport and 
Recreation 
Facilities; Policy 
37 – Biodiversity 
and Geodiversity  Policy 1; Policy 2; 
Policy 4; Policy 6; 
Policy 10 ; Policy 17; 
Policy 26; Policy 36; 
Policy 42; Policy 44; 
Policy 45; Policy 46  No net loss of biodiversity and 
/ or Geodiversity during the 
Plan period.  
 
No net loss of Green 
Infrastructure during the Plan 
period.  
 
No net loss of open space, 
sport and / or recreation 
spaces during the Plan period.  National policy 
changes to be 
less protective 
of green 
infrastructure 
assets.  
 
Housing needs 
significantly 
increases. More 
undeveloped 
land required.  
 
Unplanned 
development 
growth.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
green infrastructure 
opportunities through active 
promotion.  
 
Work closely with local groups 
as well as more national 
groups, such as Natural 
England.  
Spatial 
Objective 10: 
High quality 
and 
sustainable 
design  Policy 6 – High 
Quality Design 
and Materials; 
Policy 40 – 
Culture and 
Historic Assets; 
Policy 44 – 
Landscape and 
Character  Policy 3; Policy  10; 
Policy 11; Policy 15; 
Policy 32; Policy 33; 
Policy 46  No specific targets are 
contained within this Plan.  National policy 
changes to be 
less wanting of 
high quality 
design and 
sustainable 
development.  
 
Unplanned 
growth.  
 
National policy 
relating to Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Work closely with local groups 
as well as more national 
groups, such as Historic  
143 
 heritage assets 
is diluted.  England.  
Spatial 
Objective 11: 
Conserving 
and 
enhancing 
green 
(including 
water assets) 
infrastructure  Policy 8 – Green 
Infrastructure; 
Policy 37 – 
Biodiversity and 
Geodiversi ty; 
Policy 42 – Green 
Wedges; Policy 
43 – Countryside; 
Policy 44 – 
Landscape and 
Character; Policy 
45 – Local Green 
Space  Policy 1; Policy 9; 
Policy 17; Policy 38; 
Policy 39; Policy 46  No net loss of Green 
Infrastructure during the Plan 
period.  
 National p olicy 
changes to be 
less protective 
of green 
infrastructure 
assets.  
 
Housing needs 
significantly 
increases. More 
undeveloped 
land required.  
 
Unplanned 
development 
growth.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
green infrastructure 
opportunities through active 
promotion.  
 
Work closely with local groups 
as well as more national 
groups, such as Natural 
England.  
Spatial 
Objective 12: 
Enhancing 
Local Heritage  Policy 40 – 
Culture and 
Historic 
Environment 
Assets; Policy 41 
– Development in 
Conservation 
Areas  Policy 2; Policy 6; 
Policy 32; Policy 46  No specific targets are 
contained within this Plan.  National  policy 
changes to be 
less wanting of 
high quality 
design and 
sustainable 
development.  
 
Unplanned 
growth.  
 
National policy 
relating to 
heritage assets 
is diluted.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Work closely with local groups 
as well as more national 
groups, such as Historic 
England.  
Spatial Policy 42 – Green Policy 2; Policy 8; No unplanned loss of Green National policy Identify the problem and / or  
144 
 Objective 13: 
Green 
Wedges and 
the 
Countryside  Wedges; Polic y 
43 – Countryside  Policy 44; Policy 45; 
Policy 46  Wedge.  
 
No unplanned loss of 
Countryside.  changes to be 
less protective 
of green 
infrastructure 
assets.  
 
Housing needs 
significantly 
increases. More 
undeveloped 
land required.  
 
Unplanned 
development 
growth.  cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Stimulate d emand for new 
green infrastructure 
opportunities through active 
promotion.  
 
Work closely with local groups 
as well as more national 
groups, such as Natural 
England.  
Spatial 
Objective 14: 
Kilby Bridge 
Regeneration  Policy 17 – Kilby 
Bridge Settlement 
Envelo pe Policy 2; Policy 5; 
Policy 6; Policy 10; 
Policy 11; Policy 37; 
Policy 38; Policy 39; 
Policy 40; Policy 44; 
Policy 46  Up to 40 new residential units 
(2011 – 2031)  
 
All development built at 
approximately 30 dwellings per 
hectare (2011 – 2031)  Economic 
downturn.  
 
Unforeseen 
physical 
constraints.  
 
Unplanned 
growth.  
 
Tightening of 
finance 
availability.  
 
Reduction in 
public transport 
services.  Identify the problem and / or 
cause of poor performance.  
 
Consider a review of the 
planning policy itself.  
 
Be more  proactive in liaising 
with landowners and 
developers.  
 
Investigate potential funding 
streams for redevelopment 
and / or regeneration.  
 
Stimulate demand for new 
small scale housing, 
employment and retail 
opportunities through active 
promotion of sites.   
145 
   
146 
 Appendix One – Glossary  
Affordable housing: Affordable housing includes social rented, Starter Homes and intermediate 
housing, provided to specified eligible households whose needs are not met by  the market.  
Affordable Housing Viability Assessment: study to inform existing and future planning policy with 
regard to the delivery of affordable housing. Specifically, the Affordable Housing Viability 
Assessment examines the impacts on development viab ility of applying existing and potential 
affordable housing percentages, unit thresholds and tenures on residential development sites.  
Annual Monitoring Report: The annual monitoring report will assess the implementation of the local 
development scheme and  the extent to which policies in the Local Plan are being successfully 
implemented.  
Area Action Plan Guidance document: The document setting out the principles and objectives for 
the town centre of Wigston and the District centre of Oadby. The document ill ustrates one viable 
way of implementing the levels of development set out within this Plan.   
Biodiversity: The whole variety of life encompassing all genetics, species and ecosystem 
variations.  
Building Regulations: Statutory Instruments governing the sta ndards required for buildings and 
their construction.  
BREEAM: Buildings Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method – is the most 
widely used environmental assessment method for commercial buildings.  
Brownfield land: land that was developed but is now vacant or derelict, and land currently in use 
with known potential for redevelopment.  
Building for Life Standard: A national standard for well designed homes and communities.  
Comparison goods floor space: retail floor space that is used for the sale  of non -food items.  
Community: a specific group of people who all hold something in common. Community has tended 
to be associated with two key aspects: firstly people who share locality or geographical place; 
secondly people who are communities of interes t. 
Community engagement: the process of working collaboratively with and through groups of people 
affiliated by geographic proximity, special interest, or similar situations to address issues affecting 
the well being of those people.  
Community Infrastructu re: The infrastructure needed to make a development ‘fit for purpose’. In the 
context of the Local Plan, the provision of new roads, new schools or new flood protection would all 
be examples.  
Community Infrastructure Levy: The Community Infrastructure Lev y is a charge on most types of 
new development in an area. The proceeds of the levy will be spent on local and sub -regional 
infrastructure to support the development of the area.  
Conservation Area: an area of special architectural or historic interest iden tified by the Local 
Planning Authority under the Planning (Listed Buildings & Conservation Areas) Act 1990. There is 
a statutory duty to preserve or enhance the character or appearance of such areas.   
147 
 Convenience goods floor space: retail floor space that is used for the sale of food and drink.  
Core Strategy: A development plan document that set out the long term vision for a local planning 
authority area, the strategic objectives, and the strategic planning policies needed to deliver that 
vision.  
Cultural  facilities: Facilities of a cultural nature such as libraries, theatres and museums.  
Developer Contributions: Developer Contributions assist in mitigating the impact of unacceptable 
development to make it acceptable in planning terms. Developer Contribut ions can be provided by 
on-site or off -site physical contributions, or via off -site financial contributions.  
Development Plan Documents: spatial planning documents that are subject to independent 
examination, and together with Supplementary Planning Docume nts, will form the development 
plan for a local authority area for the purposes of the Act. Each authority must set out the 
programme for preparing its development plan documents in the Local Development Scheme.  
Duty to Cooperate: The duty to cooperate wa s created in the Localism Act 2011, and amends the 
Planning and Compulsory Purchase Act 2004. It places a legal duty on local planning authorities, 
county councils in England and public bodies to engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing 
basis to m aximise the effectiveness of Local and Marine Plan preparation in the context of strategic 
cross boundary matters.  
Employment Land and Premises Study: A local study that assesses the employment land needs 
for the Borough up to 2031.  
Environmental Impact As sessment: An Environmental Impact Assessment is an assessment of the 
possible impact - positive or negative - that a proposed project may have on the environment; 
considering natural, social and economic aspects.  
Evidence base: information gathered by the planning authority to support preparation of local 
development documents. It includes quantitative and qualitative data.  
Greenfield land: land that has never been built on or where the remains of any structure or activity 
have blended into the landscape ov er time. Greenfield land should not be confused with green belt 
land.  
Green Wedge: Green Wedges are strategic open land which can help shape urban growth. They 
can assist in preserving and enhancing links between urban areas and the countryside and can 
facilitate the positive management of land.  
Green Infrastructure: Green Infrastructure is the physical environment within and between cities, 
towns and villages. It is a network of multi -functional open spaces, including formal parks, gardens, 
woodlands, gree n corridors, waterways, street trees and open countryside.  
Housing and Economic Development Needs Assessment (HEDNA): An evidence base study that 
identifies the Objectively Assessed Housing and Employment Needs for the Leicester and 
Leicestershire Housing Market Area.  
Identified Employment Areas: Are areas that provide key employment land within the Borough. 
They consist of business and industrial premises.  
  
148 
 Leicester Principal Urban Area: The Leicester Principal Urban Area encompasses all the 
administrativ e area of Leicester City and parts of Blaby, Charnwood, Harborough, Hinckley and 
Bosworth and Oadby and Wigston districts.  
Leicester and Leicestershire Housing Market Area:  The Leicester and Leicestershire Housing 
Market Area covers the City of Leicester and the County of Leicestershire, which includes the 
District of Blaby, Charnwood Borough, Harborough District, Hinckley and Bosworth Borough, 
Melton Borough, North West Leicestershire District, and Oadby and Wigston Borough.  
Local Development Documents: c omprise of Development Plan Documents and Supplementary 
Planning Documents.  
Local Development Framework: A Local Development Framework is a folder of Local Development 
Documents outlining how planning will be managed in the area.  
Local Development Scheme:  sets out the programme for the preparation of local development 
documents.  
Monitoring: regular and systematic collection and analysis of information to measure policy 
implementation.  
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF): Sets out the Government’s planning policies for 
England and how these are expected to be applied. It sets out the Government’s requirements for 
the planning system only to the extent that it is relevant, proportio nate and necessary to do so. It 
provides a framework within which local people and their accountable councils can produce their 
own distinctive local and neighbourhood plans, which reflect the needs and priorities of their 
communities.  
National Planning Pr actice Guidance (PPG): is a web -based resource which brings together 
planning guidance on various topics into one place. It was launched in March 2014 and coincided 
with the cancelling of the majority of Government Circulars which had previously given guid ance on 
many aspects of planning.  
Public Realm: the space between and within buildings that is publicly accessible.  
Residential Land Availability Report: The Residential Land Availability and Five Year Housing 
Supply are part of an annual monitoring exerci se that assesses housing provision and supply in the 
Borough.  
6C’s The 6Cs sub -region as defined in the East Midlands Regional Plan has an existing population 
of 1.9m people. It includes the 3 cities of Leicester, Derby and Nottingham and the 3 Counties of  
Leicestershire, Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire.  
Smarter Choices: This is general description for ‘soft’ transport policy initiatives aimed at changing 
the way that individuals travel. These seek to give better information and opportunities to help 
people to choose to reduce car use while enhancing the attractiveness of alternatives. They can 
include work place and school travel plans; car clubs and car sharing; tele -working, 
teleconferencing and home shopping.  
Spatial Planning: refers to the methods used b y the public sector to influence the distribution of 
people and activities in spaces of various scales. Spatial planning includes all levels of land use 
planning including urban planning, regional planning, environmental planning and national spatial 
plans . It goes beyond traditional land -use planning to bring together and integrate policies for the  
149 
 development and use of land with other policies and programmes which influence the nature of 
places and how they function.  
Statement of Community Involvement: sets out the standards which the planning authority intends 
to achieve in relation to involving the community in the preparation, alteration and continuing 
review of all local development documents and in significant development management decisions. 
It also sets out how the planning authority intends to achieve those standards. The statement of 
community involvement is not a development plan document but is subject to independent 
examination.  
Strategic Flood Risk Assessment: provides further information o n flood risk, and raises and informs 
a crucial debate that involves all those involved in the development process. The Strategic Flood 
Risk Assessment will identify constraints which will assist in the formulation of planning policies, it 
will aid the iden tification of the development potential of proposed sites and will aid in assessing 
future development proposals.  
Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment: a key component of the evidence base to support 
the delivery of sufficient land for housing to  meet the community’s need for more homes. These 
assessments are required by national planning policy, set out in Planning Policy Statement 3: 
Housing (June 2010). This document gives practical guidance on how to carry out an assessment 
to identify land fo r housing and assess the deliverability and developability of sites.  
Supplementary Planning Documents: cover a wide range of issues on which the planning authority 
wishes to provide policy guidance to supplement the policies and proposals in development pl an 
documents. They are not subject to independent examination.  
Sustainability Appraisal: Sustainable development is central to the reformed planning system. 
Sustainability Appraisal is used to promote sustainable development through the integration of 
social, environmental and economic considerations. The European ‘Strategic Environmental 
Assessment Directive’ (2001/42/EC) requires a formal ‘environmental assessment’ of certain plans 
and programmes, including those in the field of planning and land use. Th is process feeds into and 
informs the content of the Local Development Framework.  
Sustainable communities: places where people want to live and work, now and in the future. They 
meet the needs of existing and future residents, are sensitive to their envir onment, and contribute 
to a high quality of life. They are safe and inclusive, well planned, built and run, and offer equality 
of opportunity and good services for all.  
Sustainable development: is a pattern of resource use that aims to meet human needs whi le 
preserving the environment so that these needs can be met not only in the present, but also for 
future generations. Sustainable development has become the core principle underpinning the 
planning process.  
Sustainable urban design: Good design ensures ec onomically viable places and spaces that are 
resource efficient, adaptable, durable, inclusive and fit for purpose. Quality improvements in the 
built environment create the right conditions to attract businesses, jobs and investment, and 
provide well -desig ned sustainable environments for local people.  
Targets: a desired goal which identifies the scale of change resulting from policy actions over a 
specific time period; for example, the number of new homes to be built by a set date.   
150 
 Windfalls: proposals for  housing development that has not been planned for, for example allocated 
in a Development Plan Document or identified in evidence documents, such as the Strategic 
Housing Land Availability Assessment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
151 
 Appendix Two – Technical Housing Standards  
 
 
 
 
152 
  
 
 
 
 
153 
  
 
 
 
 
154 
  
 
 
 
 
155 
  
 
 
 
 
156 
 Appendix Three – List of Locally Significant Buildings  
Oadby  
1. 1, 3, 5 and 7 Bankart Avenue.  
2. 2 Bankart Avenue.  
3. 4 Bankart Avenue.  
4. 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 22, 24, 36 and 38 Bankart Avenue.  
5. 9, 11, 25 ( Markeaton) and 27 (Hillbrow) Bankart Avenue.  
6. 13 and 15 Bankart Avenue.  
7. 17 and 19 Bankart Avenue.  
8. 18 and 20 Bankart Avenue.  
9. 21 and 23 Bankart Avenue.  
10. 26 and 28 Bankart Avenue.  
11. 29 Bankart Avenue.  
12. 30 and 32 Bankart Avenue.  
13. 31 and 3 3 Bankart Avenue.  
14. 34 Bankart Avenue.  
15. 35 and 37 Bankart Avenue.  
16. 40 Bankart Avenue.  
17. 42 Bankart Avenue.  
18. Brocks Hill House, Briar Walk.  
19. 6 The Broadway (west side).  
20. 73 The Broadway.  
21. The Elms, Brockshill Drive.  
22. Chapel House, 25 Chapel Street.  
23. Hilltop Farmhouse, NO. 23 Church Street.  
24. Sheldon House, 25 Church Street.      
25. 2 – 34 Church Street.  
26. 18 The Fairway.  
27. 32 The Fairway (south side).   
157 
 28. 34 The Fairway (south side).  
29. 43 and 45 The Fairway (north side ). 
30. The Pantiles (vinehouse and garden), Gartree Road.  
31. 3 Glebe Road (west side).  
32. 11 Glebe Road (west side).  
33. The Oadby Owl, Public House, 7 Glen Road.  
34. Launde House, Harborough Road.     
35.  18-26, Harborough Road.     
36.  12 Knighton Gr ange Road.      
37. 13 Knighton Grange Road.      
38.  14 Knighton Grange Road.  
39. 15 Knighton Grange Road.  
40. 16 Knighton Grange Road.  
41. 17 Knighton Grange Road.      
42. 18 Knighton Grange Road.      
43. 19 Knighton Grange Road.      
44. 20 Knighton  Grange Road.      
45. 21 Knighton Grange Road.      
46. 23 Knighton Grange Road.      
47. 24 Knighton Grange Road.      
48. 25 Knighton Grange Road.      
49. 26 Knighton Grange Road.      
50. 27 Knighton Grange Road.      
51. 28 Knighton Grange Road.      
52. 29 Knighton Grange Road.      
53. 30 Knighton Grange Road.      
54. 32 Knighton Grange Road.      
55. 33 Knighton Grange Road.      
56. 34 Knighton Grange Road.       
158 
 57. 37 Knighton Grange Road.      
58. 38 Knighton Grange Road.  
59. Beaumont Leys 39 K nighton Grange Road.      
60. 40 Knighton Grange Road.      
61. 1 Knighton Rise.      
62. 2 Knighton Rise.      
63. 3 Knighton Rise.      
64. Frankline House, 4 Knighton Rise.      
65. 5 Knighton Rise.  
66. 7 Knighton Rise.      
67. The Gables, 8 Knighton R ise.      
68. 9 Knighton Rise.  
69. 10 Knighton Rise.      
70. 11 Knighton Rise.  
71. Meadowhurst, 12 Knighton Rise.      
72. Elmcroft, 13 Knighton Rise.  
73. 14 Knighton Rise.      
 74. St Helier, 15, Knighton Rise.  
75. 16 Knighton Rise.      
76. 18 Knighton  Rise.      
77. 19 Knighton Rise.      
78. 20 Knighton Rise.      
79. 21, Knighton Rise.      
80. 22 Knighton Rise.      
81. 23, Knighton Rise.      
82. 25 Knighton Rise.      
83. 27 Knighton Rise.      
84. 30 Knighton Rise.      
85. Leicester Racecourse, Stands and Stabling, Leicester Road.       
159 
 86. Oadby Baptist Church, Leicester Road.      
87. Brooks House, 81 Leicester Road.      
88. 1– 5 Oadby Court, Leicester Road.      
89. Memorial, North Side of Ellis Park, Leicester Road.      
90. 1-3 London Road.  
91. 17-19 London Road.  
92. The Black Dog Public House, 23 London Road.  
93. 24-34 London Road.  
94. Gateway, London Road.  
95. 38 London Road.  
96. 65A London Road.  
97. 66 London Road.  
98. 68-80 London Road.  
99. The Fox Public House, Lond on Road.  
100. Gable House, Manor Road.  
101. The Coppice, Manor Road.  
 102. Spinneys House, 5 Manor Road.  
103. Howard House, Manor Road.  
104. Shirley House and Lodge, 8 Manor Road, (south side).  
105. Clivedon, 10 Manor Road.  
106. Ashcroft, Manor Road.  
107. Aigburth, 21 Manor Road.  
108. Villers House/Stamford Hall Court, Manor Road.  
109. Treroose, 23 Manor Road.  
110. Wighton House, 25 Manor Road.  
111. The Beeches, 29 Manor Road.  
112. Fields House, 40 Manor Road.  
113. Brendon, 42 Manor Road.  
114. Stoughton Leys, 44 Manor Road.   
160 
 115. 49 Manor Road.  
116. 51 Manor Road.  
117. Melbury House, 55 Manor Road.  
118. 66 Manor Road.  
119. 67 Manor Road.  
120. 69 Manor Road.  
121. 70 Manor Road.  
122. 73 Manor Road.  
123. 77 Manor Road.  
124. 1 Meadowcourt Road.  
125. Southcroft , 2 Meadowcourt Road.  
126. 2B Meadowcourt Road.  
127. 3 and Swallowcroft, 5 Meadowcourt Road.  
128. 4 Meadowcourt Road.  
129. 6 Meadowcourt Road.  
130. 7 Meadowcourt Road.  
131. 8 Meadowcourt Road.  
132. 9 Meadowcourt Road.  
133. 10 Meadowcourt Road.  
134 Portlan d Cottage, 11 Meadowcourt Road.  
135. 12 Meadowcourt Road.  
136. 13 and 15 Meadowcourt Road.  
137. Woodgarth, 14 Meadowcourt Road.  
138. 16 Meadowcourt Road.  
139. 17 Meadowcourt Road.  
140. 18 Meadowcourt Road.  
141. 19 Meadowcourt Road.  
142. 20 Meadowcourt  Road.  
143. 21 Meadowcourt Road.   
161 
 144. 22 Meadowcourt Road.  
145. 23 and 25 Meadowcourt Road.  
146. 24 Meadowcourt Road.  
147. 26 Meadowcourt Road.  
148. 27 and 29 Meadowcourt Road.  
149. 28 Meadowcourt Road.  
150. 30 Meadowcourt Road.  
151. 31 and 33 Meadowcourt Road.  
152. 36 Meadowcourt Road.  
153. 12-16 ‘The Old Manor Inn’, The Parade.  
154. 91 The Parade.  
155. 22 Powys Avenue.  
156. 1-31 Sandhurst Street (odd numbers)  
157. Redroofs, Southmeads Road.  
158. Elmsthorpe, 26 Southmeads Road.  
159. Barrington, Southmeads Road.  
160. Powerscourt, Southmeads Road.  
161. Whitewings, Southmeads Road.  
162. North Memorial Homes, Stoughton Road.  
163. Framework Knitters Cottages, Stoughton Road.  
164. Digby Hall, Stoughton Drive South (east side.)  
165. Stamford House, Stoughton Drive  South (east side).  
166. Southmeades, Stoughton Drive South (west side).  
167. Highgrove, Stoughton Drive South (east side).  
168. 17 Stoughton Drive South.  
169. 19 Stoughton Drive South.  
170. 23 Stoughton Drive South.  
171. Ashfield, 29 Stoughton Drive South  (west side).  
172. Greenleys, 30 Stoughton Drive South (west side).   
162 
 173. Kent House, Stoughton Drive South.  
174. Gate House, Stoughton Drive South.  
175. Rosenfels, Stoughton Drive South.  
176. Ash Lodge, Stoughton Drive South.  
177. Inglewood, Stoughton Driv e South.  
178. Hastings House, Stoughton Drive South.  
179. St Peters Church Hall, Wigston Road.  
180. The Royal British Legion, Wigston Road.  
181. The Hermitage, Wigston Road.  
 
Wigston  
1. 52 and 54 Aylestone Lane.  
2. 246 Aylestone Lane.  
3. Former Electric St ation and Wall, 49 Bell Street.  
4. 20 and 22 Bullhead Street.  
5. The Limes, 80 Bullhead Street.  
6. 106 – 110 Bullhead Street (evens only).   
7. Horse and Trumpet, Bullhead Street.  
8. Kings Centre, 56 Bullhead Street.  
9. Spoutewell Cottage, Bullhead Street.  
10. St Wolstans House and Barn, Bullhead Street.  
11. 2 – 14 Bushloe End (evens only).  
12. Apple House, 18 Bushloe End.  
13. Coach House, 48 Bushloe End.  
14. Kingswood Lodge, 50 Bushloe End.  
15. All Saints Church Rooms, Bushloe End.  
16. All Saints Vicarage, Bushloe End.  
17. Elms House, British Legion, Bushloe End.  
18. Co-op Garages, 1 Central Avenue.   
163 
 19. Ivy Cottage, Cooks Lane.  
20. Methodist Church and School Rooms, Cross Street.  
21. Former Methodist church and School Rooms, Frederick St reet. 
22. The Bungalow, Gas Lane.  
23. Weavers Cottage, 26 Gladstone Street.  
24. Tyndale, 19 Granville Road.  
25. Ivy Cottage, 20 Granville Road.  
26. 29 and 31 Granville Road.  
27. 36 Granville Road.  
28. The Poplars, 37 Granville Road.  
29. Pear Tree Lodge, Gr anville Road.  
30. 56 Granville Road.  
31. 57 Granville Road.  
32. 58 Granville Road.  
33. 71 Granville Road.  
 34. 73 Granville Road.  
 35. 75 Granville Road.  
36. Holly Villa, 76 Granville Road.  
37. 79 Granville Road.  
38. Claremont, 80 Granville Road.  
39. 81 Gr anville Road.  
40. 82 Granville Road.  
41. 83 and 85 Granville Road.  
42. 2 and 4 Leicester Road.  
43. 158 and 160 Leicester Road.  
44. 162 Leicester Road.  
45. 164 – 170 Leicester Road.  
46. 289 and 291 Leicester Road.  
47. Salisbury House, 304 Leicester Road.   
164 
 48. 306 and 308 Leicester Road.  
49. The Bell Inn, Leicester Road.  
50. Star and Garter Inn, Leicester Road.  
51. The Royal Oak Inn, Leicester Road.  
52. 22 and 22A Long Street.  
53. Devil House, 41 Long Street.  
54. 43 and 45 Long Street.  
55. 61 and 65 Long Str eet. 
56. Conservative Club, Long Street.  
57. Co-op Hall and Snooker Hall, Long Street.  
58. Former Working Mens Club, Long Street.  
59. Hubert Hall Shop, Long Street.  
60. Records Office of Leicestershire, Leicester and Rutland, Long Street.  
61. The Manse, Lo ng Street.  
62. The Pavilion, Peace Memorial Park, Long Street.  
63. Cedar Court Care Home, Long Street.  
64. 1A Moat Street.  
65.  5 and 7 Moat Street.  
66. Creasy’s Cottage, 11 Moat Street.  
67. Cromwell Cottage, 32 Moat Street.  
68. 64, 64A and 64B Moat Street . 
69. Peacock Row, 106 – 134 Moat Street (evens only).  
70. Store to the rear of 116 Moat Street.  
71. Album View, 144 Moat Street.  
72. The Old Crown Inn, Moat Street.  
73. Europa Sports Factory, Newton Lane.  
74. Belvoir Sportswear Factory, Paddock Street.  
75. 6 Spa Lane.  
76. 6A Spa Lane.   
165 
 77. Kimberley Cottage, 19 Spa Lane.  
78. 20 Spa Lane (house and privy).  
79. Guthspa Works and Spa Mews, Spa Lane.  
80. 2, 4, 6 Spring Lane.  
81. Midland Cottages, 1 – 20 Station Road.  
82. Abingdon House, Station Road.  
83. 1852  Brewery Company, Station Road.  
84. 7 Welford Road.  
85. The Chapel, Wigston Cemetery, Welford Road.  
86. The Mortuary, Wigston Cemetery, Welford Road.  
 
Kilby Bridge  
1. Berry House, Welford Road.  
2. Navigation Inn, Welford Road.  
3. The White House, Welford R oad. 
4. Weighbridge House, Welford Road.  
5. Wharf and Associated Buildings, Welford Road.  
 
South Wigston  
1. The Bassett Centre, Bassett Street.  
2. 50 – 64 Blaby Road (between Glengate and Station Street).  
3. 65 – 67 Blaby Road.  
4. 69 – 99 Blaby Road.  
5. 115 – 117 Blaby Road.  
6. Congregational Church, Blaby Road.  
7. Former Ritz Cinema, Blaby Road.  
8. Methodist Church, Blaby Road.  
9. St Thomas’ Church Rooms, Blaby Road.  
10. The Marquis of Queensbury, Blaby Road.   
166 
 11. 41 – 43 Canal Street.  
12. De Vas Routeled ge Works, Canal Street.  
13. Grand Hotel, Canal Street.  
14. Stamford Shoe Works, Canal Street.  
15. Crow Mill, Countesthorpe Road.  
16. 2 Orange Street.  
17. North Lodge, Saffron Road.  
18. The Cottage, Saffron Road.  
19. WH Bates Hosiery Factory, Station Stree t. 
20. Former Quarter Masters Quarters, Tigers Road.  
21. Former Regimental Hospital, Tigers Road.  
22. Tavra Training Hall, Tigers Road.  
 
 