1LOCAL PLAN
2018 to 2038
June 2022
2Information
Copyright
Old Oak and Park Royal Development 
Corporation
June 2022
Published by Old Oak and Park Royal 
Development Corporation
Brent Civic Centre, 32 Engineers Way, 
Wembley, HA9 0FJ
www.london.gov.uk/opdcJane Seymour
Jasper den Boeft
Katie Hunter
Kevin Twomey
Lauren Lavinere
Megan Collins
Mia Williams
Michael Drake
Michael Mulhern
Ngaire Thomson
Patora Dyrma
Peter Farnham
Peter O’Dowd
Robert Reeds
Ross Williams
Roz Henville
Sam Clayton
Simon Wainberg
Thomas Mabey
Tom Cardis
Victoria HillsEnquiries 020 7983 5732
Photography and image credits
All images subject to copyright. OPDC either 
holds copyright or has obtained copyright use 
for all photos used unless otherwise credited 
to:
AHMM
Allies and Morrison
Andrew Holt
Caoimhghín Ó Tuama
Eleanor Bentall
findmeaconference.com
Furness Partnership / Tom Carter
Gehl
Greater London Authority
Jack Hobhouse
King’s Cross Academy
Lendlease 
Levitt Bernstein
London Cycling Campaign
Matt Clayton Photography / Rock Townsend
Sebastian GroteSevern Trent
studiohire.com
Timothy Soar
Tom Simpson
Transport for London
Valerie Bennett / AKT II
Virgin Active
Acknowledgements
Ajit Atwal
Alaina Tolhurst
Alexandra Dobson
Alexandra Reitman
Ben Martin
Benjamin O’Neill
Beverley Archer
Billy Newby
Chloe Horner
Claire Cook
Claire O’Brien
Clare Healy
Clare Woodcock
Clarissa Woodstock
Dan Epstein
Davena Wilson
David Lunts
Delia Beddis
Doug Wilson
Eleanor Fawcett
Emma Williamson
Esther Everett
Grace Williams
Harry Courtney
Jan Ackenhausen3Contents
P10 Scrubs Lane 99
P10C1 Harrow Road Cluster 104
P10C2 Laundry Lane Cluster 106
P10C3 Hythe Road Cluster 108
P10C4 Mitre Canalside Cluster 110
P10C5 Mitre Way Cluster 112
P11 Willesden Junction 114
P12 Wormwood Scrubs 117
5Design 120
Principle Principles for securing high quality design 122
D1 Public realm 124
D2 Accessible and inclusive design 126
D3 Well-designed buildings 127
D4 Tall buildings 129
D5 Amenity 130
D6 Key views 133
D7 Heritage 135
D8 Play space 137
6Environment and Utilities 138
EU1 Open Space 140
EU2 Urban Greening and Biodiversity 142
EU3 Water 145
EU4 Air Quality 148
EU5 Noise and Vibration 152
EU6 Waste 153
EU7 Circular and Sharing Economy 157
EU8 Sustainable Materials 159
EU9Minimising Carbon Emissions and
Overheating1611Introduction 6
2Spatial Vision 9
3Strategic policies 15
SP1 Catalyst for Growth 16
SP2 Good Growth 20
SP3Improving Health and Reducing Health 
Inequalities22
SP4 Thriving Communities 23
SP5 Economic Resilience 25
SP6 Places and Destinations 28
SP7 Connecting People and Places 31
SP8 Green Infrastructure and Open Space 35
SP9 Built Environment 39
SP10 Integrated Delivery 42
4Places 49
P1 Old Oak South 52
P1C1 Old Oak Common Station Cluster 56
P2 Old Oak North 59
P3 Grand Union Canal 62
P4 Park Royal West 66
P4C1 Brewery Cluster 70
P5 Old Park Royal 73
P6 Park Royal Centre 76
P7 North Acton and Acton Wells 79
P7C1 North Acton Town Centre Cluster 84
P7C2 Old Oak Common Lane Station Cluster 86
P8 Old Oak Lane & Old Oak Common Lane 88
P8C1 Atlas Junction Cluster 92
P9 Channel Gate 954EU10 Energy Systems 163
EU11 Smart Technology 165
EU12 Extraction of Materials 167
EU13 Land Contamination 168
7Transport 170
T1 Roads and Streets 172
T2 Walking 174
T3 Cycling 176
T4 Parking 179
T5 Rail 183
T6 Buses 186
T7 Freight, Servicing and Deliveries 188
T8 Construction 189
T9 Transport Assessments and Travel Plans 190
8Housing 192
H1 Housing Supply 194
H2 Affordable Housing 196
H3 Housing Mix 199
H4 Family Housing 200
H5 Existing Housing 201
H6 Build to Rent Housing 202
H7 Co-Living and Shared Housing 203
H8 Gypsy and Traveller Accomodation 204
H9 Specialist Housing 205
H10 Student Housing 207
9Employment 208
E1Protecting, Strengthening & Intensifying the 
Strategic Industrial Location210
E2 Employment Sites Outside SIL 213
E3 Supporting Small Businesses and Start Ups 215
E4 Work-Live Units 216E5Local Access to Training, Employment and 
Economic Opportunities218
10Town Centre and Community Uses 220
TCC1 Locations for and Impacts of Town Centre Uses 222
TCC2 Vibrancy 225
TCC3 Social Infrastructure 227
TCC4 Culture and Art 231
TCC5 Sports and Leisure 232
TCC6 Public Houses 233
TCC7 Catalyst Uses 234
TCC8 Meanwhile Uses 236
TCC9 Visitor Accommodation 237
TCC10 Night Time Economy Uses 238
11Delivery and Implementation 240
DI1Balancing Priorities and Securing Infrastructure 
Delivery242
DI2 Timely Delivery and Optimised Phasing 245
DI3Stakeholder Engagement and being a Proactive 
Planning Authority249
DI4 Planning Powers and Monitoring 252
12Glossary 254
 5Chair’s Foreword
Liz Peace
Chair of the Old Oak and Park Royal 
Development CorporationChange and regeneration is underway at Old Oak and Park Royal, a process that will undoubtedly 
gather pace over the next few years. This New Local Plan, produced by the Old Oak and Park Royal 
Development Corporation, is the statutory planning framework for managing this process and making 
sure it delivers for local people and newcomers alike. It sets out the land use and policy requirements that 
will bring tens of thousands of new and affordable homes, many more high quality jobs, new parks and 
public spaces, and a healthy and low carbon district where businesses can grow and thrive.
In just a few years’ time, Old Oak Common station, the largest ever constructed in the UK, will open 
with High Speed Two, Elizabeth Line and Great Western services. This will create an unprecedented 
opportunity for regeneration and investment as Old Oak becomes one of the best-connected places 
in the UK. This plan looks to organise and optimise that potential for growth, whilst placing genuine 
environmental, social and economic sustainability at its heart. 
By 2038, we forecast there will be almost 20,000 new homes and over 35,000 new jobs in our area, 
creating a regenerated and flourishing district of London that is attractive, inclusive, lively and innovative. 
Whilst respecting and taking a cue from the extraordinary heritage of Old Oak and Park Royal, new 
developments will provide a showcase environment for physical and mental health and well-being, 
with new parks and shared spaces, better access and use of the Grand Union Canal and the protected 
Wormwood Scrubs, healthy, liveable streets, improved local amenities and a range of complementary 
town centre uses. 
The plan promotes exemplary standards of environmental and social sustainability, including low and 
zero carbon development, the re-use of materials, a sharing economy and smart technology. It supports 
the creation of new jobs across a range of sectors and income levels that will deliver a fairer economy. 
It also provides for the creation of lifetime neighbourhoods through the construction of a wide range 
of housing types, with a target for 50% of these to be affordable homes. It celebrates the diversity of 
London’s communities, not least in our part of west London, placing inclusive design at the centre of new 
developments. New homes, workplaces and public spaces will be fully accessible and safe, with new 
and improved ancillary uses such as schools, health centres and community spaces provided in a timely 
manner to support a growing local population. 
Old Oak and Park Royal is London’s largest industrial estate, employing over 43,000 people and this plan 
recognises the crucial role that industry has played, and will continue to play in the future. It is a vital cog 
in London’s industrial and distribution economy and this plan protects and intensifies these functions, 
ensuring our area continues to thrive in an increasingly competitive and globalised world economy. 
OPDC has worked closely and extensively with local residents, businesses and a wide range of other 
organisations in the preparation of this plan, and I want to thank everyone for their advice, thoughts and 
feedback. We will continue to listen, learn and engage closely with all our communities as we see the 
emergence of a truly exceptional, exciting and super-connected place to live, work and play. 
6Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION7Figure 1.2: Policy status and relationshipBACKGROUND TO OPDC
1.1. The following sections provide details on the 
background of OPDC and the legal status of the Local 
Plan. Further details on the legal status, policy status 
and background context to the area can be found in the 
appendix.
1.2. The Mayor of London established the Old Oak 
and Park Royal Development Corporation (OPDC) on 
1 April 2015 as a ‘Mayoral Development Corporation’ 
under powers of the Localism Act (2011). OPDC is the 
second of its kind in London, the first being the London 
Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC). 
1.3. The OPDC has a number of key aims, including: 
a) transforming one of London’s most inaccessible 
areas into a well-connected, world-class transport 
interchange;
b) enabling delivery of new housing and commercial 
development, surrounded by sustainable and 
thriving neighbourhoods and valued open space; 
c) protecting, strengthening and intensifying Park 
Royal and Old Oak; and
d)  protecting and improving Wormwood Scrubs.
1.4. OPDC is the local planning authority for the area 
and as such is responsible for plan-making including 
the production of a Local Plan. The OPDC Local 
Plan sets out OPDC’s strategy for the sustainable 
development of its area as a whole, including the 
general amount, type and location of new development 
it considers could take place and the policies to which 
applications for planning permission should conform. 
The OPDC Local Plan period is 2018 to 2038
1.5. Its planning powers, including preparing and 
implementing the Local Plan, represent one part of the 
OPDC’s role as a Mayoral Development Corporation. 
Working with its partners, including the host Boroughs 
of Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith & Fulham and the 
local community, OPDC will help implement projects 
and bring about change that will help meet the 
Corporation’s key aims.STATUS OF THE PLAN
Legal Status
1.6. This document is a Development Plan Document 
(DPD) and is part of the Government’s planning policy 
system introduced by the Planning and Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004.
1.7. Part 6 of the Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 sets out the 
procedure for the production of Local Plans. This 
version of the Local Plan constitutes the adopted Local 
Plan.
Policy Status
1.8. Alongside the National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF), London Plan, Old Oak and Park 
Royal Opportunity Area Planning Framework, West 
London Waste Plan DPD, any ‘made’ Neighbourhood 
Plans and any adopted Supplementary Planning 
Documents (SPDs), OPDC’s Local Plan is a key 
planning policy document against which planning 
applications within the OPDC area will be assessed 
(see figure 1.2). 1.9. The following existing borough Local Plan 
documents will be superseded for the OPDC area:
• London Borough of Brent
• Core Strategy
• Site Specific Allocation DPD
• Draft Development Management Policies DPD
• Saved UDP Policies
• Policies Map
• London Borough of Ealing
• Development (Core Strategy) DPD
• Development Management DPD
• Development Sites DPD
• Draft Planning for Schools DPD
• Policies Map
1.10. Please note, that following the London Borough 
of Hammersmith and Fulham adopting their Local Plan 
in February 2018, their Core Strategy, Development 
Management Local Plan and associated Proposals 
Map were removed from the Development Plan. 
1.11. The policies in this Local Plan are consistent with 
the version of the National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF) published in 2012 and are in general 
conformity with the London Plan (2021). Further, the 
Old Oak and Park Royal Opportunity Area Planning 
Framework (OAPF) adopted by the Mayor in November 
2015 as Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) 
to the London Plan has helped to inform the policy 
themes and policies in this Local Plan. 
1.12. In order to keep the OPDC Local Plan spatial 
and succinct, this Local Plan does not seek to repeat 
policies already contained in the NPPF and London 
Plan save for where such policies are particular to 
the area or type of development proposed or it is of 
particular importance to reflect them. This Local Plan 
should therefore be read in conjunction with the NPPF, 
the associated National Planning Practice Guidance 
(NPPG) and the London Plan. 
1.13. When considering development proposals, 
the OPDC will take a positive approach that reflects 
the overall presumption in favour of sustainable 
development contained in the NPPF and will work SPDs Local PlanNeighbour-
hood PlansWest 
London 
Waste PlanLondon Plan & Old Oak 
and Park Royal OAPFNPPF and 
NPPG8
with applicants to secure development that improves 
the environmental social and economic wellbeing of 
its area. Planning applications that accord with the 
policies in the Local Plan will be approved unless 
material considerations indicate otherwise.
1.14. The Strategic Policies, Place policies and 
Delivery and Implementation policies (chapters 3, 4 
and 11) form OPDC’s strategic policies for the area and 
establish the framework for fulfilling the spatial vision 
for the future of the OPDC area. The strategic policies 
dovetail with the OPDC’s corporate priorities and 
outline how the OPDC area will be transformed over 
the plan period. 
1.15. Chapters 3, 4 and 11 will be treated as OPDC’s 
strategic policies when considering the general 
conformity of neighbourhood planning policies.
1.16. Figures in the Local Plan should be treated as 
indicative. The exact boundaries for spatially specific 
policies are set out in OPDC’s Policies Map.
Relationship with the High Speed Rail (London- 
West Midlands) Act (2017)
1.17. High Speed 2 (HS2) is the Government’s 
proposal for a new, high speed north-south railway. 
Phase One of the scheme will connect London to the 
West Midlands and will run through the OPDC area. 
Part of the project involves delivery of the new station 
at Old Oak Common where there will be a connection 
to the Elizabeth Line and the national rail services.  
1.18.  The High Speed Rail (London-West Midlands) 
Act (2017) grants deemed planning permission for 
phase 1 of the HS2 project. Matters such as the 
principle for the railway works, their limits, and matters 
of principle relating to mitigation are determined 
through the Parliamentary Act, rather than the normal 
Town and Country Planning Act process. The level of 
detailed design necessary to enable the development 
to be constructed has yet to be carried out, so the 
deemed planning permission is subject to a series 
of items that require the approval of local planning authorities on the route known as Schedule 17 
approvals. OPDC as the planning authority for the Old 
Oak and Park Royal area will be responsible for such 
approvals. The considerations of any approvals for 
works to be carried out in relation to Phase One of HS2 
are limited to those set out in Schedule 17. Further 
information for Schedule 17 approvals can be found 
in the Main Provisions of the planning regime (B1) 
information paper available on the HS2 webpages.9Chapter 2
SPATIAL VISION104. Old Oak will be the major 
transport hub  for London, 
providing a gateway to London, 
the UK and beyond.2. The OPDC area will become 
a major new London centre  
providing high-density mixed 
use development, that will 
shape west London and support 
London’s continued growth.
7. Park Royal and Old Oak North  will 
continue to be London’s largest and 
most successful industrial area reflecting 
its designation as a Strategic Industrial 
Location to support London’s economy 
with opportunities for intensification and 
innovative growth.1. High quality design  will 
be showcased as part of new 
development that will set new 
international standards in 
accessible and inclusive high 
density commercial, industrial 
and residential development 
and open space design and 
management. 3. The area will become a 
destination  for people from 
across London and the UK 
that will be home to a mix of 
cultural and leisure uses.
5. Wormwood Scrubs  will 
be accessible MOL that will 
continue to perform its role as a 
metropolitan park.
6. It will be an exemplar in 
healthy and sustainable 
large-scale development.Thinking Big Our Spatial Vision
Old Oak and Park Royal will be a highly 
connected part of London, playing an 
important role in shaping west London’s 
future and driving national economic 
growth.
It will comprise a network of places 
including an innovative industrial area 
and a high-density new vibrant part of 
London. It will be home to a diverse and 
intense mix of uses, places and people.
Development will pioneer international 
excellence in sustainability, health 
and wellbeing and design quality to 
deliver tangible benefits for both local 
communities and London.1114. Life chances and fairness will be 
improved for existing and future communities, 
with new development providing opportunities 
to enhance health and wellbeing, access to 
skills, education and social infrastructure. 12. Benefits from development 
will be generated for local people.
15. Day-to-day quality of life  will be 
enhanced for local people by enabling a sense 
of ownership, empowerment, safety and 
provision of convenient access to town centre 
uses, shops, GPs, schools, nature and parks, 
community facilities, leisure and sports.8. Local economies will 
be supported  by creating 
opportunities for local 
businesses to access 
new markets and provide 
a mix of employment 
space to support new 
business growth.10. An attractive built 
environment will be created 
comprising a network of new and 
enhanced places enabling people 
to enjoy good quality streets, 
open spaces and well-designed 
buildings that complement 
surrounding neighbourhoods.9. The areas’ existing rich social, 
cultural and built environmental 
and heritage assets such as 
Wormwood Scrubs, Kensal Green 
Cemetery the Grand Union Canal 
and the Rolls Royce Factory will 
be conserved and enhanced. 
13. New development will 
connect local existing and new 
communities and neighbourhoods 
in the surrounding areas through 
high quality walking, cycling, public 
transport and vehicular links.11. A mix of new homes will 
be delivered at different prices 
including affordable housing for 
local people.Going Local
Supporting Text
2.1. The Spatial Vision is OPDC’s vision for what the 
different places of Old Oak, Park Royal and Wormwood 
Scrubs would be like in twenty years at the end of the 
‘plan period’. It both leads and is informed by the policy 
content of the Local Plan to set out how the OPDC 
area is intended to benefit people, the economy and 
the built and natural environment at the local, London 
and national scale.
2.2. The Spatial Vision is comprised of the 
overarching Vision Statement and the Vision Narratives 
- ‘thinking big’ and ‘going local’. The Vision Statement 
provides an overarching view of the future. The Vision 
narratives provide further information on the proposed 
outcomes of this development, ‘thinking big’ at the 
national and regional scale and ‘going local’, setting out 
how local people would benefit from change and how 
neighbourhoods would improve.
2.3. These three elements provide the structure and 
the key themes for the policies in this Local Plan. The 
objectives for how the Spatial Vision will be delivered 
are embedded in the Strategic Policies and Place 
Policies that, alongside the Development Management 
Policies will drive and guide future development and 
Supplementary Planning Documents. 12Innovation Transit Oriented DevelopmentGrand Union Canal and 
Wormwood Scrubs
Old Oak and Park Royal can 
set new standards for creating 
high quality, high density cities. 
Fundamental to this will be 
ensuring innovative solutions 
are embedded into the design, 
construction and operation of 
the buildings, public realm and 
infrastructure. The development 
of Old Oak and Park Royal 
will span many decades, 
meaning that the area can be 
at the vanguard of incorporating 
appropriate technologies 
that support the creation of 
sustainable communities by 
being smart from the start.The success of this area will to some 
extent be dependent on being able to 
encourage residents and workers in the 
area to leave their cars at home and walk, 
cycle or use public transport for the majority 
of journeys. The new Old Oak Common 
Station will provide the impetus for this, 
but other potential (Old Oak Common 
Lane) and improved rail stations (such as 
Willesden Junction and North Acton) and 
new and improved walking and cycling 
connections, along with enhancements 
to bus infrastructure will help to improve 
the areas public transport accessibility 
level (PTAL) and provide people with a 
choice of high quality sustainable transport 
modes. Alongside the implementation of 
traffic reduction strategies, this will assist in 
delivering the mode share targets set out in 
the Mayor’s Transport Strategy.The Grand Union Canal is a key 
historic feature in the area and 
provides a valuable green and 
blue link. Development will provide 
opportunities to consider how 
the canal can be enhanced as a 
green link and as an important 
feature in the approach to place 
making. Wormwood Scrubs is one 
of London’s larger open spaces. 
It acts as an important green lung 
that provides people and wildlife 
with the opportunity to enjoy 
green open space. Development 
provides opportunities to enhance 
access to it and to provide 
sensitive enhancements so 
that it can be enjoyed by more 
Londoners and fulfil its role of a 
metropolitan park.
Economic Growth Place Making Health and Wellbeing
The area has the capacity to 
deliver 36,350 new jobs over the 
next 20 years. This development 
potential could bring enormous 
rewards for the national, regional 
and local economy, generating 
billions in Gross Value Added 
(GVA) and provide local people 
with opportunities for lifelong 
learning and employment across 
a range of skills and sectors.Regeneration of the area provides 
significant opportunities to celebrate 
heritage and enhance existing and 
create new neighbourhoods, providing 
locals and Londoners with new places 
to live, work, visit and play. However, 
there are also substantial challenges to 
place making resulting from the area’s 
topography, severance caused by existing 
infrastructure, the phased approach to 
delivery and the scale of development 
planned that will need to be managed and 
early development opportunities will need 
to be carefully integrated within long-term 
development proposals.In recent decades society has 
become more obese and more 
stressed and these trends are 
predicted to continue. It will 
be important to create places 
that support active and healthy 
lifestyles. This can be achieved 
through the creation of Healthy 
Streets and a high quality public 
realm, multi-functional open space 
and through providing facilities 
that support social interaction.Opportunities and Challenges
2.4. The delivery of the Spatial Vision is complex 
and gives rise to a number of opportunities and 
challenges. The role of the Spatial Vision and 
supporting policies is to clearly articulate how OPDC 
will work with a variety of stakeholders to capitalise 
on the opportunities, mitigate the challenges and 
set out the parameters that will create a socially, 
environmentally and economically sustainable 
community in Old Oak and Park Royal. 
2.5. Figure 2.1 identifies some of these key 
opportunities and challenges facing the delivery of 
the spatial vision, which are addressed in the Spatial 
Vision itself and policies in this Plan.OpportunitiesFigure 2.1: Opportunities and Challenges
Opportunities13Industry Higher Density Development Climate Change Deliverability
The industrial land within OPDC’s boundary is 
a vital cog in the London economy and OPDC 
will work to protect, strengthen and intensify the 
Strategic Industrial Location in Park Royal and 
Old Oak North. However, the nature of industry 
in London will continue to change and Park 
Royal needs to be able to continue to respond 
to these changes to remain competitive. 
Regeneration in the OPDC area presents a 
dichotomy for industry. Industry can serve to 
support the needs of development by providing 
ancillary services. This includes the potential 
for a circular economy, looking at ways that 
things can be recycled and repurposed by 
businesses. However, regeneration could 
result in rent increases and increased pressure 
on infrastructure which if not managed could 
undermine what makes the Old Oak and Park 
Royal area a success.The area’s public transport access 
will provide significant opportunities 
to create high density development, 
which will have benefits in terms of 
optimising the delivery of homes and 
jobs. However, if not appropriately 
designed and managed, high densities 
can present challenges in terms of 
its potential impacts on the transport 
network, townscape, on climate change 
and the local environment, community 
services and on health and wellbeing.Climate change is an issue facing 
the entire planet and is not confined 
solely to Old Oak and Park Royal. 
Addressing climate change is not 
without its challenges with the density 
of development being proposed. 
The ambition should be to place this 
development project at the vanguard 
of demonstrating how cities can 
reduce the effects of climate change 
through the design of development, 
the built environment and infrastructure 
provision.The scale of development and 
infrastructure required to support this 
presents significant challenges to the 
deliverability of development. For the 
first ten years of the Local Plan, HS2 
Ltd will use a number of development 
plots to construct the HS2 line and 
station at Old Oak, which could impact 
on the developability and deliverability 
of adjacent plots. Further, there are 
challenging sites such as the Elizabeth 
Line Depot, which will either require 
relocation or decking to enable 
development to be brought forward and 
other sites which could have significant 
land contamination, impacting on 
development viability.
Diversity of Housing Competing Demand for Space Adaptability Managing Traffic and Construction
The OPDC area is capable of accommodating 
an indicative capacity of 25,500 homes, of 
which a minimum 19,850   could be delivered 
in the next 20 years. It is important that 
these meet the housing needs of locals and 
Londoners and are provided over a range of 
tenures and housing types, including much 
needed affordable housing, private sale, rented, 
student and extra care housing with some 
shared living. The scale of this regeneration 
project provides a substantial opportunity 
to meet these needs, but the complexity of 
developing the area also presents significant 
challenges to the viability of meeting the needs 
of everyone and particularly those on lower 
incomes.By consequence of the high density 
nature of development, space in the 
Old Oak and Park Royal area will be at 
a premium. This will create challenges 
in terms of securing adequate open 
space and space for servicing. 
However, the intensity of use also 
provides opportunities to capitalise on 
economies of scale and take innovative 
approaches to the provision of services 
and infrastructure. This could include 
taking a system of systems approach 
where services are pooled or shared to 
deliver greater efficiencies.The regeneration of the area will occur 
over a number of decades. The phased 
approach to development is likely to 
mean that the streets and buildings 
built today might not be fit for purpose 
20 years from now. Technological 
advances such as driverless cars and 
smart technology are also likely to 
fundamentally change the way that we 
plan, design and operate cities in the 
future. It will therefore be important that 
the development in Old Oak and Park 
Royal is designed with flexibility and 
adaptability in mind.The Old Oak and Park Royal area 
suffers from significant congestion. 
Without appropriate management, 
this will be further exacerbated 
during development’s construction 
and through its operation, having 
detrimental impacts on the environment 
and particularly on air quality and 
noise and vibration. Providing high 
quality options for sustainable transport 
and construction and the re-use and 
repurposing of materials will be critical 
to mitigating these impacts.Challenges14
Figure 2.2: Key Diagram
15
Chapter 3
STRATEGIC POLICIES16
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Cultural Principles
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Socio-Economic Baseline StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Design Chapter
• Environment and Utilities Chapter
• Transport Chapter
• Housing Chapter
• Employment Chapter
• Town Centre and Community Uses Chapter
• Delivery and Implementation ChapterPOLICY SP1: Catalyst for Growth
OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
A world-class transport super-hub at Old Oak 
Common, supporting the creation of a new part of 
London that acts as a catalyst for growth at national, 
regional and local levels. 
POLICY
Proposals should:  
a) support the delivery of the new strategic transport 
hub and interchange at Old Oak Common;
b)  support the delivery of a new part of London, 
which is both a destination and a gateway to 
London and the rest of the UK; and
c)  provide a range of land uses in accordance with 
relevant land use policies, that:
i promotes and supports London’s role as 
a global city and position as the world’s 
economic and cultural capital;
ii complements, supports and shapes west 
London’s growth; and
iii contributes to meeting the needs of local 
communities.SUPPORTING TEXT
3.1. Old Oak Common Station is set to become the 
second biggest rail station in London and the largest 
sub-surface station to have ever been built in the UK. 
The station will support the wider Old Oak and Park 
Royal area in becoming a new strategic destination - 
10 minutes from Heathrow and the West End. It will 
also provide a transport interchange to other airports 
and to the rest of the UK, including places such as 
Birmingham, Bristol, Leeds, Manchester and Sheffield.
3.2. This new station provides the opportunity to 
set new standards for optimising sustainable transit 
oriented development that can strengthen London’s 
position as a global city and help to deliver much 
needed new homes and jobs. To enable this, proposals 
should support the timely delivery of this station, 
ensuring it is properly embedded into its surroundings 
and that the station and surrounding land provide 
a range and quantum of uses that capitalise on the 
improved access to public transport. This will ensure 
that the benefits to the UK, London and for local 
communities are maximised.3.3. The development potential across Old Oak 
and Park Royal offers significant potential to deliver 
new homes, jobs and supporting ancillary uses. The 
Mayor’s London Plan identifies that the OPDC area 
can deliver an indicative 25,500 homes and 65,000 
jobs, making it one of London and the UK’s largest 
regeneration projects. 19,850 of these homes and 
36,350 of these jobs can be delivered by 2038 (see 
policies SP4 and SP5). 
3.4. The successful regeneration of Old Oak and 
Park Royal can offer significant benefits for the wider 
west London sub-region. Below is a list of the areas in 
the wider region where joint working will be required 
to ensure that the benefits of regeneration can be fully 
captured. 
 »White City Opportunity Area is currently being 
transformed with the expansion of Westfield, 
development of Imperial College’s White City 
Campus and redevelopment of the BBC Television 
Centre. The White City OAPF was published 
in 2013 and development in this area is well 
underway. Coordinated public realm improvements 
could deliver better connectivity between the OPDC 
area and White City. Economic synergies will also 
be explored such as the potential for Imperial 
College to continue to grow its west London 
campus into the OPDC area;
 »Harlesden Town Centre is a designated District 
Town Centre, providing town centre facilities 
for people living in the area. The centre and its 
surroundings currently suffer from economic 
deprivation, falling within the top 10% most 
deprived wards nationally when measured 
against the Index of Multiple Deprivation (2019). 
Improved connections between it and the OPDC 
area provide significant opportunities for residents 
and businesses in Harlesden to benefit from 
regeneration. OPDC and Brent Council have 
established a Willesden Junction Steering Group to 
coordinate projects and strategies for the area;17
HS1
VAUXHALL
NINE ELMS
BATTERSEA
18,500 HOMES
18,500 JOBSKENNINGTON
CLAPHAM
JUNCTIONNORTHERN
LINE
EXTENSION
BALHAM
STREATHAM
WIMBLEDONCROSSRAIL 2THAMESLINK
A3220A501A41A404A4005
A312
A312HIGH SPEED 2NORTH CIRCULAR
ELIZABETH LINE
LONDON  OVERGROUNDLONDON OVERGROUNDWEST COAST MAIN LINE
SKY LINE
MOTSPUR
PARKFULWELL
SUNBURY /hyphen.cap ON /hyphen.cap THAMESTWICKENHAMRICHMONDGREENFORD
NEW MALDEN
SHEPPERTONVICTORIA
1,000 HOMES
4,000 JOBS
EARLS COURT & 
WEST KENSINGTON
6,500 HOMES
5,000 JOBSWATERLOO
1,500 HOMES
6,000 JOBS
SOUTH WIMBLEDON
COLLIERS WOOD
5,000 HOMES
6,000 JOBSKINGS CROSS
1,000 HOMES
25,000 JOBSEUSTON
2,800/hyphen.cap3,800 HOMES
8,000/hyphen.cap15,000 JOBS
PADDINGTON
1,000 HOMES
13,000 JOBS
WHITE CITY
7,000 HOMES
2,000 JOBSKENSAL
CANALSIDE
3,500 HOMES
2,000 JOBSWEMBLEY
14,000 HOMES
13,500 JOBS
OLD OAK & 
PARK ROYAL
25,500 HOMES
55,000 JOBS
SOUTHALL
9,000 HOMES
3,000 JOBSHAYES
4,000 HOMES
1,000 JOBS
SLOUGH
GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY
HEATHROW
13,000 HOMES
11,000 JOBSHARROW &
WEALDSTONE
5,000 HOMES
1,000 JOBSTOWARDS
WATFORD,
NORTHAMPTON
TOWARDS
READING, SWINDON
AND BRISTOLTOWARDS
OXFORD, BANBURY
AND BIRMINGHAMTOWARDS
LUTON &
MILTON KEYNES
TOWARDS
EPSOMCRICKLEWOOD
BRENT CROSS
9,500 HOMES
26,000 JOBSCOLINDALE
BURNT OAK
7,000 HOMES
2,000 JOBS
TOTTENHAM
COURT ROAD
300 HOMES
6,000 JOBS
M4M1
A40
A40M40
M4
M3M25
SOUTH CIRCULAR
A3A4
A316A4
THAMESLINKC E N T R A L     L O N D O N
WEST DRAYTON
GREAT WEST CORRIDOR
7,500 HOMES
14,000 JOBS
KINGSTON
9,000 HOMES
5,000 JOBS
Figure 3.1: Strategic Context18
Park Royal
White City OA
Kensal OA
Wembley OA
Shepherd’s Bush
Harlesden Town Centre
Acton Town Centre
Ealing Town Centre
Old Oak 
Wormwood Scrubs
North Kensington
East Acton 
White City EstateKensal Rise
Maida Vale
North London Line
West Coast Main Line
Great Western LineGrand Union Canal
West London LineCentral LineDudding Hill Line
A40Central Line
Central LinePiccadilly LineWest Coast Main Line
A40
Great Western Line
North London LineHS2 tunnelHS2 tunnel
St Mary’s 
CemeteryKensal Green 
Cemetery
HMP
Wormwood Scrubs  Hammersmith 
Hospital  Linford Christie 
StadiumWest Acton Alperton Housing ZoneStonebridge
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDUNDERGROUNDUNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDWillesden Junction
Kensal Green
White CityEast Acton North ActonHarlesdenUNDERGROUNDStonebridge Park
UNDERGROUNDHanger Lane
UNDERGROUNDPark Royal
Acton Main Line
UNDERGROUNDNorth EalingUNDERGROUNDWest Acton
Ealing Broadway
0 0.25 0.5 0.125 Kilometers ±
 »Kensal Canalside Opportunity Area is 
immediately to the east of the OPDC area and is 
identified in the London Plan as having the capacity 
to deliver an indicative 2,000 new jobs and 3,500 
new homes. The Royal Borough of Kensington and 
Chelsea are lobbying the Mayor of London and TfL 
for a new Elizabeth Line station at Kensal, which 
could further increase the area’s development 
capacity. The station’s delivery is not yet committed 
but is safeguarded within the Royal Borough of 
Kensington and Chelsea’s Local Plan. There will 
be opportunities to improve connections between 
Kensal Canalside and the OPDC area and OPDC 
will work with the Royal Borough of Kensington and 
Chelsea to explore ways that this can be achieved;
 »Alperton located to the west of the OPDC area in 
Brent has been identified as a ‘Housing Zone’ by 
the Mayor of London with additional funding for 
the delivery of affordable housing. The Alperton 
Housing Zone is identified as having the capacity to 
deliver over 3,000 homes; 
 »Wembley Opportunity Area is less than 2 miles 
from the OPDC area and is west London’s second 
largest Opportunity Area after Old Oak, with 
capacity to deliver 14,000 homes and 13,500 jobs. 
OPDC is working with Brent Council to explore 
opportunities to better connect Wembley to the 
OPDC area; and
 »Centres in the wider area such as Ealing, 
Southall, Acton, Wembley, Hammersmith and 
Kensington will be influenced by the scale of 
development proposed at Old Oak and Park Royal. 
There is a need for close collaboration with the 
surrounding and host local authorities to consider 
what these influences might be and ensure that 
measures are taken to capture opportunities and 
to ensure there are not any significant adverse 
impacts on the vitality and viability of these centres. Figure 3.2: Harlesden Town Centre
SP119
Park Royal
White City OA
Kensal OA
Wembley OA
Shepherd’s Bush
Harlesden Town Centre
Acton Town Centre
Ealing Town Centre
Old Oak 
Wormwood Scrubs
North Kensington
East Acton 
White City EstateKensal Rise
Maida Vale
North London Line
West Coast Main Line
Great Western LineGrand Union Canal
West London LineCentral LineDudding Hill Line
A40Central Line
Central LinePiccadilly LineWest Coast Main Line
A40
Great Western Line
North London LineHS2 tunnelHS2 tunnel
St Mary’s 
CemeteryKensal Green 
Cemetery
HMP
Wormwood Scrubs  Hammersmith 
Hospital  Linford Christie 
StadiumWest Acton Alperton Housing ZoneStonebridge
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDUNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDWillesden Junction
Kensal Green
White CityEast Acton North ActonHarlesden
UNDERGROUNDStonebridge Park
UNDERGROUNDHanger Lane
UNDERGROUNDPark Royal
Acton Main Line
UNDERGROUNDNorth EalingUNDERGROUNDWest Acton
Ealing Broadway
0 0.25 0.5 0.125 Kilometers ±Figure 3.3: Surrounding Context
Opportunity Area
Old Oak & Park Royal
Harlesden / Acton town centres
Alperton Growth Area
Open space
20
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Integrated Impact Assessment
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costing Study
• Smart Strategy
• Statement of Community Involvement
• POLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Design Chapter
• Environment and Utilities Chapter
• Transport Chapter
• Housing Chapter
• Employment Chapter
• Town Centre and Community Uses Chapter
• Delivery and Implementation ChapterPOLICY SP2: Good Growth
OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
Delivering a new part of London, that supports best 
practice and innovative approaches to achieving 
high density, high quality development across the 
environmental, social and economic strands of 
sustainability.
POLICY
Proposals should:
a) create vibrant, mixed and inclusive lifetime 
neighbourhoods;
b) deliver a low carbon and environmentally resilient 
development, that is adaptive to and resilient to 
climate change;
c)  deliver the highest standards of place making, 
urban design and architecture;
d)  ensure the robust and feasible ongoing 
management of the built environment;
e)  promote and deliver efficiency and effectiveness 
in advanced construction;SUPPORTING TEXT
3.5. The OPDC area can fulfil a vital role in helping 
to meet London’s growth sustainably. It is imperative 
that given the scale of development envisaged, it 
achieves high standards of sustainability in terms of 
design, delivery, operation and management. This 
can be particularly challenging at high densities, but it 
is through high density, transit oriented development 
that some of the greatest sustainability benefits can 
be realised. The policies in this Local Plan set out 
the approach for how development in the OPDC area 
can deliver internationally recognised best practice 
standards in these policy areas, delivering excellence 
and innovation in how cities of the future are planned, 
delivered and operated.3.6. Lifetime neighbourhoods extol the principles 
of community cohesion and empowerment, access 
and inclusivity, mixed use neighbourhoods, safety and 
security, respect of diversity, affordability and choice of 
housing. OPDC will ensure new development embeds 
these principles from the outset. Further details on how 
this will be achieved are included throughout this Local 
Plan. 
3.7. New development will need to consider 
and demonstrate how it can best address the 
substantial environmental challenges facing the planet. 
Requirements are set out in the Environment and 
Utilities Chapter, providing locally specific policies 
that build on policies and standards in the Mayor’s 
London Plan and London Environment Strategy, 
and the principle of environmental net gain as set 
out in the Government’s 25 Year Environment Plan. 
The application of these environmental policies and 
standards will understandably be challenging. In 
applying these, regard would always need to be given 
to the viability of development (see Policy DI1). 
3.8. The marked change in public transport 
access makes the brownfield site at Old Oak a suitable 
location for new high density development. Buildings 
at high density must be of the highest quality (see 
Policy SP9) to ensure that potential place making and 
environmental challenges are addressed. OPDC’s 
Precedents Study identifies a range of high quality, 
well-designed schemes that are considered to achieve 
these policy aspirations. High density development 
in SIL will be different to mixed use development, but 
OPDC’s Park Royal Intensification Study and Old Oak 
North Intensification Study demonstrate how SIL could 
be regenerated to increase industrial floorspace and 
provide additional jobs.
3.9. High quality urban design is not just 
about planning, design and delivery. Appropriate 
arrangements must be put in place to ensure long-term 
success. Materials in buildings, streets, spaces and f) design, construct and manage a smart and 
resilient city; 
g)  promote resource efficiency and the principles of 
the circular and sharing economy; and
h)  proactively engage with and deliver benefits for 
local communities.21
infrastructure should be designed to last and these 
elements need to be robust, resilient and coordinated. 
OPDC will work with developers to appropriately 
secure arrangements for the successful long-term 
management of the area to ensure that design 
quality maintains good growth and supports lifetime 
neighbourhoods.
3.10. A lack of speed, innovation and skills within 
the construction industry has impacted on the ability 
to deliver new homes and jobs at pace. However, 
increasing efficiency and effectiveness in advanced 
construction techniques can help to speed up delivery 
and would be supported. This innovation could 
help OPDC exceed its homes and jobs targets (see 
policies SP4 and SP5).  This may include precision 
manufacturing techniques such as modular off-site 
construction, 3D printing of materials and automation. 
3.11. The proliferation of technology and 
transformational change to our environment and 
society will require cities and development that 
are designed with flexibility in mind. Buildings and 
infrastructure will need to stand the test of time and 
so far as is possible, be future proofed and adaptable. 
Development proposals will be expected to consider 
how buildings, land uses and spaces may need to 
adapt over time. OPDC’s Smart Strategy identifies 
how innovations in technology could be practically 
embedded within development. Policy EU11 in the 
Environment and Utilities Chapter sets out OPDC’s 
expectations for how development proposals should 
plan for, and future-proof for, innovations in technology. 
3.12. Creating high quality environments that 
are resource efficient is part of the world-wide 
development agenda. The benefits of resource 
efficient design includes reduced carbon emissions, 
lower operating costs, better build quality, healthier 
lifestyles, more social integration and less reliance 
on scarce resources. Resource efficiency should be addressed through careful design, with management 
and maintenance considerations factored in from the 
start. Development should consider how it would fit into 
a wider integrated system (see Policy SP10). 
3.13. OPDC has developed a Circular and Sharing 
Economy Study, which identifies specific measures that 
would support a shift to a more resource and space 
efficient place. Further details of how development 
proposals are expected to contribute to this are 
included in Policy EU7 and the recommendations 
from the Circular and Sharing Economy Study are 
embedded throughout the policies of this Local Plan.  
3.14. Places are shaped by people and to ensure 
success, there is a need for ongoing dialogue with the SP2
communities and politicians that live and work in and 
around the area, to achieve active participation in place 
making. OPDC will strongly encourage developers to 
engage in a genuine and fair manner with the local 
community at a sufficiently early stage in the design 
of a development proposal, to enable local people to 
share their insight and knowledge. This open approach 
ensures local people are more informed and able 
to feed into the discussion around the challenging 
trade-offs that may be required (see Policy DI1). 
OPDC’s Statement of Community Involvement (SCI) 
sets out in further detail how developers should 
engage with OPDC and local communities and further 
policy requirements for community engagement and 
participation are set out in Policy DI3.
Figure 3.4: Hale Village (credit: Eleanor Bentall)
22
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Energy, Overheating and Daylight in Tall Buildings Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Social Infrastructue Needs Study Update
• Socio-Economic Baseline Study
POLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Design Chapter
• Environment and Utilities Chapter
• Transport Chapter
• Housing Chapter
• Employment Chapter
• Town Centre and Community Uses Chapter
• Delivery and Implementation ChapterPOLICY SP3: Improving Health and Reducing Health Inequalities
SUPPORTING TEXT
3.15. There are marked health inequalities across 
London, such that people living in London’s more 
deprived neighbourhoods have shorter life expectancy 
and spend a greater proportion of their lives in ill-health 
than those living in wealthier areas. It is recognised 
that our health and wellbeing is influenced by a wide 
range of determinants, including the physical and social 
environment. Planning decisions shape the physical 
environment and can therefore help promote healthy 
or unhealthy lifestyles. For example, access to open 
space and nature can enhance mental and physical 
health, promote physical activity, social interaction, 
employee satisfaction and productivity. 
3.16. The successful regeneration of the OPDC 
area will in part be judged on the future health, 
wellbeing and quality of life of the people living, 
working and visiting the area. Development proposals 
in the OPDC area should therefore demonstrably 
contribute to improved health and wellbeing.
3.17. The quality of the outdoor environment is a 
major determinant of peoples’ health, wellbeing and 
ability to live active and healthy lifestyles. Development 
will be expected to contribute towards a healthy place 
by delivering Healthy Streets that support active 
travel and a modal shift to more sustainable transport 
modes (see Policy SP7), with environmental impacts 
appropriately mitigated (see Policies EU4, EU5 and 
EU13), supported by a network of easily accessible 
and inclusive buildings, social and community facilities 
(see Policies SP4 and SP5), open spaces and active 
play for all ages (see Policy SP8). Social interaction OUR PROPOSED OUTCOMES
Creating a place that enables active and healthy 
lifestyles, improves mental and physical health and 
wellbeing and reduces health inequalities.
POLICY
Proposals should:
a) improve health and reduce health inequalities;
b) design and operate internal and external spaces 
to improve health and wellbeing, reduce health 
inequalities and enable healthy lifestyles; and
c)  ensure adequate access to facilities and services 
that support health, wellbeing and healthy 
lifestyles.and development that supports shared learning will 
also contribute towards a healthier and happier society.   
3.18. It is estimated1 that in developed countries 
people spend around 90% of their time indoors. 
Research shows that poor indoor air quality and 
poor quality daylighting, sound insulation, thermal 
comfort and internal design of buildings can have 
negative impacts on health and wellbeing. This can 
result in physical complaints, poor mental health and 
reduced quality of life and productivity. Applicants 
will be expected to work positively with OPDC and 
other key stakeholders to ensure that internal spaces 
are designed to achieve a high quality environment. 
Factors such as air and water quality, daylight and 
sunlight, noise mitigation measures and access to 
open space and community services where people 
can interact and share ideas and facilities will be 
important factors to consider and further details on 
OPDC’s requirements for this can be found in chapters 
5 (Design) and 6 (Environment and Utilities).  
3.19. Health impact assessments (HIAs) will be 
required for major development proposals. HIAs 
help to ensure that health and wellbeing are fully 
considered as part of new development proposals. 
The process looks at the positive and negative impacts 
of a development as well as assessing the indirect 
implications for the wider community. The aim is 
to identify the main impacts and seek to maximise 
benefits and mitigate or avoid potential adverse 
impacts. HIAs should be undertaken at the earliest 
stage possible to ensure that any required alterations 
to proposals can be made with minimal disruption.
REFERENCES
1. WELL Building Institute23
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Affordable Housing Viability Assessment
• Development Capacity Study Update
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Precedents Study
• Social Infrastructure Needs Study Update
• Sports Courts and Swimming Pools Study
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Housing Chapter
• Town Centre and Community Uses ChapterPOLICY SP4: Thriving Communities
3.21. Delivering this quantum of housing across the 
OPDC area will require high density living and working 
and mixed use development with layering of uses. 
However, building at high density does not remove 
the need for a diversity and mix of housing types and 
sizes. OPDC’s Strategic Housing Market Assessment 
(SHMA) identifies the need for approximately 50% 
of homes to be affordable and within this, there is 
a significant need for affordable family housing. 
To meet this need, development proposals will be 
expected to contribute towards an overarching target 
to deliver 50% affordable housing, measured in 
habitable rooms. Given the complexity of developing 
land across this challenging brownfield site and the 
level of infrastructure needed to unlock development, 
viability on individual planning applications will need to 
be considered in detail (see Policy H2) to inform and 
determine the level of affordable housing that can be 
delivered on each site. 
3.22. There is also a need for a variety of types of 
homes. This will include housing to own and rent, at 
a range of values, homes to meet the needs of small 
and large families and specialised housing that would 
meet the needs of particular groups such as older 
people, disabled people, students and gypsies and 
travellers. OPDC will require delivery of a mix of homes 
to meet these varying needs and to support a mixed 
and balanced community, that will ensure community 
cohesion and lifetime neighbourhoods. These different 
forms of housing should be mixed across the area 
and potentially within buildings. This can help to 
integrate different sections of the community and 
can have benefits in terms of space efficiency. The 
Humanitas scheme in Deventer, Holland provides a 
recent example of how the approach to mixing housing 
typologies could be further developed (see OPDC 
Precedents Study). The Housing Chapter also provides 
further policies for the delivery of a variety of housing 
types within the OPDC area.  SUPPORTING TEXT
3.20. The area’s public transport access, coupled 
with the reservoir of brownfield land mean Old Oak 
and Park Royal can make a significant contribution 
towards meeting housing needs. The London Plan 
identifies that the Old Oak and Park Royal Opportunity 
Area have the capacity to deliver an indicative 25,500 
new homes. OPDC’s Development Capacity Study 
demonstrates that this target can be achieved over 
the total development period in the next 30 years, that 
at least 19,850 new homes are deliverable within the 
Local Plan period (2018-38) and that at least 13,670 
new homes are deliverable within the London Plan 
0-10 year period (2019-2029). This quantum of housing 
enables OPDC to meet its objectively assessed 
need as well as contribute towards meeting housing 
need in the London Boroughs of Brent, Ealing and 
Hammersmith and Fulham and London-wide housing 
need (see Policy H1 and figure 8.2).OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
Creating sustainable communities by providing a 
range of housing types and affordabilities, that meet 
local needs and that contributes to strategic needs. 
This will be supported by a range of high quality 
social infrastructure facilities that serve the current 
and future community.
POLICY
Proposals should promote lifetime neighbourhoods, 
social cohesion and the integration of new and 
existing communities through: 
a) protecting existing and providing new homes that 
help to meet a local and London-wide need by:
i) providing a range of housing tenures, types 
and sizes that deliver mixed and inclusive 
communities; and
ii) delivering at least 19,850 additional homes 
between 2018-38, including 13,670 additional 
homes wihtin the 2019-29 London Plan 0-10 year period and supporting the attainment 
of an overarching 50% affordable housing 
target, measured in habitable rooms and 
subject to viability.
b) delivering and/or contributing to new high quality 
social infrastructure and protecting and improving 
existing, to meet the needs of the population in 
terms of its location, scale and phasing.24
3.23. An important element for the integration of 
existing and new communities will be the design, 
phasing and location of new social infrastructure 
and improvements to existing social infrastructure, 
where required. These facilities, if designed to a 
high quality, will act as meeting points for residents, 
workers and visitors and will help to foster a strong 
sense of community and pride. They can also support 
interaction between different ethnicities, age groups, 
faiths, sexualities and cultures.  OPDC will work with 
developers and service providers to ensure that new 
and improved facilities can meet the needs arising from 
development in the OPDC area in a phased manner 
and to ensure that facilities complement existing 
provision. Further details on the approach to social 
infrastructure can be found in Policy TCC3 and in the 
Places Chapter (Chapter 4).Figure 3.5: Woodberry Downs (credit: Eleanor Bentall)SP425
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Development Capacity Study Update
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Industrial Estates Study 
• Industrial Land Review and Addendums
• Old Oak North Intensification Study
• Park Royal Intensification Study
• Socio-Economic Baseline StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Employment Chapter
• Town Centre and Community Uses ChapterPOLICY SP5: Economic Resilience
It is estimated that these new jobs could generate 
a minimum £7.6 billion GVA per annum to the UK 
economy, thereby driving economic prosperity both 
locally and nationally. 
3.26. The diversity of character across the OPDC 
area will support the delivery of a range of employment 
opportunities. Park Royal and Old Oak North form 
London’s largest industrial area and are designated as 
a Strategic Industrial Location (SIL) in the London Plan. 
Protecting the SIL is vital to the London economy and 
opportunities should be taken to intensify its use where 
feasible (see Policy E1). The Industrial Land Review 
Addendum (2021) demonstrates that there is potential 
to deliver a net gain of 250,428 sqm of industrial 
floorspace capacity through the intensification of SIL 
and co-location of industrial activities outside of SIL 
in the OPDC area. This increase will help contribute 
towards meeting the ongoing demand for industrial 
space in the wider market area.
3.27. Outside of SIL, the focus will be on creating 
a vibrant range of employment uses as part of mixed 
use development, focussed on the creation of a 
major new commercial centre around the new Old 
Oak Common Station. This new commercial centre 
will be able to capitalise on the station’s excellent 
future connections to the Midlands and the north of 
England, Central London and Canary Wharf, and its 
easy access to Heathrow and Gatwick Airports. It will 
make a significant contribution to London’s commercial 
space pipeline, at a time when other current major 
regeneration schemes would be completed, or 
nearing completion, such as Kings Cross, Paddington 
and White City. This new commercial centre will be 
supplemented by further employment uses consisting 
of:
a) town centre uses within OPDC’s new town centre 
hierarchy (see Policy SP6); and 
b) provision of smaller employment spaces that could 
provide relocation opportunities for businesses SUPPORTING TEXT
3.24. The OPDC area is currently home to 1,700 
businesses, employing 43,100 workers across a range 
of employment sectors and skills levels1. Today the 
area generates £2.1 billion annually in gross value 
added (GVA) to the UK economy. The area is home to 
a diverse range of economic sectors, with particular 
sector strengths in logistics, car repair and sales 
and food production; over 30% of London’s food is 
produced within the OPDC area. The area also has a 
growing creative sector.
3.25. The scale of change planned across the 
OPDC area will make a significant contribution to the 
local, regional and national economy. The area has 
the capacity to accommodate 56,250 new jobs over 
the total development period in the next 30 years and 
36,350 new jobs over Local Plan period (2018-2038)2. OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
A strong, resilient and diverse economy, that allows 
existing businesses to thrive and grow and supports 
the introduction of new businesses to the area. A 
fair economy across the OPDC area will provide 
opportunities for locals and Londoners to access a 
range of employment opportunities across a range of 
sectors and skill levels.
POLICY
Proposals should:
a) support the delivery of 36,350 new jobs between 
2018-38;
b)  protect, strengthen and intensify the Strategic 
Industrial Location (SIL) in Park Royal and Old 
Oak North;
c) create a new major commercial centre around Old 
Oak Common Station;
d)  deliver a range of appropriate employment uses 
within designated town centres;
e)  support the provision of small workspaces across 
Old Oak and Park Royal;
f) provide employment space across a range of sizes, types, tenures, forms and affordabilities; 
g)  design employment space to ensure it is flexible 
and adaptable to changing needs;
h)  secure employment and training opportunities for 
local people and procurement opportunities for 
local businesses; and
i) strongly encourage contractors and building 
occupants to sign up to the London Living Wage.26
affected by redevelopment (see Policy E5). 
3.28. The communities around OPDC suffer from 
significant economic deprivation with higher than 
average unemployment rates, lower than average skills 
levels and high levels of income deprivation. Located 
in what is currently a deprived part of London, OPDC 
will expect development proposals to ensure that the 
increase in employment opportunities benefit local 
people (see Policy E2).
3.29. Across both Old Oak and Park Royal, OPDC 
will promote and secure a range of employment spaces sizes and land uses, that support a variety 
of employment sectors and that provide employment 
opportunities over a range of skills levels. This 
will enable local people and Londoners to access 
a genuine choice of career paths. Securing small 
business spaces and low-cost/affordable workspace 
will be vital to supporting the establishment and growth 
of new businesses in the area (see Policy E3). 
3.30. Building a successful new part of London 
will require employment provision that is resilient and 
flexible to changing economic cycles and ways of 
working. OPDC will work with developers to ensure that SP5
employment space is provided to be readily adaptable 
in terms of its size and fit out. 
3.31. OPDC is working closely with educational 
institutions, developers, surrounding local authorities 
and other public, private and third sector bodies to 
ensure that programmes are put in place to support 
local training and employment initiatives, both 
during and post construction. OPDC is also keen to 
enable local businesses to benefit from procurement 
opportunities and is developing a local business 
directory to support this ambition. 
3.32. High property costs and living costs mean 
that in-work poverty is a key issue for Londoners. 
Paying the London Living Wage is a step that can 
be taken to address the problem of in-work poverty. 
Evidence shows3 that as well as benefitting workers, 
paying the London Living Wage benefits business, 
reducing absenteeism and sick leave, helping with staff 
recruitment and retention, boosting staff morale and 
productivity and improving brand awareness. OPDC 
will work with the host local authorities, business 
groups and businesses in the area to support the 
implementation of the London Living Wage across 
all business sectors in the OPDC area and through 
the planning process, will work with developers to 
ensure that contractors and business occupants of 
new developments are signing up to the London Living 
Wage. Informatives on the London Living Wage will be 
provided on planning decision notices.Figure 3.6: Custard Factory Small Workspace Hub, Birmingham (credit: findmeaconference.com)
REFERENCES
1. Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
2. Development Capacity Study Update
3. Living Wage Foundation27
Figure 3.7: Land Uses
28
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Catalyst Uses Study
• Cultural Principles
• Precedents Study
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumsPOLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Town Centre and Community Uses ChapterSP6: Places and Destinations
OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
Creating a range of locally distinctive places that 
celebrate local context and provide a range of active 
destinations for locals and Londoners, including 
catalyst uses, meanwhile uses and a new town 
centre hierarchy that meets needs and complements 
surrounding centres.
POLICY
Proposals should: 
a) support a coordinated and phased approach to 
place making that:
i) creates a series of high quality and distinctive 
places and clusters as set out in Chapter 4;
ii) delivers a range of meanwhile and catalyst 
uses; and
iii) supports the creation of a new Cultural 
Quarter;
b) deliver and support a new town centre hierarchy, 
that offers a range of town centre uses, serving the 
needs of the development and that complements 
surrounding town centres. Proposals should 
support the delivery of the following hierarchy:i) Old Oak – a major town centre that delivers 
a wide range of town centre and community 
uses. The policy requirements for this centre 
can be found in policies P1, P3, P7, P8 and 
P9;
ii) North Acton – a neighbourhood town centre 
focussed around North Acton station, Victoria 
Road and along Portal Way. The policy 
requirements for the centre can be found in 
Policy P7C1; and
iii) Park Royal Centre – a neighbourhood town 
centre in the heart of the Park Royal Industrial 
Estate. The policy requirements for the centre 
can be found in Policy P6.
SUPPORTING TEXT
3.33. There is a variance across the OPDC area 
in terms of land use, transport access, environment, 
topography, communities and heritage. It will be 
important that development continues this variety in 
character, which will help to foster communities and 
create a sense of identity and pride.
3.34. To support this, Chapter 4 (Places) identifies 
12 places, with associated policies. Within these 
places, the Local Plan also identifies a series of 
‘clusters’, which are characterised as locations that are 
likely to attract higher footfall and/or have a particular 
use and as such, warrant more detailed policy. 
3.35. Within the Places and Clusters, proposals should support the delivery of a series of distinct but 
connected neighbourhoods. Neighbourhood planning 
can play a key role in helping to inform the character of 
these neighbourhoods (see Policy DI3). 
3.36. Development in Old Oak and Park Royal 
will take many years. To support place making, it will 
be important to ensure that development phasing 
establishes a range of activity early on. To support the 
early activation of new neighbourhoods, meanwhile 
and catalyst uses could play an important role, 
especially where they help to establish the long-term 
character of the area. 
3.37. Meanwhile uses will help create a sense 
of place and provide services for new and existing 
residents and employees. They can also provide 
opportunities for entrepreneurs and start-ups and help 
existing businesses to expand. OPDC’s Precedents 
Study provides case study examples of how the 
provision of early uses such as open space, culture, 
art, retail and business space can support this. 
However, there is a risk that these uses can often be 
pushed out once more permanent structures are built. 
OPDC is keen to ensure that these occupiers are 
provided opportunities to occupy spaces within new 
developments into the long-term (see Policy TCC8). 
3.38. Catalyst uses1 that range in size from small 
to large can help draw people into the area and help 
it to become a recognised and successful part of 
London where people want to live, work and visit. Such 
uses could include culture, sports, leisure, business, 
education or health facilities. The new station at Old 
Oak Common will itself be a major catalyst for the 
regeneration of the area; however, given the scale 
of regeneration in the OPDC area, it is likely that a 
range of supporting catalyst uses could be secured 
that complement one another and help bring a range 
of different people to the area at different times. 
Regeneration in Kings Cross and in the London 
Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC) provide 29
Figure 3.8: Places
30
useful precedents for how a range of early phase 
catalysts can support place making. The criteria for the 
consideration of catalyst uses are included in Policy 
TCC7. 
3.39. OPDC’s Cultural Principles document sets 
out how the OPDC area could play a significant role in 
supporting the Mayor’s aspirations to promote London 
as the world’s cultural and arts capital as set out in the 
Mayor’s Culture Strategy. This could be achieved by 
supporting new and enhanced catalyst, cultural, arts, 
night-time and meanwhile uses. OPDC will work with 
the GLA, neighbouring local authorities and developers 
to ensure that cultural provision in the area supports 
the creation of a new Cultural Quarter that can 
complement nearby cultural clusters and contribute to 
London’s wider cultural offer. 
3.40. A key facet to place making in the OPDC 
area will be the location, role and function of its town 
centres. The town centre hierarchy consists of three 
centres (see figure 3.7), serving the needs of its 
existing and future residents, workers and visitors. 
The hierarchy consists of a new major town centre in 
Old Oak and two neighbourhood town centres: one 
new centre at North Acton and the continuation and 
expansion of Park Royal Centre. Each town centre will 
have its own character and mix of uses that support 
social interaction and thriving communities. OPDC’s 
town centre hierarchy will need to ensure it maintains 
its resilience and adaptiveness to changes in the way 
services are provided, in accordance with Policy SP2. 
3.41. Old Oak Major Town Centre will play a 
particularly important role in place making and in 
creating an identity. Old Oak Major Town Centre 
does not yet exist, but its identification arises from 
the current projects for homes, jobs and interchange 
passengers in Old Oak. This proposed new major town 
centre is considered to complement the wider town SP6
REFERENCES
1. Catalyst Uses Study
2. Retail and Leisure Needs Studycentre network2. It is important to set the trajectory and 
scale for this new centre now to ensure the provision of 
town centre uses are aligned with the planned number 
of homes and jobs.  This will allow both the OPDC 
Local Plan and those of neighbouring authorities to 
plan for the consequences of this new centre. 
3.42. Early development phases to the north west 
of Old Oak South will be expected to accord with 
this designation. When Old Oak Common Station is 
operational, a significant portion of the centre is likely 
to have been built and/or planned. At this point, OPDC 
will be able to better understand the functioning of the 
centre and whether there may be a need to re-consider 
the designation of the centre as a metropolitan 
town centre. Any re-designation would need to be 
undertaken as part of a future Local Plan review and 
in line with the requirements of the NPPF and London 
Plan.  
3.43. OPDC has also designated neighbourhood 
centres in North Acton and Park Royal to serve the 
local communities of workers and residents in and 
around these locations. Similarly to Old Oak, the North 
Acton centre is not yet established as a neighbourhood 
town centre. This Local Plan sets the trajectory for 
the future scale of these centres and development 
proposals will be required to contribute towards their 
delivery. Park Royal Centre was previously designated 
in Ealing’s Local Plan. OPDC supports this centre’s 
continued growth, to support the envisaged increase in 
jobs and homes in Park Royal. Details on the function 
and character of each of the designated centres can 
be found in the following policies in the Places Chapter 
(Chapter 4):
a) Old Oak (Policies P1, P1C1, P3, P7, P7C2, P8, 
P8C1 and P9);
b)  North Acton (P7 and P7C1); and
c)  Park Royal Centre (P6).3.44. Whilst this policy promotes flexibility to be 
able to respond to changing circumstances, it is also 
recognised that the delivery of these new town centres 
cannot proceed unchecked and policies in Chapter 10 
set out controls to ensure that these new town centres 
provide for needs and support the existing town centre 
hierarchy.31
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Bus Strategy Update
• Car Parking Study
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Construction and Logistics Strategy
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costing Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling StrategyPOLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Transport Chapter
• Delivery and Implementation ChapterPOLICY SP7: Connecting People and Places
SUPPORTING TEXT
3.45. The ambition is to create a state of the art 
transport network that implements the transport 
principles of Good Growth and increases the area’s 
public transport accessibility level to enable an 
optimised approach to development that can help 
support the economic sustainability of the UK, London 
and the local economy. There is an opportunity to 
deliver a transport network that achieves exemplar 
standards of sustainability and enables people to live 
active and healthy lifestyles and deliver on the Mayor’s 
mode share target for over 80% of journeys in London 
to be made by walking, cycling or public transport.
3.46. This will require a significant amount of 
new transport infrastructure. The planned Old Oak 
Common Station is central to transforming the 
transport accessibility of the area. The scale of change 
in transport accessibility will be unique and provides 
an unparalleled opportunity for transit oriented 
development. The station will offer fast and frequent 
connections nationally to Birmingham and Manchester 
via HS2, to the west country via the Great Western 
Main Line, and regionally and locally to Heathrow, 
Ealing, the West End and the City via the Elizabeth 
Line. Existing and potential London Overground OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
Delivering a highly connected, high quality and 
efficient transport network, that enhances local and 
strategic transport accessibility and supports the 
Mayor’s ambition for 80% of journeys in London to be 
made by walking, cycling or public transport.
POLICY
Proposals should contribute to a high quality, safe 
and accessible movement network which: 
a) delivers sufficient transport infrastructure to 
support the planned growth in the OPDC area;
b) supports the delivery of OPDC’s Sustainable 
Transport Hierarchy by:
i) minimising the need to travel;
ii) delivering healthy streets, that appropriately 
prioritise walking and cycling to encourage 
active travel; 
iii) delivering a high quality, frequent, reliable 
and well connected public transport network, that optimises Public Transport Accessibility 
Levels (PTALs);
iv) discouraging the use of private motorised 
vehicles and limiting car parking;
v)  ensuring the efficient servicing of sites; and
vi) supporting the successful functioning and 
operation of Strategic Industrial Location (SIL) 
by implementing carefully planned servicing 
arrangements;
c) delivers an efficient, safe and accessible transport 
network that embraces innovations in technology; 
d) embeds transport infrastructure into the built 
environment and carefully plans and coordinates 
utility infrastructure provision as part of the delivery 
of the transport network; 
e)  delivers and/or contributes to a new and enhanced 
street network that connects the Places of Old Oak 
and Park Royal together and connects into the 
surrounding areas including
i) enhancements to existing streets;
ii)  a new movement network comprised of the key 
routes as shown in figure 3.10;
iii) new connections to Old Oak Common Station; 
and
iv) new and enhanced pedestrian and cycle 
connections to Wormwood Scrubs;
f) supports upgrades to the strategic road network 
and Transport for London Road Network, including 
the A40 and A406;
g) supports delivery of Old Oak Street:
i) as early as is feasible and practicable; 
ii)  as new through routes for walking cycling and 
where feasible, buses and providing access 
only for private vehicles;
iii) as an active street, providing town centre, 
employment and community uses at the 
intersections with other key routes and around 
rail stations; and
h) promotes the use of the Grand Union Canal as a 
movement route.32
Private CarPublic TransportPedestrians and cyclistsReducing the Need to Travelpromote the creation of a high density and highly 
compact, layered city form that puts local services 
within easy reach. The Healthy Streets Approach 
will be championed to ensure that where people do 
need to travel, they choose healthy, environmentally 
friendly ways to do so (see Policy T1). This should 
be achieved by delivering a high quality, attractive, 
accessible and inclusive public realm that not only 
provides people with the choice to walk and cycle but 
that actively incentivises these more sustainable types 
of movement, through the quality of the environment 
and supporting infrastructure (see Policy D1). OPDC’s 
sustainable transport hierarchy should not be viewed 
as a mechanism to restrict the essential delivery of 
new and enhanced public transport infrastructure 
given the significant investment required to deliver this 
infrastructure and the resultant benefits for the area 
and communities.
3.51. It is recognised that for certain operations, 
such as servicing, deliveries and construction, it 
will be more challenging to adhere to the hierarchy. 
Businesses are likely to require some vehicle 
movement by road, particularly for servicing and 
deliveries and while this will need to be supported, 
the impacts from their movements will need to be 
carefully planned so as to mitigate any negative 
impacts (see Policy T7). Proactive strategies that 
reduce the need to travel, in particular for employees, 
will need to be implemented.  OPDC is working with 
a variety of stakeholders to develop approaches for 
how businesses can work together to consider the 
consolidation of servicing and deliveries. This includes 
encouraging new models that reduce traffic and the 
trialling of new technologies, such as cloud based 
freight consolidation, drones and automated vehicles. 
3.52. Given the scale of development planned 
for the area, construction will be a huge challenge. 
Reducing the need to travel will again be important 
for this. OPDC has developed a Construction and 
Logistics Strategy. This sets out mechanisms to 
minimise construction impacts by coordinating stations at Willesden Junction and Old Oak Common 
Lane and enhancements to London Underground 
stations within the area, will further supplement this, 
providing connections to Acton, White City, Richmond, 
Clapham Junction and Stratford. These transport 
enhancements should seek to enable parts of the 
Old Oak area to achieve a PTAL of 6b to support an 
optimised approach to development. In Park Royal, 
enhancements to the bus network will also increase the 
area’s PTAL. 
3.47. In addition to these known proposals for 
enhanced rail services, OPDC will also support other 
future proposals for rail services and stations serving 
the OPDC area, where this helps to improve public 
transport access and does not undermine the timely 
delivery of homes and jobs targets in the area. 
3.48. OPDC will work with a variety of stakeholders 
to support the delivery of new and enhanced rail 
stations and services. It will be important to ensure that 
rail stations are well connected into their surroundings, 
can support surrounding development and achieve 
high standards of design that contributes to place 
making and a sense of arrival (see Policy T5).  As 
part of this, it will be important to provide a seamless 
interchange between transport modes and stations and 
the surrounding street network. 
3.49. It is important that these large-scale transport 
projects are also supported by a range of more 
localised projects. These include new and enhanced 
bus routes and frequencies and improved walking and 
cycling environments. Information can be found in the 
Places Chapter, Transport Chapter with further detail in 
OPDC’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP).  
3.50. OPDC’s Sustainable Transport Hierarchy (see 
figure 3.9) promotes the creation of Healthy Streets 
and a transition to an environmentally sustainable city. 
The priority is to minimise people’s need to travel and 
need for and use of private vehicles. This approach 
is supported through other policies in this plan, which SP7
approaches to construction management and ensuring 
the utilisation of more sustainable transport modes, 
where necessary. OPDC’s Circular and Sharing 
Economy Study also sets out a number of approaches 
to support the re-use of construction waste (see 
Policies EU6, EU7 and EU8).
3.53. To support the sustainable regeneration of 
the area, development will be required to deliver and/
or contribute to the creation of a series of high quality 
and accessible streets, bridges and underpasses, 
connecting the area seamlessly with its surroundings. 
This will ensure that existing and future communities 
can benefit from the transport improvements, services 
and employment opportunities on offer in the OPDC 
area and vice versa. Figure 3.10 identifies the 
movement hierarchy in the OPDC area. In Strategic 
Industrial Locations (SIL), the focus will be on 
enhancing the function of the streets for all modes 
and improving their environment. Scrubs Lane, Old 
Oak Lane, Old Oak Common Lane and Victoria Road 
are home to existing residential communities and 
businesses. They will be an important location for 
early development phases and development along 
Figure 3.9: OPDC Sustainable Transport Hierarchy33
Figure 3.10: Proposed Connections
34
these routes will play a key role in helping to knit 
together existing and new communities in the area. 
An enhanced street network should be arranged to 
connect these existing streets together and provide 
improved connectivity, focussed on the 2 new key 
routes of Old Oak Street and Wormwood Scrubs 
Street. The exact location and design of these new 
streets will need to be informed over time through more 
detailed work.
3.54. Old Oak Street will play a particularly 
important role in improving connectivity across the 
area, supporting place making and facilitating an 
optimised approach to regeneration. Old Oak Street 
will need to overcome significant barriers created by 
topography and infrastructure to create a new artery 
through the area, meaning that the street will not be 
capable of accommodating all modes along its length, 
but where it is feasible to do so, its delivery as an all 
modes route should be prioritised, but with access only 
provided for private vehicles.  
3.55. Development sites and new infrastructure 
(including rail) should facilitate, or where appropriate 
not preclude, its delivery by demonstrating how they 
help its longer term delivery. Early delivery of Old Oak 
Street would be supported where it is demonstrated to 
be feasible. Old Oak Street should be animated with 
positive and active frontages where possible. This may 
include early meanwhile uses that help to animate this 
route in advance of comprehensive redevelopment. 
3.56. The western part of Wormwood Scrubs 
Street’s delivery is reliant on development being 
brought forward on the Intercity Express Programme 
(IEP) depot site. Whilst mixed use development on 
this site would be supported in principle, it has not 
been identified as a site allocation (see table 3.1) and 
development on the site within the plan period may 
not happen given the existing rail uses. However, 
development on adjacent sites should not preclude the 
future delivery of this key route.water-borne movement, including freight. Development 
proposals either side of the canal will also be required 
to improve access to the canal for pedestrians. Further 
details on how proposals should support this are 
provided in the Place polices (see Policy P3).SP7
3.57. Further details on the function and character 
of the other routes identified across Old Oak and 
Park Royal in figure 3.10 can be found in the Places 
Chapter (Chapter 4) and in Policy T1. Routes will need 
to function effectively as movement corridors and also 
play an important role in shaping the identity of the 
area, supporting place making and realising OPDC’s 
environmental sustainability ambitions for the area by 
promoting walking and cycling opportunities. 
3.58. The Grand Union Canal (figure 3.11) is an 
important feature on the OPDC landscape. The canal 
is a well-used movement corridor, with the towpath 
providing convenient access for pedestrians and 
cyclists to both Old Oak and Park Royal and which 
provides excellent connections to the east and west. 
The canal is also popular with residential barges and 
there are a number of permanent and temporary 
moorings in the area. Historically, the canal was a key 
movement corridor for freight and OPDC is working 
with the Canal and River Trust, TfL, local authorities 
and developers to consider the potential for increased 
Figure 3.11: Grand Union Canal35
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costing Study
• Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation StatementPOLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Design Chapter
• Environment and Utilities Chapter
• Delivery and Implementation ChapterPOLICY SP8: Green Infrastructure and Open Space
OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
Contributing to the All London Green Grid by 
delivering new and enhanced green infrastructure 
and open spaces that provide for a range of 
functions, serving people and nature across the 
OPDC area.
POLICY
Proposals should deliver and/or positively contribute 
towards a varied, well-designed, integrated and high 
quality green infrastructure and open space network, 
by:
a) providing for the needs of people living, working 
and visiting the area by:
i) conserving and enhancing existing green 
infrastructure and open spaces identified 
in the Policies map. Any loss or relocation 
should accord with the requirements of Policy 
EU1;
ii) providing sensitive enhancements and 
improvements to access existing open 
spaces; and
iii) appropriately providing and/or positively 
contributing to new green infrastructure 
and open spaces, that meet the needs of 
the development in terms of their quantum, 
quality, access and function, including delivering 30% of the developable area 
outside of Strategic Industrial Locations 
(SIL) as publicly accessible open space 
in accordance with Policy EU1, including 
delivering 2 new local parks, each of at least 
2ha; 
b) improving the ecology of the area and ensuring an 
overall net gain in biodiversity by:
i) conserving and enhancing existing 
biodiversity habitats. Any loss or relocation 
should accord with the requirements of Policy 
EU2; and
ii) delivering and/or positively contributing to new 
biodiversity habitats; and
c) successfully integrating with the wider green 
infrastructure and open space network, including 
the Grand Union Canal, Wormwood Scrubs and 
All London Green Grid.
SUPPORTING TEXT
3.59. Green infrastructure refers to the network of 
green spaces and water spaces and the way in which 
they are planned, designed and managed to provide 
a range of functions and benefits which are illustrated 
in figure 3.12. It includes open spaces such as parks, 
gardens, other spaces such as green roofs and walls, 
rain gardens (vegetated sustainable drainage systems 
(SuDS)) and trees within the public realm and ‘blue’ 
spaces such as waterways, ponds and fountains. Open space can also include more civic spaces such as 
station squares.
3.60. The benefits of green infrastructure and 
open space can only be fully realised through the 
delivery of an appropriate quantum, quality and range 
of green infrastructure and open space and ensuring 
its appropriate maintenance and management over 
time. Green infrastructure and open space therefore 
needs to be carefully designed and integrated into 
the area and recognised as an essential part of the 
development.
3.61. There are a substantial number of existing 
green infrastructure and open space assets in 
the OPDC area, such as the Grand Union Canal, 
Wormwood Scrubs Park, Acton Cemetery and Wesley 
Playing Fields, whilst beyond the boundary are 
important spaces such as St. Mary’s, Kensal Cemetery 
and Little Wormwood Scrubs. There are also a number 
of railway embankments and cuttings, which although 
not publicly accessible, provide green corridors through 
the site and are an important asset for wildlife. 
3.62. Figure 6.3 identifies the green infrastructure 
and open space assets in the OPDC area, including 
Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINCs). 
These spaces should be conserved and enhanced, 
except for in exceptional circumstances where any loss 
is considered necessary to facilitate the comprehensive 
redevelopment of the area and where a proposed 
development can clearly demonstrate that the functions 
and benefits of the existing asset are being reprovided 
to an equal higher standard (see policies EU1 and 
EU2). OPDC will support proposals for sensitive 
enhancements and improved access to existing 
spaces and will look to secure planning contributions to 
support this. 
3.63. Delivery of new open space and green 
infrastructure to serve the needs of both people and 
nature will be of paramount importance. 30% of the 36
Cultural Benefits
- Acts as a social hub, promoting 
community cohesion; 
- Provides space to host gatherings 
and events; and
- Features can help to celebrate 
heritage, culture and diversity.
Place-Making Benefits
- Enhances and uplifts the quality of 
the built environment;
- Enhances the experience and 
perception of place;
- Provides visual amenity; and
- Helps to knit together 
neighbourhoods.Environmental Benefits
-  Provides natural environment 
conditioners, which improve air 
and water quality and condition 
against overheating;
- Provides a safety valve against 
flood risk; 
-  Enhances biodiversity and 
habitat resilience; and
- Helps absorb and off-set carbon 
emissions.
Health and Well–Being Benefits
- Provides space for communities to de-stress, 
escape and re-connect with nature;
- Encourages active lifestyles, including walking and 
cycling;
- Promotes and provides for space for play for all 
ages;
- Helps to mitigate against poor air 
quality, light and noise which all 
impact on health and well-being; and
- Promotes social interaction and 
shared learning.
.Economic Benefits
- Provides resilience against costly 
environmental risks, such as air quality. 
flood risk and overheating;
- Positively contributes to the provision 
of services like energy demand and 
water treatment and supply;
- Enhances the value of property and 
businesses; and
- Supports tourism and recreation 
industries.developable area outside of SIL should be provided as 
high quality publicly accessible open space. The priority 
within this should be the delivery of two new local parks 
of at least 2ha, within the Old Oak South and Channel 
Gate places. Figure 3.13 identifies indicative locations 
for these new local parks, as well as other new publicly 
accessible open spaces to be delivered in the OPDC 
area. Information for the requirements for open space 
provision can be found in the Places Chapter, in Policy 
EU1 (Open Space) with further details in OPDC’s 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). Development should 
also ensure that the regeneration of the area delivers 
a net overall increase in urban greening, to ensure that 
the area is biodiversity positive (see Policy EU2).  
3.64. London is supported by an existing network of 
green infrastructure and open space, known as the ‘All 
London Green Grid’. OPDC will work with neighbouring 
local authorities to ensure that a coordinated approach 
is taken to green infrastructure and open space 
delivery. Development proposals should contribute to 
this network to ensure that their contribution to quality 
of life, to the environment and to the economy can be 
maximised. 
3.65. Wormwood Scrubs Park is Metropolitan 
Open Land (MOL). At over 68 hectares, it is of the 
scale of a Metropolitan Park as defined in the Mayor’s 
London Plan. Creating an integrated green network 
that connects and enhances access from Old Oak 
and Park Royal to this space, whilst also managing 
visitor pressures and enhancing its functionality, will 
be critical in order that it can function as a space that 
can serve residents, workers and visitors from across 
the area, including within the OPDC area. Sensitive 
enhancements and improved access will be very 
important, whilst also maintaining and enhancing the 
site’s ecological and wider ecosystem service benefits 
(see Policy P12).
3.66. Providing high quality new green infrastructure 
and accessible open space can be challenging at high Figure 3.12: Benefits of Green InfrastructureSP837
Figure 3.13: Open Spaces
38
densities, where particular consideration will need to 
be given to providing adequate sunlight and daylight 
into new open spaces, to ensure they are of a high 
quality that will provide residents with meaningful open 
space. To address this, applicants will be expected to 
consider green infrastructure and open space provision 
early in the design process, in terms of its spatial 
layout, functionality, quality of design and microclimate 
and long-term management arrangements. Innovative 
solutions that incorporate green infrastructure 
into building fabric and design as well as other 
infrastructure assets, such as transport, will also need 
to be considered.
3.67. To support the delivery of this strategic policy, major development proposals will be required to submit 
a Green Infrastructure and Open Space Strategy and 
Management Plan (GIOSSMP). This should identify 
how the proposals accord with the requirements of 
Policy SP8, as well as the associated open space 
and biodiversity and urban greening policies in the 
Environment and Utilities Chapter (policies EU1 and 
EU2). The GIOSSMP, should as a minimum include:
a) an assessment of current green infrastructure and 
biodiversity and measures that will be taken to 
conserve and enhance it;
b) the location, phasing, quantum, access and 
function of green infrastructure and open space;
c) how the proposal’s green infrastructure provision provides a range of benefits, including urban 
cooling, air quality enhancement, surface water 
management, biodiversity, noise mitigation, healthy 
lifestyles, recreation and amenity and cycling and 
walking;
d) how the proposal’s green infrastructure provision 
contributes to and fits in with the wider area-wide 
green infrastructure network;
e) the quality of green infrastructure provision in terms 
of its Urban Greening Factor score (further details 
on this can be found in Policy EU2); and
f) arrangements for the management and upkeep of 
green infrastructure provision, including longer term 
revenue funding.
Figure 3.14: Wormwood ScrubsSP839
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Character Areas Study
• Development Capacity Study Update
• Environmental Modelling Framework Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Heritage Strategy
• Old Oak Historic Outline Assessment
• Precedents Study
• Tall Buildings Statement Update
• Views StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Design Chapter
• Environment and Utilities Chapter
• Delivery and Implementation ChapterPOLICY SP9: Built Environment
OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
Delivering a well-designed, high quality and resilient 
built environment, that supports the creation of a new 
high density part of London, positively shaped by 
local context, character and heritage.
POLICY
Proposals should optimise development in a 
sustainable manner, that:
a)  delivers buildings, public realm and infrastructure 
of the highest design quality and architecture, that:
i) positively responds to context and enhances 
local character and identity;
ii) responds appropriately to the setting of 
sensitive locations identified in figure 3.15, 
including designated and undesignated 
heritage assets, open spaces and existing 
residential communities and ensuring 
that these help shape local character and 
townscape;
iii) ensures appropriate standards of amenity;
iv)  delivers a safe and secure environment;v)  incorporates high quality public realm with 
active and positive street frontages;
vi) demonstrates a high standard of accessible 
and inclusive design;
vii)  comprises of attractive, resilient and 
sustainable materials; and
viii) demonstrates high levels of sustainable 
design, construction and operation;
b) delivers high densities and a range of building 
heights, including tall buildings in the locations 
identified in figure 3.15.
SUPPORTING TEXT
3.68. The built environment is an important 
determinant in how well a society integrates. If 
designed and managed to a high quality it can help to 
improve quality of life, increase productivity, enhance 
health and wellbeing and educational attainment. 
It can also help to reduce the occurrence of crime, 
ensure long-term resilience and greater environmental 
sustainability and help to bring people together 
from different ages, ethnicities and socio-economic 
backgrounds.3.69. Thanks to the area’s current and future 
access to public transport, the Old Oak and Park Royal 
area can make a significant contribution to local and 
regional growth. Development of the area needs to 
make the best use of land to fully capture and realise 
the benefits of regeneration and growth. However, it is 
important that this optimised approach to development 
is sustainable and acceptable in terms of its impacts on 
infrastructure, the environment, health and wellbeing, 
character and heritage and that it complements growth 
in the surrounding area and the wider London region. 
3.70. In accordance with Policy SP2, OPDC will 
require regeneration in Old Oak and Park Royal to 
set high standards for design quality and architecture. 
Design quality covers a broad range of uses and can 
be subjective, in particular in respect of architectural 
treatment and building height. However, there are 
some core strands to achieving high quality design 
and outstanding architecture, outlined below and in 
further detail in the Place policies (Chapter 4) and 
Design policies (Chapter 5), which OPDC will expect to 
see delivered and clearly demonstrated as part of any 
development proposal, regardless of scale, density or 
use. 
3.71. In order to create a high quality place, 
integrated into its surroundings, development in Old 
Oak and Park Royal will be expected to respond to 
existing local character, create new character and 
deliver a high quality townscape. OPDC’s Character 
Areas Study identifies the positive elements of the 
area’s character which development should respect 
and respond appropriately to. Policies D1 and 
D3 further elaborate on OPDC’s requirements for 
development to create a high quality townscape and 
place-specific policy guidance is provided in the Places 
Chapter (Chapter 4).  
3.72. OPDC’s Heritage Strategy identifies that 
Old Oak and Park Royal has a rich social, cultural 
and built heritage. There are a number of statutory 40
listed buildings, as well as existing and proposed 
conservation areas and Local Heritage Listings 
within and around the OPDC area (see figure 3.14). 
This includes assets such as St. Mary’s and Kensal 
cemeteries, the latter of which is a Grade 1 listed 
registered park and garden, and the Grand Union 
Canal, the majority of which is covered by conservation 
areas. Development should look to conserve this 
heritage and enhance its setting. Policy D7 provides 
further policy guidance on how development proposals 
should appropriately respond to heritage assets and 
place specific guidance is provided within the Places 
Chapter (Chapter 4). 
3.73. Figure 3.15 also identifies other sensitive 
locations such as open spaces and existing residential 
communities. Further details on OPDC’s expectations 
in relation to this can be found in the Design Chapter 
and specifically policies D3 (Well-designed buildings), 
D4 (Tall buildings) and D5 (Amenity). Further policy 
guidance, where relevant, is also provided in the place 
policies (see Chapter 4).
3.74. Ensuring good standards of amenity is not just 
a matter for sensitive locations. Amenity covers issues 
such as daylight, sunlight and overshadowing, privacy, 
climate, air quality and noise. Good amenity has a 
positive impact on health and wellbeing and it will, 
therefore be important to deliver appropriate standards 
of amenity of existing and future residents and workers. 
OPDC’s detailed policy requirements for protection of 
amenity are provided in Policy D5.
3.75. Safety and security can have an impact on 
the quality of the built environment. As such, buildings, 
public realm and infrastructure will need to contribute to 
improving safety, reducing crime and the fear of crime. 
OPDC’s detailed policy requirements for delivering a 
balanced approach between security and design of 
development are provided in policies D1 and D3. 3.76. Development in the OPDC area needs to 
deliver a high quality of public realm, framed by well-
designed buildings with active and positive street 
frontages. In taking a high quality approach to the 
design of the built environment, proposals should 
ensure that the street network, open spaces and 
buildings are designed to be accessible and inclusive 
for all. Further details on OPDC’s requirements for 
creating an inclusive and accessible development 
can be found in Policy D2. To ensure a high quality of 
design, proposals should also make use of high quality 
and resilient materials, which where feasible, should 
be sustainably sourced. Consideration should also be 
given to the complementarity of materials with that of 
neighbouring developments. Further information on 
OPDC’s requirements for this can be found in policies 
D1, D3 and EU8. 
3.77. In accordance with Policy SP2, development 
should deliver a high quality design that is 
environmentally sustainable. OPDC’s Environmental 
Standards Study has investigated the specific context 
of the Old Oak and Park Royal area and detailed a 
series of environmental standards that development 
in the OPDC area should look to achieve. These 
standards have been embedded throughout the Local 
Plan and in particular, in chapters 4-7. 
3.78. The proposed level of investment in transport 
infrastructure and the planned public transport 
accessibility improvements, on a brownfield site in 
zone 2/3 west London, provides a strong rationale 
for the design and delivery of new high density 
development including new tall buildings in appropriate 
locations. Outside of SIL, modelling shows that in order 
to achieve the homes and jobs targets for the area, 
development will likely deliver average residential 
densities of 450 units per hectare. The indicative 
density range is 300 to 600 units per hectare. However, 
local context, character and environmental impacts are important factors to consider in the design process 
meaning development will be expected to deliver a 
range of densities and building heights, for example, 
responding with lower densities and building heights 
close to more sensitive locations and providing 
increased densities and building heights away from 
these sensitive locations and in areas of high public 
transport accessibility. Where appropriate, the Places 
policies set out more specificity about appropriate 
building heights, but in many parts of the area, there 
is a need for flexibility in the approach to achieving 
homes and jobs targets (see Chapter 4). 
3.79.  As part of the response to achieving the 
homes and jobs targets and to make the best use of 
land, tall buildings will be appropriate within parts of 
the OPDC area. Tall buildings are defined in OPDC’s 
evidence base1 as buildings above 15 residential 
storeys or being 48 metres above ground level. Figure 
3.15 shows the locations within the OPDC area where 
tall buildings have been identified to be appropriate 
in principle. Any proposal for a tall building would 
however, need to be assessed on its own merits and 
would need to respond appropriately to identified 
sensitive locations and accord with all other relevant 
policies within OPDC’s Local Plan (including policies 
D5 and D7), the Mayor’s London Plan and any other 
relevant material planning considerations.SP9
REFERENCES
1. Tall Buildings Statement Update41
Figure 3.15: Sensitive Locations and tall building locations
42
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Absorption Rate Study
• Construction and Logistics Strategy
• Development Capacity Study Update
• Development Infrastructure Funding Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Integrated Water Management Strategy
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costing Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Social Infrastructure Needs Study Update
• Strategic Site Allocations Viability Assessment
• Utilities Study
POLICY LINKS
• Places Chapter
• Design Chapter
• Environment and Utilities Chapter
• Transport Chapter
• Housing Chapter
• Employment Chapter
• Town Centre and Community Uses Chapter
• Delivery and Implementation ChapterPOLICY SP10: Integrated Delivery
OUR PROPOSED OUTCOME
Delivering development in a comprehensive, timely 
and coordinated manner, supported by a range of 
infrastructure that enables an optimised approach to 
development, making the best use of land. 
POLICY
Proposals should enable a comprehensive and 
integrated approach to the delivery of development 
and infrastructure that:
a) supports and brings forward development in 
accordance with, or in advance of, the phasing 
identified in figure 3.16, to support OPDC’s 
homes and jobs targets, particularly through 
the redevelopment of sites identified for 
redevelopment in the first 10 years and/or Site 
Allocations in table 3.1;
b) ensures that an optimised and comprehensive 
approach is taken to the development of the Site 
Allocations in table 3.1, so that the Site Allocation 
homes and non-residential floorspace targets can 
be met or exceeded;  c)  contributes appropriately and proportionately 
towards required infrastructure identified in the 
Local Plan and further detail in the Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP), at a rate and scale sufficient 
to support the area’s development and growth; 
d)  where applicable, connects into area-wide 
infrastructure and enables the connection of 
others into such infrastructure; 
e)  safeguards land required to deliver area-wide and 
site-specific infrastructure identified in the Local 
Plan and the further detail in the IDP;
f) is appropriately phased to fit in with the 
programmed delivery of other development and 
infrastructure for the area and that impacts, 
including construction and servicing, are planned 
in a complementary manner and provide 
appropriate mitigation; 
g) supports an integrated and comprehensive 
approach to the design, construction and 
management of the proposed development; and
h)  is appropriately designed so that the built form 
complements and does not unduly restrict 
development on adjacent and connected sites.SUPPORTING TEXT
3.80. The redevelopment and regeneration of the 
OPDC area will be challenging. A number of large-
scale operations need to be relocated, reconfigured 
and/or decked over. A significant amount of 
infrastructure is needed to unlock the development 
potential of the area. There will be substantial amounts 
of planning, construction and operational activities all 
likely to be taking place concurrently. This will happen 
against the backdrop of the continued operation of 
businesses across Park Royal and Old Oak, as well 
as demographic and social change, economic cycles 
and climate change. Taking a coordinated approach 
to the development of the land and infrastructure 
within the area will help optimise the development 
opportunity, in terms of densities, levels of affordable 
housing and better place making. OPDC will consider 
the use of its compulsory purchase powers to facilitate 
comprehensive regeneration, in accordance with Policy 
DI4.
3.81. The timing and phasing of delivery will be 
a critical factor in the successful regeneration of the 
Old Oak and Park Royal area. Figure 3.16 identifies 
OPDC’s development trajectory. This has been 
informed by:43
Figure 3.16: Development Phasing
44
a) OPDC’s Development Capacity Study for the area, 
which has assessed the capacity for new homes 
and jobs; and  
b)  OPDC’s Absorption Rate Study, which assesses 
typical delivery rates across London over recent 
years, including delivery rates in other large 
regeneration schemes. Given the scale of the site, 
the research concludes that there are multiple 
delivery markets within Old Oak and Park Royal. 
3.82. This work has informed OPDC’s housing and 
jobs targets contained in policies SP4 and SP5. To 
support the achievement of these targets, the Local 
Plan designates ‘Site Allocations’ (see table 3.1). 
Site Allocations are used to help OPDC demonstrate 
its supply of land for new housing, commercial and 
industrial floorspace. The housing and commercial 
or industrial floorspace targets are expressed as 
minimums, whereas jobs figures are indicative. 
The figures for each Site Allocation should be read 
alongside the capacity figures for new homes and jobs 
stated for each place within the Places Chapter. Site 
Allocations have been identified for:
a) sites that are anticipated to come forward in the 
first 10 years and that would make a significant 
contribution to OPDC achieving its homes target, 
by delivering over 100 homes; and/or
b)  sites that are anticipated to be brought forward 
between 11-20 years and that would make a major 
contribution to OPDC achieving its homes target, 
by delivering over 1,000 homes; and/or
c) sites that are anticipated to deliver a minimum 
of 10,000 sqm of commercial and/or industrial 
floorspace during the plan period. 
3.83. OPDC’s Site Allocations are shown on figure 
3.17 and are included on OPDC’s Policies Map. Where 
required, policy guidance for site allocations has been 
provided in the Places Chapter (Chapter 4).3.84. Figure 11.3 shows indicative public and 
private land ownership within the OPDC area. Over 
the first ten years of the Local Plan period, the majority 
of mixed use development is likely to occur on land in 
North Acton, in the western parts of Park Royal, along 
Scrubs Lane and on some sites along Old Oak Lane 
and Old Oak Common Lane. This will primarily be on 
land unencumbered by HS2’s and other construction 
requirements or land required for transport functions. 
OPDC will work with stakeholders and landowners 
to support them in bringing forward land for early 
development and will, where appropriate, consider the 
use of its compulsory purchase powers to facilitate land 
assembly to enable more timely and comprehensive 
regeneration. Further details on how OPDC will 
support early delivery can be found in the Delivery and 
Implementation Chapter (chapter 11).
3.85. In the latter 10 years of the plan period, 
delivery on the public sector land around the planned 
Old Oak Common Station and its associated 
construction sites, would become the primary supply 
of land for development. Here, the public sector will 
need to play a key role in coordinating and enabling 
the delivery of this land. OPDC will work closely 
with landowners, developers and service providers 
to develop strategies to support the release of this 
land for development in line with the policies in the 
Local Plan, which may include the use of compulsory 
purchase powers to ensure greater certainty of delivery 
of development, in accordance with Policy DI4.
3.86. There is also land within the core development 
area at Old Oak that may be redeveloped at some 
point in the future, subject to resolving issues around 
current operational uses. This includes sites such as 
the Elizabeth Line Depot and sidings site, Intercity 
Express Programme (IEP) depot and London 
Overground Rail Operations Ltd (LOROL) depot. These 
sites do not currently contribute to the homes and jobs 
figures currently identified as being delivered within 
the 20 year life of this Local Plan, but were a suitable solution to their earlier delivery to be found, OPDC 
would be supportive of mixed use development on 
these sites. Further information is included in the Place 
policies.
3.87. Development on many of the sites in the 
OPDC area will be challenging and involves the 
relocation, reconfiguration and/or decking over of 
existing businesses and infrastructure. In addition, 
significant provision of new infrastructure is also 
needed to unlock development and overcome 
severance. Table 11.1 in the Delivery and 
Implementation Chapter provides more detail on these 
challenges and the arrangements needed to tackle 
these and ensure coordinated development in a timely 
fashion. OPDC will consider the use of compulsory 
purchase powers to assist in the timely delivery of 
development, in accordance with Policy DI4.
3.88. A significant amount of new and/or 
enhanced infrastructure will be required to unlock 
the regeneration of the area. OPDC’s infrastructure 
requirements are set out within Local Plan policies 
and in OPDC’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
Developers will be expected to engage early with 
OPDC and with infrastructure service providers 
to discuss infrastructure requirements. Some 
infrastructure will relate to a particular site, whilst some 
will relate to the wider area. It is important that each 
development provides a fair contribution towards both 
site-specific and area-wide infrastructure. Alongside 
this, the impacts arising from the development across 
the area will need to be coordinated and adequately 
mitigated. Where required, OPDC will consider the use 
of compulsory purchase powers to assist in the timely 
delivery of infrastructure and development supporting 
that infrastructure, in accordance with Policy DI4.
3.89. Area wide infrastructure will require a variety 
of stakeholders to work in collaboration with one 
another to secure timely delivery. Particular examples 
include: SP1045
a) Infrastructure including sewerage, water supply, 
drainage, power and heat, telecommunications, 
public transport provision, streets, bridges, 
underpasses, public realm and art and strategic 
green space provision;
b)  Social infrastructure including schools, healthcare, 
library provision, community centres, sports and 
leisure centres, childcare facilities, emergency 
services facilities, community recycling centres; 
and
c)  Design, construction (including treatment 
of contamination), servicing and operation/
management.
3.90. In relation to infrastructure, developers will be 
required to demonstrate to OPDC how infrastructure 
both above and below ground is being considered 
and in particular, how it can work with site-specific 
and/or area-wide strategies planned by OPDC or 
other landowners and/or developers. For smaller 
developments, this is likely to result in requirements to 
facilitate the delivery of or connect into key pieces of 
infrastructure, whereas for larger developments, there 
are likely to be requirements for direct delivery and/or 
contributions towards infrastructure. 
3.91. In relation to social infrastructure, developers 
will be required to contribute appropriately and 
proportionately towards the required site specific and, 
as applicable, area-wide infrastructure and community 
facilities to support the area’s development and growth.
3.92. Where there are different landowning interests 
involved in a development proposal, or the proposal 
is part of a wider site allocation or masterplan area, 
site-wide and area-wide infrastructure will need to be 
based on an equitable equalisation mechanism. In 
some instances, for relevant types of infrastructure 
the Community Infrastructure Levy may provide 
this mechanism, but where contributions will be 
via in-kind infrastructure or secured by planning 
obligations, an equitable equalisation mechanism for such provision or contributions will be required by the 
relevant landowning interests to allow development 
to proceed. The mechanism would be applied to 
development brought forward in advance of, but reliant 
upon infrastructure, to the development delivering 
the infrastructure and to any future development 
relying on that infrastructure, where a retrospective 
pooling mechanism would be employed to secure 
necessary contributions. In such instances, an 
Infrastructure Delivery Strategy should be provided by 
an applicant for a development proposal that sets out 
an overarching framework for infrastructure delivery 
and provides suitable confirmation that infrastructure 
provision is being jointly and comprehensively planned 
and delivered accordingly. Such an Infrastructure 
Delivery Strategy should:
a) demonstrate that the development would:
i) contribute towards a comprehensive 
infrastructure plan for the wider site or area;
ii) ensure its impacts are mitigated; and 
iii) not prejudice and help facilitate the delivery of 
future development of the wider site or area; 
b) include a list of the wider site or area-wide 
infrastructure elements, details of how and where 
the infrastructure would be delivered or funded 
(including costs, levels of funding and timings); and 
a high-level phasing strategy; and
i) cover those elements of infrastructure to be 
provided:
ii) solely by one development site to meet their 
own needs;
iii) on one site but serve the wider site or area;
iv) off-site;
v) via funding by an alternative means (e.g. CIL).
3.93. OPDC will monitor delivery of development 
and infrastructure through its Authority Monitoring 
Report. Delays to the delivery of sites and/or 
infrastructure or decisions not to proceed with the 
delivery of key pieces of critical infrastructure, required 
to enable the attainment of homes and jobs targets, would trigger a need for a review of OPDC’s Local Plan 
policies.
3.94. In terms of design, construction and 
the operation, management and maintenance of 
development, developers should engage early with 
OPDC, other developers and stakeholders in the area 
to consider how these issues can be considered in a 
joined up way. At an early stage, thought needs to be 
given to how the design of a scheme complements 
adjacent development. A key component of this will be 
allowing for an optimised approach to development on 
surrounding sites and demonstrating this through the 
pre-application process, where multiple development 
options may need to be considered. This is necessary 
to ensure development on one site does not preclude 
the optimised delivery of development on another site. 
Applicants will need to demonstrate how proposals 
complement the wider regeneration project, in terms of 
their use and built form. 
3.95. Applicants should also consider other 
opportunities for joint working, which can help to 
deliver sustainable development. During construction, 
there will be opportunities for joint working to manage 
impacts on amenity and the highway network. There 
are opportunities here for sharing construction 
management sites and contamination treatment (see 
policies T8 and EU13). Post construction, developers 
will need to consider how management, maintenance 
and servicing arrangements align with that of adjacent 
developments. Again, there may be opportunities here 
to consider a joined up approach to ensure that a high 
quality place is created, in a cost effective fashion.SP1046
Table 3.1: Site Allocations 
The housing and commercial or industrial 
floorspace targets are expressed as minimums 
and jobs figures are indicative. Place 
PolicyNet additional housing 
units over the first ten 
years of the plan periodNet additional housing 
units during the 11 to 20 
years of the plan periodMinimum commercial 
or industrial floorspace 
over the plan period. 
Floorspace is provided 
as Net Internal Areas 
(NIA).New jobs resulting 
from the provision of 
commercial or industrial 
floorspace over plan 
period
1 Old Oak Common Station and surroundings P1 0 100 200,500 17,100
2 Cargiant P2 0 0 170,800 2,600
3 The Triangle Business Centre P2 0 0 20,500 350
4 EMR P2 0 0 21,200 300
5 First Central and surroundings P4 1,200 0 1,200 60
6 Bashley Road Metal Refinery P5 0 0 30,100 500
7 32-36 & 38-42 Minerva Road P5 0 0 12,300 700
8 Park Royal ASDA P6 500 0 23,000 1,400
9 Land East of the Victoria Centre P6 141 0 0 0
10 Boden House P7 250 50 7,600 600
11 Acton Wells East P7 1,650 8,000 700
12 Holbrook House P7 280 0 100 5
13 Victoria Industrial Estate P7 400 700 6,500 400
14 Perfume Factory North P7 300 0 1,400 87
15 Perfume Factory South P7 326 0 4,970 430
16 The Portal P7 350 0 550 50
17 2 Portal Way P7 380 0 5,300 300
18 3 Portal Way P7 100 0 3,600 230
19 Portal West P7 651 0 3,200 200
20 Algerian Embassy P7 200 0 3,600 300
21 Willesden Junction Maintenance Depot P8 100 0 400 30
22 Westway Estate P8 0 1,000 4,800 300
23 Oaklands P8 605 0 3,500 200
24 Oaklands North P8 200 0 1,000 90
25 Old Oak Common Lane sites P8 200 0 2,800 180
26 Channel Gate P9 3,100 10,700 600
27 Harrow Road P10 200 500 8,100 400
28 Cumberland Business Park P10 300 0 1,800 110SP1047
Table 3.1: Site Allocations 
The housing and commercial or industrial 
floorspace targets are expressed as minimums 
and jobs figures are indicative. Place 
PolicyNet additional housing 
units over the first ten 
years of the plan periodNet additional housing 
units during the 11 to 20 
years of the plan periodMinimum commercial 
or industrial floorspace 
over the plan period. 
Floorspace is provided 
as Net Internal Areas 
(NIA).New jobs resulting 
from the provision of 
commercial or industrial 
floorspace over plan 
period
1 Old Oak Common Station and surroundings P1 0 100 200,500 17,100
2 Cargiant P2 0 0 170,800 2,600
3 The Triangle Business Centre P2 0 0 20,500 350
4 EMR P2 0 0 21,200 300
5 First Central and surroundings P4 1,200 0 1,200 60
6 Bashley Road Metal Refinery P5 0 0 30,100 500
7 32-36 & 38-42 Minerva Road P5 0 0 12,300 700
8 Park Royal ASDA P6 500 0 23,000 1,400
9 Land East of the Victoria Centre P6 141 0 0 0
10 Boden House P7 250 50 7,600 600
11 Acton Wells East P7 1,650 8,000 700
12 Holbrook House P7 280 0 100 5
13 Victoria Industrial Estate P7 400 700 6,500 400
14 Perfume Factory North P7 300 0 1,400 87
15 Perfume Factory South P7 326 0 4,970 430
16 The Portal P7 350 0 550 50
17 2 Portal Way P7 380 0 5,300 300
18 3 Portal Way P7 100 0 3,600 230
19 Portal West P7 651 0 3,200 200
20 Algerian Embassy P7 200 0 3,600 300
21 Willesden Junction Maintenance Depot P8 100 0 400 30
22 Westway Estate P8 0 1,000 4,800 300
23 Oaklands P8 605 0 3,500 200
24 Oaklands North P8 200 0 1,000 90
25 Old Oak Common Lane sites P8 200 0 2,800 180
26 Channel Gate P9 3,100 10,700 600
27 Harrow Road P10 200 500 8,100 400
28 Cumberland Business Park P10 300 0 1,800 110Table 3.1: Site Allocations 
The housing and commercial or industrial 
floorspace targets are expressed as minimums 
and jobs figures are indicative. Place 
PolicyNet additional housing 
units over the first ten 
years of the plan periodNet additional housing 
units during the 11 to 20 
years of the plan periodMinimum commercial 
or industrial floorspace 
over the plan period. 
Floorspace is provided 
as Net Internal Areas 
(NIA).New jobs resulting 
from the provision of 
commercial or industrial 
floorspace over plan 
period
29 Mitre Yard P10 241 0 1,123 66
30 North Kensington Gate South P10 206 0 750 50
31 Mitre Wharf P10 100 0 420 20
32 Big Yellow Storage (Scrubs Lane) P10 150 0 1100 60
33 Tea Crate P10 150 0 1100 60
34 Mitre Industrial Estate P10 100 100 1100 60
35 4 Portal Way P7 702 0 1,946 140
36 3 School Road / 99 Victoria Road P7 250 0 800 40
37 Central Middlesex Hospital North East site P6 158 0 0 0
38 1 Lakeside Drive P4 300 0 500 40
39 Cargiant Scrubs Lane P10 600 2,400 120
40 North Pole East Depot P10 750 0 500 40
41 1 Portal Way (Carphone Warehouse) P7 764 0 3,500 200
42 Acton Wells West P7 0 555 30,000 2,500SP1048
Figure 3.17: Site allocations
49
Chapter 4
PLACES50
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Air Quality Study
• Catalyst Uses Study
• Channel Gate Development Framework Principles 
• Character Areas Study
• Cultural Principles
• Development Capacity Study Update
• Development Infrastructure Funding Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Grand Union Canal Massing and Enclosure Statement 
Update
• Heritage Strategy
• Industrial Estates Study
• Industrial Land Review and Addendums
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Integrated Water Management Strategy
• North Acton District Energy Study
• North Acton Station Feasibility Study
• Old Oak North Intensification Study
• Old Oak Outline Historic Areas Assessment
• Park Royal Atlas
• Park Royal Development Framework Principles
• Park Royal Intensification Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Precedents Study
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costing Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study
• Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles Update
• Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation Statement
• Smart Strategy
• Social Infrastructure Needs Study Update
• Sports Courts and Swimming Pools Study
• Tall Buildings Statement Update
• The Land at Abbey Road Study
• Utilities Study
• Victoria Road and Old Oak Lane Development Framework 
Principles
• Views Study
• Waste Apportionment Study
• Willesden Junction Station Feasibility Study
• Wormwood Scrubs SurveyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Transport Policies (All)
• Housing Policies (All)
• Employment Policies (All)
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policies (All)4.1. This chapter provides spatial guidance for 12 
places within the OPDC area. Although only 650 
hectares in size, there is huge diversity across the area 
in terms of land use, transport access, environment, 
topography, communities and heritage. Each place is 
different with regard to its existing character and future 
opportunities and challenges. This diversity provides 
opportunities for new development to create a range of 
locally distinctive places.  
4.2. Policies in this chapter provide specific guidance 
for each place at a greater level of detail than the 
Strategic Policies in Chapter 3 and the Development 
Management policies later in the Local Plan. Places 
have been defined by the existing character and 
context, future potential, land ownership and in 
response to recommendations by the community. 
4.3. Within these places, a series of ‘clusters’ are 
identified. Clusters are characterised as locations 
that are likely to attract higher footfall and/or have a 
particular use that warrants more detailed policy. 
4.4. For each place and cluster, a vision, policy and 
diagram is provided. These are individual to each 
location but should be read in conjunction with other 
policies in the Local Plan. 
4.5. Place and cluster policies are accompanied 
by a series of Site Allocations that are likely to come 
forward for development and contribute to OPDC’s 
homes and jobs targets. These set job capacity targets 
and minimum homes targets for these sites. See Policy 
SP10 in Chapter 3 for further information.Introduction
PLACES:
• P1: Old Oak South
• P1C1: Old Oak Common Station Cluster 
• P2: Old Oak North
• P3: Grand Union Canal
• P4: Park Royal West
• P4C1: Brewery Cluster
• P5: Old Park Royal
• P6: Park Royal Centre
• P7: North Acton and Acton Wells
• P7C1: North Acton Town Centre Cluster
• P7C2: Old Oak Common Lane Station 
Cluster
• P8: Old Oak Lane & Old Oak Common Lane
• P8C1: Atlas Junction Cluster
• P9: Channel Gate
• P10: Scrubs Lane
•  P10C1: Harrow Road Cluster
•  P10C2: Laundry Lane Cluster
•  P10C3: Hythe Road Cluster
•  P10C4: Mitre Canalside Cluster
•  P10C5: Mitre Way Cluster
• P11 Willesden Junction
• P12 Wormwood Scrubs51
Figure 4.1: Places and clusters
52
Figure 4.2: Old Oak South PlacePOLICY P1: Old Oak South
VISION 
Old Oak South will deliver a new commercial centre 
for west London, centred on the integrated world-
class Old Oak Common Station. Away from the 
station, mixed-use development will deliver a range 
of town centre uses and new homes. This place 
will accommodate high densities and tall buildings 
with development also responding appropriately to, 
and celebrating, the area’s unique railway heritage, 
the Grand Union Canal and the locally cherished 
Wormwood Scrubs. 
53
P1
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Development and Phasing
a) supporting the comprehensive redevelopment 
of Old Oak South by working positively with 
stakeholders; 
b) supporting the relocation, reconfiguration and/or 
development, on, over and/or around, existing and 
future railway infrastructure including:
i) the Old Oak Common Station and tracks; and
ii) in the longer term, the Elizabeth Line Depot, 
sidings and the Intercity Express Programme 
Depot, where feasible. 
Land Uses
c) supporting the creation of a thriving mixed use, 
high-density place that contributes to the delivery 
of:
i) 17,100 new jobs and a minimum of 100 new 
homes in the plan period; and
ii) 35,700 new jobs and a minimum of 3,700 new 
homes for the full development period. 
d) establishing a commercial centre around Old Oak 
Common Station, that supports London’s growth, 
by delivering a significant amount of Use Class 
E floorspace that is appropriately designed and 
serviced to support the commercial centre;
e) contributing to the delivery of Old Oak major 
town centre by delivering a range of town centre 
uses, including top-up convenience stores, cafés, 
bars, restaurants, social infrastructure, business 
hotels and comparison retailers, that meet 
needs of employees, residents and interchange 
passengers; 
f) contributing to the activation of this place and 
creation of a Cultural Quarter, delivering cultural 
and catalyst uses within Old Oak South;Public Realm and Movement
g) contributing to and/or enabling, the delivery of 
a permeable, inclusive and accessible street 
network as shown in figure 4.2 including Old Oak 
Street as an all modes route and a walking and 
cycling route from Old Oak Common Station to 
Scrubs Lane;
h) delivering active and positive frontages along the 
edge of the Elizabeth Line Depot and along the 
walking and cycling route from Old Oak Common 
Station to Scrubs Lane where feasible.
Green Infrastructure and the Environment
i) delivering a high quality, well-connected, network 
of multifunctional publicly accessible open spaces, 
including:
i) the Old Oak South Local Park of a minimum 
of 2 hectares in size, provided as a series of 
connected spaces;
ii) canalside spaces; 
iii) a publicly accessible open space over the 
western portion of the HS2 Station Box if 
demonstrated to be feasible; and 
iv) enhancing the Birchwood Nature Reserve if 
retained in its current location, or reprovided in 
accordance with policies EU1 and EU2.
Heritage and Character
j) strengthening local identity and character by:
i) conserving and enhancing the Grand Union 
Canal Conservation Area and its setting; and
ii) ensuring future local character is informed 
by the area’s existing character including 
the historic railways, Grand Union Canal, 
Wormwood Scrubs and surrounding residential 
areas.
Building Heights
k) contributing to a variety of building heights that 
respond to public transport access and sensitive 
locations by:
i) supporting the delivery of tall buildings in Old Oak South in accordance with Policies SP9, D4 
and where relevant, subject to HS2 operational 
constraints and where enabling works for such 
building works are included within the HS2 
scope;
ii) appropriately responding to existing residential 
areas, including Wells House Road, 
Shaftesbury Gardens and Midland Terrace; and
iii) appropriately responding to Wormwood Scrubs 
as Metropolitan Open Land.
Figure 4.3: King’s Cross
54
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.6. Old Oak South sits between Wormwood 
Scrubs in the south and the Grand Union Canal in 
the north. The area is currently dominated by railway 
infrastructure. These pieces of existing infrastructure 
sever the area from its surroundings. Old Oak Common 
Station is set to open after 2028 and will make Old 
Oak South one of the best connected locations in 
London. The station will be one of the largest transport 
interchanges in the country and will be the largest sub-
surface station ever built in the UK, providing access 
to the HS2 line, Elizabeth Line and the Great Western 
Main Line alongside local connections to the London 
Overground, buses, walking and cycling networks and 
taxis.
4.7. There are a number of challenges that need 
to be addressed in delivering the vision for Old Oak 
South; in particular, coordinating and facilitating 
development and infrastructure at locations around 
Old Oak Common Station. Other significant challenges 
include addressing the environmental and design 
impacts of building at high density in a constrained 
place whilst also managing the impacts on surrounding 
sensitive locations. 
4.8. Early development in Old Oak South will 
be supported. However, it is likely that most of the 
development in Old Oak South will be delivered 
after the opening of Old Oak Common Station and 
development on the Elizabeth Line depot and sidings 
and IEP depot is not envisaged to commence until 
beyond the Local Plan period.  
4.9. The excellent public transport access created 
by the new Old Oak Common Station provides the 
opportunity to deliver a minimum of 100 new homes 
during the plan period1 within high density mixed use 
development across the area in a range of building 
heights. Old Oak South also has capacity to deliver 
17,100 new jobs2 across new commercial, retail and P1
leisure uses, within the plan period. 3,700 new homes 
and 35,700 new jobs are also currently envisaged to 
the delivered during the full development period. OPDC 
will work with stakeholders to support early delivery, 
including seeking earlier development of the Elizabeth 
Line Depot if demonstrated to be feasible. These 
development quantums make a significant contribution 
to achieving the Mayor’s London Plan target to deliver 
65,000 new jobs. This capacity has the potential to be 
increased subject to securing grade separation. OPDC 
will work with the Department of Transport and HS2 
Ltd to explore opportunities for non-preclusion of grade 
separation to support the delivery of Old Oak Common 
Station. 
4.10. Old Oak South has the opportunity to become 
a new commercial centre3 that supports London’s 
economic growth and role as a global city. This 
potential is driven by the area’s excellent future 
connections to the Midlands and the north of England, 
Central London and Canary Wharf, and its easy access 
to Heathrow and Gatwick Airports. Key sectors that will 
likely be attracted to this new accessible brownfield 
site will include ICT, media and creative services, 
professional and financial services and life sciences4. 
To support this, new development should enable 
delivery of a significant amount of new Use Class E 
employment space that supports the functioning of the 
commercial centre.
4.11. This commercial centre will likely be delivered 
following the opening of Old Oak Common Station. 
This timing puts Old Oak South in a strong position to 
contribute to London’s commercial floorspace pipeline, 
at a time when other current major regeneration 
schemes would be completed, or nearing completion, 
such as Kings Cross, Paddington and White City.
4.12. Old Oak South will also be home to part of the 
new Old Oak major town centre. Town centre uses 
should be focused in the town centre as depicted in 
figure 3.7. Town centre uses should also complement and connect with other sections of this new town centre 
located within Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common 
Lane (P8), Channel Gate (P9) and North Acton and 
Acton Wells (P7).
4.13. Cultural, meanwhile and catalyst uses can play 
an important role in supporting the development of this 
new major town centre destination and Cultural Quarter 
(see Policy SP6). 
4.14. The area is currently isolated from neighbouring 
locations by railway infrastructure, level changes and 
the Grand Union Canal. Significant challenges to 
movement are also presented by the proposed and 
existing railway infrastructure of Old Oak Common 
Station, the Elizabeth Line Depot and sidings and the 
Intercity Express Programme (IEP) Depot. 
4.15. Comprehensive redevelopment should deliver 
a diversity of legible and comfortable streets and 
spaces that reflect the future intensity of use. New 
development should help to connect Old Oak South 
and the station into the wider movement network5. This 
will enable local people to access the extensive range 
of new uses, services, open spaces and employment 
opportunities. The key route within the new movement 
network to be delivered during the plan period is Old 
Oak Street. The delivery of Wormwood Scrubs Street 
is expected to take place after the plan period within 
Old Oak South and is contingent on the redevelopment 
of the IEP Depot. Although outside of the plan period, 
development proposals should safeguard for and if 
relevant and appropriate, contribute to and / or deliver 
Wormwood Scrubs Street’s future delivery.
4.16. The delivery of connections to Old Oak Common 
Station from the surrounding places will be critical in 
fully connecting Old Oak South into its surroundings in 
a clear and legible manner. Delivering Old Oak Street 
as a high quality route will be particularly important for 
connectivity as well as providing walking and cycling 
access to Scrubs Lane.55
P1
Figure 4.4: Bankside - precedent for new employment
areas and town centre uses4.17. Old Oak Common Station should not preclude 
a connection to Wormwood Scrubs in the future and 
development should safeguard for and if relevant and 
appropriate, contribute to and / or deliver a bridge 
to Wormwood Scrubs. Any connection will need to 
consider how it will cross and provide passive provision 
for future development on the IEP Depot.  
4.18. Within Old Oak South, 30% of developable 
land should be publicly accessible open space. This 
can be achieved through the delivery of the new Old 
Oak South Local Park (please refer to Policy SP8 for 
the area of search for this park), enhancements to 
the Birchwood Nature Reserve (see Policy P3) and a 
range of other spaces. In the long term there is also 
the potential to explore the delivery of an additional 
Local Park in Old Oak South through the release of the 
Elizabeth Line Depot for development if demonstrated 
to be feasible. The character of the Old Oak South 
Local Park will comprise a number of connected open 
spaces ranging from hard landscaped station squares 
to green pocket parks. Open spaces to the west of 
Old Oak Common Station will only be feasible subject 
to HS2 operational constraints. These spaces will be 
delivered over the long term and in some instances 
beyond the plan period. 
4.19. London Plan policy and national guidance seek 
to optimise development at transport interchanges 
and on brownfield land. As such, the station will act 
as a major catalyst for the development of the OPDC 
area, placing Old Oak South at the heart of one of the 
UK’s largest regeneration projects, with the opportunity 
to become a new London destination. In light of this, 
high densities and tall buildings delivering a range of 
uses will be appropriate. Based on the development 
capacities proposed for Old Oak South, it is expected 
that tall buildings will predominantly be in the range 
of 20-30 storeys, with taller buildings up to 45 storeys 
close to the Old Oak Common Station. Tall building 
proposals will be considered against all relevant 
development plan policies and material considerations.  
It is important that the existing context helps to REFERENCES
1. and 2. Development Capacity Study Update
3. and 4. Future Employment Growth Sectors Study 
5. Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy 
6. Heritage Strategy and Character Areas Study shape building heights across the area. Development 
should respond appropriately to surrounding sensitive 
locations. Along Wormwood Scrubs, development 
should respond to its character as Metropolitan Open 
Land, and development close to existing residential 
areas should ensure that it does not result in an over-
bearing mass of buildings. Historically Old Oak South 
has been characterised by the Grand Union Canal 
railway infrastructure and nearby Wells House Road 
and Wormwood Scrubs6. This rich heritage provides an 
opportunity to inform the character of new development 
which can conserve and enhance the area’s unique 
heritage offer. 
4.20. The creation of a new commercial centre, 
major town centre and high density mixed use 
neighbourhoods will necessitate the provision of 
a substantial amount of infrastructure. The Local 
Plan policies identify the likely requirements for 
infrastructure in the area. A significant amount of 
social infrastructure will be required, detailed further 
in OPDC’s IDP. Current population and child yield 
projections indicate that there is a need to deliver 
one super nursery and one sports centre in Old Oak 
South. These requirements are based on current 
population and child yield projections, which could 
change over time thereby impacting on the size and 
type of facilities required (see Policy TCC3). Proposals 
should appropriately safeguard land for and contribute 
to and/or deliver these and other infrastructure 
requirements set out in the Local Plan policies and IDP, 
in accordance with Policy SP10.56
Figure 4.5: Old Oak Common Station Cluster
POLICY 
OPDC will work positively and proactively with High 
Speed 2 Ltd and all stakeholders to support the 
delivery of Old Oak Common Station and associated 
works in accordance with the High Speed Rail 
(London – West Midlands) Act 2017. Proposals 
should plan positively to deliver the cluster vision by 
contributing and / or delivering where appropriate and 
relevant as follows:
Development and Phasing
a) working positively with the Department for 
Transport and High Speed 2 Ltd to facilitate 
the delivery of Old Oak Common Station in 
accordance with the High Speed Rail (London – 
West Midlands) Act 2017;
b) supporting the timely delivery of an exceptionally 
designed, world-class, 21st century station and 
associated public realm and publicly accessible 
open spaces;
c) supporting the integration of the station with 
surrounding areas by ensuring it is designed to be 
resilient and adaptable to respond to a changing 
surrounding context including the longer-term 
redevelopment of the Elizabeth Line Depot and 
sidings and Intercity Express Programme Depot, a 
new street network, new public open spaces and 
transport interchange facilities; 
d) supporting the design and operation of the VISION
Old Oak Common Station will be a state of the art, 
exceptionally designed, 21st century multi-modal 
transport interchange. It will become a destination at 
the heart of a new major town centre and commercial 
centre for London. Set within high quality public open 
spaces and highly connected into its surroundings, 
the station will be a catalyst for growth locally, across 
London and the UK.POLICY P1C1: Old Oak Common Station Cluster
57
P1C1
station by ensuring it pioneers and responds to 
technological innovation and behavioural change.
Land Uses
e) ensuring the station’s design and its surrounds 
support Old Oak becoming a new commercial 
centre, part of Old Oak major town centre, Cultural 
Quarter and home to high density housing; and 
f) ensuring the station is a destination where people 
want to spend time by clustering permanent and 
meanwhile town centre uses within and around 
the station.
Public Realm and Movement
g) integrating the station within the wider movement 
network, across all phases, by delivering legible, 
accessible, comfortable and 24-hour public routes 
through and to the station;
h) ensuring the station delivers, contributes to and/or 
enables the delivery of public realm that connects 
seamlessly with the wider street and open space 
network including ensuring that the vertical and 
horizontal alignments of routes and entrances 
optimise this wider integration; 
i) providing a high quality transport interchange by:
i) delivering an efficient and seamless journey 
from street to platform;
ii) ensuring the station and associated public 
realm, movement routes and open spaces 
are designed for high amounts of walking and 
cycling movement and deliver clear routes; and
iii) locating and distributing station transport 
interchange facilities in appropriate locations 
to adequately serve the station and to support 
the effective integration of the station within 
surrounding public realm and movement 
network, whilst ensuring that the surrounding 
public realm is not vehicle dominated;
j) creating a high quality environment by focusing 
the delivery of public art within Old Oak Common 
Station and surrounding public realm and publicly 
accessible open spaces.Green Infrastructure and the Environment
k) providing a series of high quality publicly 
accessible open spaces around the station;
l) demonstrating how the station public realm and 
publicly accessible open spaces contribute to the 
delivery of the Old Oak South Local Park;
m) ensuring new station public realm and publicly 
accessible open spaces provide good levels of 
large canopy tree planting, green infrastructure 
and facilities for outside relaxation and socialising 
in areas with the highest amount of daylight and 
direct sunlight; and
n) providing access to nature and delivering green 
infrastructure within the design of the station and 
associated public realm and publicly accessible 
open spaces in accordance with Policies SP8, 
EU1 and EU2 and HS2 Ltd’s Commitments to 
Sustainability.
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.21.  Old Oak Common Station will be the largest 
sub-surface station to have ever been built in the 
UK and will be a high profile transport interchange 
that provides access to an expanded Heathrow and 
beyond.
4.22. The station will be one of the defining features in 
Old Oak in terms of its design and role as a nationally 
significant transport interchange. It will support Old Oak 
in becoming a destination for a range of commercial, 
town centre, catalyst and residential uses. As such it 
is important that the station design is coordinated and 
integrates with development sites around it. 
4.23. The Old Oak Common Station will serve High 
Speed 2 Ltd, the Elizabeth Line and Great West 
Mainline. OPDC will work positively, proactively and 
transparently with relevant stakeholders including the 
Department for Transport, High Speed 2, Network 
Rail and Transport for London to support the timely 
delivery of the Old Oak Common Station, associated works and the comprehensive regeneration of Old Oak 
South. OPDC will also work with transport operators to 
appropriately safeguard land for other supported rail 
connections into the station. At the time of publication 
of this Local Plan, this include the proposed Chiltern 
Line services. Development proposals should 
also safeguard for and if relevant and appropriate, 
contribute to and/or deliver the Chiltern Line to Old Oak 
Common Station.
4.24. The delivery of Old Oak Common Station and 
its associated public realm and infrastructure has been 
approved by Government through the High Speed Rail 
(London – West Midlands) Act 2017, which gained 
Royal Assent in February 2017 (“the Act”). The Act 
defines the powers, Act limits (including land to be 
acquired and used), and sets the scope of High Speed 
2 (“HS2”) Ltd. To support the delivery of the Act, an 
associated planning regime (Schedule 17) has been 
developed. This establishes the approvals process 
and sets out the grounds for OPDC to determine 
submissions for proposals such as construction 
arrangements, plans and specifications of proposed 
buildings and restoration of sites. It enables OPDC 
to work with HS2 Ltd to modify the design or external 
appearance of the building to preserve the local 
environment or local amenity. The consideration of any 
approval for works to be carried out in relation to Phase 
One of HS2 are limited to those set out in Schedule 
17. OPDC recognises the extent of High Speed 2 Ltd’s 
powers, land interests and scope as set out in the Act.
4.25. To reflect the station’s significance, its design 
quality should be exceptional and will be expected to 
deliver inspiring spaces, structures and buildings.  The 
station will partially sit on the Great Western Main Line, 
a line that was engineered by the famous Isambard 
Kingdom Brunel. This heritage provides an excellent 
opportunity to reflect both the UK’s proud railway 
heritage and the area’s local railway character in the 
future design of this new station. The station should be 
informed by best practice and should pioneer smart city 58
Figure 4.6: What Old Oak South could look like in 2028 concepts.  This could include providing gateless access 
to platforms to support walking and cycling routes 
within and through the station.
4.26. Permanent and meanwhile active uses 
(managed through Policy TCC8) within and around the 
station will play an important role in helping the station 
to be outward looking and establish it as an integral 
part of Old Oak major town centre. How these uses 
and adjacent public realm are designed will be critical 
in activating the station public realm and / or other 
publicly accessible open spaces, internal spaces and 
adjacent areas. 
4.27. The High Speed Rail (London – West 
Midlands) Act 2017 scheme currently sets out that 
Old Oak Common Station will be designed to provide 
interchange facilities for 54,366 passengers which does 
not consider proposed development within the OPDC 
area. To help inform the design of Old Oak South, 
TfL have carried out modelling which identifies that in 
2031 approximately 250,000 passengers per day will 
interchange within the station and 42,000 passengers 
will leave the station to interchange with other modes. 
As such, the layout of the movement routes within and 
around the station needs to support local permeability 
and legibility. The station should be designed for non-
preclusion to allow for modifications to enable these 
routes to be delivered at a later date. 
4.28. Topographical changes could have a negative 
impact on the quality of the public realm, if not 
appropriately considered and addressed early in 
the design of the station. OPDC will work with HS2 
Ltd to ensure station entrances established by the 
Act and any future entrances are integrated with the 
surrounding street network. This will also include 
defining opportunities for delivering, contributing and / 
or enabling other entrances and routes in the form of 
direct and / or passive provision.  
4.29. Public art provides many social and cultural 
benefits. It can also support place making and inform local identity. To maximise the impacts of these 
benefits, public art should be located within Old Oak 
Common Station and within its associated public realm 
and publicly accessible open spaces, where significant 
numbers of people can enjoy and experience it. 
4.30. Development on and around the station should 
support the delivery of publicly accessible open 
spaces that support the high levels of passengers 
interchanging between modes while providing spaces 
for people to spend time and make use of the services 
at Old Oak Common Station1. Given the high levels of 
use of these spaces, it is anticipated that they will need 
to include significant amounts of hard landscaping. 
However, these spaces can also contribute to the 
provision of urban greening and the delivery of the Old Oak South Local Park. Open spaces and public 
realm in this location will be used by a variety of 
people living and working and visiting the station and 
surrounding area. Consideration should be given the 
resilient design of features in these spaces and to 
the optimisation of levels of daylight and sunlight into 
these spaces to enable the provision of high quality 
green infrastructure and to ensure that they are inviting 
spaces where people wish to spend time.P1C1
REFERENCES
1. Environment Standards Study and Public Realm, Walking and      
    Cycling Strategy59
Figure 4.7: Old Oak North PlacePOLICY P2: Old Oak North
VISION 
A high quality, intensively used and vibrant industrial 
area, which is better connected to surrounding 
neighbourhoods. Redevelopment with new multi 
storey intensified industrial typologies will respond 
sensitively to the area’s heritage, including the Canal 
and the Rolls Royce Building. High density industrial 
activities will be supported by better connections and 
ancillary facilities as well as canal side open spaces 
that can support businesses, employees and visitors, 
making Old Oak North a vibrant industrial location 
that people will want to work in, visit and pass 
through. 
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land Uses
a) delivering a minimum 212,500 sqm non-
residential floorspace and an indicative 3,300 new 
jobs by taking opportunities to intensify sites for 
SIL compliant broad industrial type activities in 
line with the identified site allocations;
b) delivering ancillary services and facilities where 
they support place-making and activate key 
routes.
Public realm and movement
c) contributing towards and / or delivering 
improvements to the function and quality of the 
transport network for all users by:
i) improving the existing pedestrian and cycle 
route from Old Oak North to Willesden 
Junction station
ii) delivering a new, high quality inclusive access 
pedestrian and cycle bridge over the canal to replace and relocate Bulls Bridge and to 
connect into Oaklands or, if this is not feasible 
or agreeable with landowners, upgrading the 
existing bridge to ensure inclusive access for 
all users;
iii) delivering enhanced pedestrian and cycle 
infrastructure along key routes, including 
segregated cycle lanes where feasible, where 
this does not have a significant adverse 
impact on the functioning of the highway; 
iv) enhancing the highways capacity of routes 60
Figure 4.8: Existing industrial character of Old Oak NorthSUPPORTING TEXT
4.31. Old Oak North is home to a series of business 
operations primarily comprising of a large car 
processing and sales plant, but there are also light 
industrial uses, creative industries, waste management 
operations and residential moorings.
4.32. Multi-storey intensification of the area will 
provide an uplift in industrial floorspace and help meet 
increasing demand from industrial sectors, support 
economic growth and innovation. The area benefits 
from having a semi-consolidated land ownership 
with a limited number of landowners enabling a 
comprehensive and coordinated approach to be 
taken to the redevelopment of the area which will 
ensure an optimised approach to intensification. 
Based on the development capacity modelling and 
precedents set out in the Old Oak North Intensification 
Study, development in Old Oak North is expected 
to predominantly be in the range of 2 to 5 industrial 
storeys; however, heights could exceed this range to 
deliver tall buildings dependent on the type and form 
of industrial uses proposed. Tall building proposals will 
be considered against all relevant development plan 
policies and material considerations.with existing and/or proposed industrial 
operational requirements.
Heritage and charater 
g) strengthening local identity and character by:
i) conserving and enhancing heritage 
assets including the Grand Union Canal 
Conservation Area, Grade I Listed Kensal 
Green Cemetery Registered Park and 
Garden, the Rolls Royce Building and their 
settings; 
ii) ensuring character is informed by the area’s 
existing heritage including the railways, Grand 
Union Canal and industrial heritage.
Building heights and massing
h) delivering increased building heights and multi 
storey industrial typologies where this will deliver 
industrial intensification and SIL compliant broad 
industrial type activities; and
i) appropriately responding to the Grand Union 
Canal Conservation Area.P2
into and through Old Oak North necessary to 
support industrial intensification; and
v) safeguarding for and, if relevant and 
appropriate, contributing to Laundry Lane 
Bridge, a new vehicular connection with 
bridges/underpasses from Scrubs Lane into 
Old Oak North.
d) contributing towards and / or delivering 
improvements to the function and quality of the 
public realm for all users through: 
i) enhanced street greening and public realm 
along all key routes
ii) ensuring industrial uses support the activation 
of the public realm by delivering positive 
frontages along; 
• the Grand Union Canal 
• Hythe Road
• Salter Street
iii) ensuring ancillary uses support the activation 
of the public realm by delivering active 
frontages, particularly around Bulls bridge 
canal crossing and to aid navigation along key 
routes; and
iv) improved wayfinding, signage and lighting, 
prioritising routes to/from Willesden Junction 
station, Scrubs Lane and the Grand Union 
Canal.
Green infrastructure and the environment 
e) making efficient use of Old Oak Sidings by:
i) safeguarding the site for continued use as a 
waste management site;
ii) supporting and/or enabling the site to deliver 
an energy from waste facility that contributes 
to a decentralised energy network for the 
wider area, where this accords with other 
relevant policies including Policy EU4; and
iii) supporting the delivery of an integrated utility 
hub on the site.
f) contributing towards and/or delivering new 
publicly accessible open spaces, including new 
canalside public open spaces where compatible 
61
Figure 4.9: Rolls Royce Building, Hythe RoadP2
4.33. New ancillary uses will provide amenities to 
support employees, visitors and the existing mooring 
communities and deliver active frontages to the street 
and canal to enhance the vibrancy of area. These 
activities should be focussed around navigation points, 
such as bridge crossings and/or along Hythe Road, 
and could include ancillary front-of-house spaces for 
industrial uses alongside other ancillary uses. All other 
industrial frontages should provide positive frontages 
onto key routes and to the canal. 
4.34. Existing walking and cycling connections from 
Old Oak North to surrounding public transport services 
and other amenities are of poor quality. In particular, 
the existing walking access from Old Oak North to 
Willesden Junction should be enhanced to deliver a 
safer and more legible connection to this important 
public transport hub. New and improved connections 
are needed to support multi-storey intensification 
and ensure that Old Oak North is connected into 
surrounding places. This will ensure that Old Oak North 
has high quality walking and cycling access to public 
transport services at Scrubs Lane, Willesden Junction, 
Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common and access to the 
Grand Union Canal. 
4.35. To the south-west of Old Oak North, Bulls Bridge 
is the only crossing point from Old Oak North to the 
southern towpath. The current bridge does not provide 
inclusive access and its position would not result in 
the most direct desire line towards Old Oak South 
and access to Old Oak Common Station. Relocating 
the bridge towards the west would mean that the 
route would directly connect into the new mixed use 
residential led Oaklands North development. 
4.36. There are two existing vehicular routes serving 
Old Oak North: Hythe Road/Salter Street and Haul 
Road. These offer reasonable vehicular access into 
the area and may be sufficient to support increased 
business traffic associated with the proposed level 
of industrial intensification. However, more detailed transport assessments will be required as part of future 
planning applications in order to test and understand 
the impacts of development proposals. There is the 
possibility that these assessments may highlight the 
need for an additional vehicular connection. Therefore, 
to facilitate this, the policy has identified a potential 
future northern vehicular connection (Laundry Lane 
Bridge) providing access directly from Scrubs Lane into 
Old Oak North. This will likely need to allow for HGVs 
and other large business vehicles to service the area, 
so land is required to be safeguarded accordingly for 
this purpose (see also P10).  
4.37. Old Oak North has historically been a location for 
industrial and railway infrastructure. This history should 
continue to inform the character of the area as it is 
redeveloped. A number of heritage assets and positive 
elements of character have been lost during the 
evolution of the area but a number remain, including 
the Rolls Royce Building. This building provides a 
key anchor for local heritage and identity; its original 
features can help to provide a local character reference 
to inform the design of new intensified industrial 
typologies that would sit alongside it. 
4.38. There is potential for the Old Oak Sidings waste 
site to significantly increase its waste throughput 
capacity. The site is capable of meeting the London 
Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham’s (LBHF) waste 
apportionment targets for the London Plan period up to 
2036, and if it was fully optimised this could generate 
surplus capacity. To help LBHF meet their waste 
apportionment targets, the Local Plan safeguards this 
site and OPDC will work closely with the site operator 
to explore ways it can be assisted to expand its 
markets in order to increase its use. The infrastructure 
improvements that may be required to support the 
wider industrial intensification of Old Oak North will 
help to support the ongoing and enhanced operation of 
the Old Oak Sidings site.Old Oak Sidings also has the 
potential to support the management of waste during 
the construction of development in the OPDC area 
and potentially play a more significant role in OPDC’s 
future waste, energy and utilities network. Other waste 
operations in Old Oak North could be retained and 
re-provided on site as part of future development or 
if they were redeveloped for a non-waste use then 
compensatory provision would need to be made, in 
line with the London Plan Policy SI9 and Local Plan 
Policy EU6. As referenced above, the Old Oak Sidings 
waste site has significant potential to increase its 
waste throughput capacity and it is therefore likely that 
compensatory provision will be demonstrable through 
the potential for increase in throughput on this site.  62
Figure 4.10: Grand Union Canal Place
Figure 4.10: Grand Union Canal PlacePOLICY P3: Grand Union Canal
VISION 
The Grand Union Canal will be a defining feature 
of the OPDC area, shaping the character of both 
Old Oak and Park Royal. Moorings, open spaces 
and canalside activities will support its role as a 
community asset and lively leisure and recreation 
destination. The canal’s role as a transport corridor 
will also be optimised, while ensuring that its ecology 
and heritage are conserved and enhanced.POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the activation of the Grand Union Canal 
and canalside spaces within Channel Gate by 
delivering:
i) permanent and meanwhile town centre, leisure, 
employment, community and canal-related 
uses with active frontages in areas of higher 
activity including at publicly accessible open 
spaces and crossings of key routes; andii) residential and employment uses with positive 
frontages elsewhere.
b) supporting overlooking, security and safety along 
the canal and canalside spaces within Park 
Royal and Old Oak North by delivering positive 
frontages;
c) delivering a range of permanent and temporary 
new residential, leisure, educational, cultural, 
commercial and visitor moorings and their 
supporting infrastructure along the canal.
Public realm and movement
d) supporting delivery of new or improved bridges, 
as shown in figure 4.10, by working positively with 
stakeholders;
e) connecting canalside routes with new or improved 
bridges;
f) ensuring bridge infrastructure and associated 
spaces are designed to be integrated into the built 
environment, are accessible, safe and include 
active and positive frontages where possible;63
Figure 4.11: Here East, Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park - precedent for the Grand Union Canal Local Parkg) contributing to improvements to the southern 
towpath in its role as part of the national towing 
path network and as a continuous high quality 
east-west walking and cycling route as part of the 
National Cycle Network by:
i) delivering a high quality shared walking and 
cycling route;
ii) delivering appropriate levels and types of 
lighting;
iii) ensuring development is integrated with the 
route in relation to its design, operation and 
location of uses; and
iv) coordinating delivery of improvements with 
relevant stakeholders.
h) supporting local connectivity by contributing to 
and/or delivering a continuous local walking and 
cycling route along the northern side of the canal 
within Channel Gate;
i) contributing to the use of the Grand Union Canal 
for waterborne passenger, leisure and freight 
transport by:
i) delivering new transport related moorings, 
waterway access, wharfs and ancillary facilities 
in appropriate locations; and
ii) utilising water-borne freight transport during the 
construction and operation of development.
Green infrastructure and the environment
j) contributing to and/or delivering a network of high 
quality multi-functional publicly accessible open 
spaces along the canal including:
i) Channel Gate Local Park; 
ii) other smaller open spaces;
iii) improvements to existing open spaces 
including Birchwood Nature Reserve, Mary 
Seacole Gardens and Barretts Green; and
iv) multifunctional new basins and waterspaces;
k) conserving and enhancing the biodiversity value 
of the canal and the Birchwood Nature Reserve 
as a Site of Importance for Nature Conservation in 
accordance with Policy EU2;
l) enhancing the environmental quality and role of 
the canal by:
i) contributing to enhancing water quality; and
ii) enabling SuDS and new water infrastructure to 
connect to the Grand Union Canal.
Heritage and character
m) strengthening local identity and character by:
i) conserving and enhancing the Grand Union 
Canal and St. Mary’s Cemetery conservation 
areas and their settings and Local Heritage 
Listings adjacent to the canal including the 
Canal Cottage within Park Royal; and
ii) delivering a consistent and high quality palette 
of materials that conserves and enhances the 
historic canalside character.
Building heights 
n) contributing to a variety of building heights that 
support the functioning, designations, amenity and character of the canal and canalside spaces by:
i) subject to the impact on the heritage, 
character, biodiversity and amenity of the 
Grand Union Canal within Channel Gate, 
delivering heights of generally 6 to 8 storeys 
fronting directly onto the Grand Union Canal 
with opportunities for tall buildings at key 
crossing points such as Channel Gate Street, 
Old Oak Lane and Scrubs Lane; and
ii) within Park Royal and Old Oak North, 
delivering appropriate heights that balance 
the need to conserve and enhance the 
heritage, character, biodiversity and amenity 
of the Grand Union Canal with the functioning 
and intensification of the Strategic Industrial 
Location.P364
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.39. The Paddington Arm of the Grand Union 
Canal was constructed in the late 18th century and 
is a key heritage asset within the OPDC area. The 
canal performs many valuable functions including its 
roles as an ecology asset, as part of the All London 
Green Grid, conservation area, walking and cycling 
route and corridor for water transport. It presents the 
opportunity to become a focal point within the Old Oak 
area and for it to become the heart for new canal-
related, leisure and community uses that people living 
and working in the area can enjoy. Within the OPDC 
area, the Grand Union Canal is underutilised, caused 
by its inaccessibility and limited natural surveillance. 
Development along the canal provides the opportunity 
for proposals to contribute to and/or enable the 
enhancement of these existing functions and to deliver 
new roles and uses along, and on, the canal. This will 
help to celebrate local character and ensure the canal 
becomes an integral part of future redevelopment.
4.40. The Grand Union Canal crosses a number of 
places including Scrubs Lane, Old Oak North, Old 
Oak South, Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common 
Lane, Channel Gate and Park Royal West. Each of 
the relevant place policies provides guidance for how 
development should respond to the canal and its 
setting. However, the character of the canal should 
also actively inform the design and operation of 
development in those places. 
4.41. Moorings play an important role in supporting 
the historic canalside character, in meeting housing 
need, providing space for employment and leisure 
activities and increased activities. New permanent and 
temporary moorings will be supported along the length 
of the canal with a focus at publicly accessible open 
spaces and other accessible locations including at:
• Channel Gate Local Park; 
• the Atlas Junction Cluster;P3
• Birchwood Nature Reserve;
• Mitre Canalside Cluster; and
• other canalside spaces including basins and 
locations adjacent to crossings.
4.42. Proposals will need to be agreed with the Canal 
and River Trust and local mooring associations.
4.43. A shared high quality walking and cycling route 
along the southern towpath with segregated cycling 
route running parallel to the towpath are proposed1 to 
support the route’s role as part of the National Cycle 
Network. Along both routes, cycling calming measures 
will be required. Proposals should be appropriately 
set back to allow, where feasible, for the widening 
of the towpath to provide a comfortable width to 
accommodate both pedestrians and cyclists and to 
provide space for access ramps and other connections 
to surrounding areas.
4.44. New bridges will play a critical role in supporting 
movement, supporting locally distinctive place making 
and helping to activate canalside spaces. Any bridge 
crossings of the canal will need to be agreed with the 
Canal and River Trust, in addition to approvals from the 
relevant Highways Authority.
4.45. The northern canalside route also provides an 
opportunity for areas within Channel Gate and Old Oak 
Lane to be connected by a continuous walking and 
cycling route. The location of this route will likely vary, 
running beside the canal and around buildings located 
directly on to the water.  
4.46. Water transport is a sustainable mode of 
transport and its use will contribute to OPDC’s 
Sustainable Transport Hierarchy (see Policy SP7). 
The Grand Union Canal has the potential to facilitate 
water based passenger, leisure and additional freight 
transport2. Currently there is limited provision of 
wharves and associated facilities to support water 
transport with only the Old Oak Sidings Wharf providing access for waterborne transport in the OPDC area. 
To support water transport, proposals that enhance 
existing wharves and deliver new wharves within both 
Old Oak and Park Royal will be supported. OPDC 
will work with providers of water transport services to 
coordinate their delivery. Water based transport also 
needs to consider impacts on biodiversity and water 
quality in accordance with Policies EU2 and EU3.  
4.47. The Grand Union Canal is a Site of Importance 
for Nature Conservation (SINC)3. To ensure this role 
is continued and enhanced, proposals should respond 
positively to the canal and accord with Policy EU2. The 
canal is a valuable asset in helping OPDC to address 
flooding and drainage issues. To ensure accordance 
with Policy EU3, proposals should contribute to and/
or deliver and enable the connection of sustainable 
drainage systems (SuDS) into the canal. Any water 
entering the canal should be of an adequate quality, 
according with the Water Framework Directive or any 
subsequent standards, in accordance with Policy EU3.
4.48. The Grand Union Canal currently has isolated 
pockets of open space, including the Birchwood Nature 
Reserve, Mary Seacole Gardens and Barretts Green. 
There is a need to enhance and connect these open 
spaces and deliver new publicly accessible canalside 
open spaces. Each open space will provide a different 
role, responding to its surrounding context. Within  
Channel Gate, the Local Park should be located on the 
Grand Union Canal and perform a range of functions 
including leisure, walking and cycling routes, canalside 
activities and community uses. Delivery of these 
spaces will support OPDC’s target to deliver 30% of 
the development area as publicly accessible open 
space. See Policies SP8 and EU1. Where appropriate 
and related to a development, contributions will also 
be sought towards environmental enhancements along 
the canal. 
4.49. The development of Channel Gate provides the 
opportunity for new water spaces in the form of basins 65
Figure 4.12: Chicago Riverwalk - precedent for activating canalside spacesP3
REFERENCES
1. Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
2. Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
3. Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation Statement
4. Heritage Strategy
5. Grand Union Canal Massing and Enclosure Note Update
6. Park Royal Intensification Study and Old Oak North Intensification 
Studythe canal also provides an opportunity to generate 
localised heat and cooling for development. Proposals 
should consider the potential use of the canal for heat 
and cooling generation, in accordance with Policy 
EU10 and in agreement with the Canal and River Trust.
4.55. The Canal and River Trust is a key stakeholder 
as the landowner of the canal and elements of 
canalside sites. Alongside the Trust, OPDC will work 
positively with other stakeholders, such as boating 
groups and other canal users, to support the delivery 
of aspirations in this policy. OPDC will continue to 
work with the Canal & River Trust and other relevant 
stakeholders to develop a Canal Place Making Strategy 
for the area that further develops the vision for the 
Grand Union Canal.  The strategy will be embedded 
into relevant planning guidance documents to guide 
development on and alongside the canal corridor.and/or widening of the existing canal. New canal water 
spaces must contribute to conserving and enhancing 
the character of the canal. The canal is also an 
ecology asset and new water space should contribute 
to enhancing its biodiversity. They can also provide 
additional space for uses both on the canal and on the 
canalside that will contribute to the canal’s activation 
and sense of place. 
4.50. The significance of the Grand Union Canal’s 
historic environment is reflected in its designation as a 
conservation area. It is one of the defining features of 
the OPDC area4 which is reflected in OPDC’s Heritage 
Strategy. As such, proposals should conserve and 
enhance the significance of the canal and canal related 
infrastructure such as bridges and respond positively 
to the canal’s character in their design. Alongside 
the canal, there are a number of Local Heritage 
Listings which should be used to inform the design of 
development in areas adjacent to the canal.
4.51. To respond to the significance of the canal and 
its potential to inform the design of development and 
place making across both Old Oak and Park Royal, 
proposals should deliver a palette of materials that 
reflects the historic canalside environment and that are 
consistent across land ownerships in accordance with 
Policy SP10.
4.52. Policy SP9 identifies the canal as a sensitive 
location, reflecting its existing character, use, SINC 
designation and conservation area status. In response 
to these roles, for proposals sitting directly on to 
the canal, buildings of generally 6 to 8 storeys are 
considered to be appropriate5. However, each site 
will need to consider the site specific circumstances 
and accord with relevant London Plan and Local 
Plan policies alongside other material considerations. 
Along the canal there will be opportunities for tall 
buildings where key routes cross the canal. These 
taller elements need to be considered on a site by site 
basis and will be determined using all other relevant 
planning policy and material considerations. Within 
Strategic Industrial Locations, building heights will need 
to respond to OPDC’s aspirations to support economic 
growth and job creation through the intensification of 
industrial floorspace6 while continuing to conserve and 
enhance the canal in terms of its heritage and ecology 
designations.
4.53. Unlocking the comprehensive redevelopment 
of areas will necessitate the provision of a substantial 
amount of new and improved physical infrastructure 
along and across the Grand Union Canal. Any 
development or infrastructure adjacent to or across 
the canal will need to ensure that the canal’s structural 
integrity is not compromised, in accordance with the 
relevant national policy and guidance in place at the 
time (including relevant paragraphs of the NPPF 
and Land Stability NPPG). The Local Plan identifies 
the likely requirements for infrastructure which are 
based on current population projections. These could 
change over time impacting on the size and type of 
infrastructure required further detailed within OPDC’s 
IDP. 
4.54. In addition to its roles in managing flooding, 66
Figure 4.13: Park Royal West Place
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land Uses
a) delivering 3,390 new jobs within SIL, by taking 
opportunities to intensify the use of all sites, but 
in particular on identified Site Allocations, and 
having regard to the locations and typologies 
identified in OPDC’s Park Royal Intensification 
Study;
b) delivering 120 new jobs and a minimum 1,575 
homes on sites outside of SIL, achieving early 
delivery of housing to contribute towards OPDC’s 
0-10 year housing supply, in line with the Brewery 
Cluster, First Central and Lakeside Drive Site 
Allocations;
c) safeguarding Twyford Waste Transfer Station site 
in accordance with the West London Waste Plan.
Public Realm and movement
d) contributing towards and / or delivering 
improvements to the function and quality of the 
transport network for all users by:
i) rationalising, minimising or removing on-street 
car parking, where possible and practicable, 
to enable walking, cycling and public realm 
improvements;POLICY P4: Park Royal West
VISION 
Park Royal West will continue to be London’s leading 
location for large, medium and small industrial 
businesses. The protection and intensification of 
industrial space, along with a co-ordinated approach 
to infrastructure investment and delivery will improve 
its functionality and environment; strengthening Park 
Royal’s competitive position, and helping businesses 
to grow sustainably.67
P4
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.56. Park Royal West is predominantly an area 
designated as a Strategic Industrial Location (SIL) 
where the priorities are to protect, strengthen and 
intensify industrial activities in line with Policy SP5 
and E1. The industrial area as a whole experiences 
low vacancy rates and rising rent levels resulting from 
increased demand for industrial space across London. 
This demand could continue to come from a broad 
range of industrial sectors, but more transport intensive 
uses, such as transport and logistics operations, have 
been increasingly attracted to Park Royal West.
4.57. Employment densities across the industrial 
area are relatively high, but there are opportunities for 
further intensification to deliver additional industrial  
floorspace and employment to contribute to OPDC’s 
jobs targets.
4.58. OPDC has carried out work to explore ways 
to deliver additional floorspace and industrial jobs1. 
This work highlights sites and typologies where 
industrial intensification may be possible through 
vertical/horizontal extensions, internal subdivision 
or comprehensive redevelopment. It demonstrates 
that, overall, an uplift of around 3,390 jobs could be 
achieved, although this figure is  indicative and is 
dependent on site specific constraints. Twyford Tip, 
if viable and deliverable2, represents a significant 
opportunity to provide additional industrial floorspace/
jobs as it is currently vacant land;  it should be 
noted that there is an extant planning permission 
for non compliant SIL uses on this site. The site is 
adjacent to the Twyford Waste Transfer Station which 
is safeguarded for waste apportionment purposes 
through the West London Waste Plan (WLWP) 2015 
(see Policy EU6). If the Twyford Waste Transfer 
Station were redeveloped for a non-waste use then 
compensatory provision would need to be made in line 
with the London Plan Policy SI9, the WLWP and Local 
Plan Policy EU6. 100 Twyford Abbey Road is also a ii) creating new or upgraded continuous walking 
and cycling routes particularly along key 
routes, to/from stations, Park Royal Centre 
and the Grand Union Canal; and
iii) supporting traffic calming measures along 
Chase Road.
e) contributing towards and / or delivering enhanced 
bus infrastructure to support existing and planned 
bus services between Park Royal, Old Oak and 
other key destinations;
f) contributing towards and / or delivering 
improvements to the road network to support 
more efficient business operations and servicing 
including:
i) safeguarding for and if relevant and 
appropriate, contributing to and/or delivering  
a new vehicular, pedestrian and cycle route to 
link Park Royal to Channel Gate; 
ii) supporting improvements to junctions to 
facilitate improved traffic flow, pedestrian and/
or cycle enhancements; and
iii) contributing towards enhancements to the 
A40 and A406 which improve flow of traffic; 
support the movement of freight and/or 
reduce severance. 
g) contributing towards and / or delivering 
improvements to the function and quality of the 
public realm for all users through:
i) enhanced street greening, public realm and 
active and/or positive frontages, particularly 
along the key routes identified in Figure 4.13;
ii) delivering more generous pavements widths, 
where this does not have a significant adverse 
impact on the functioning of the highway; and
iii) improved wayfinding, signage and lighting, 
prioritising routes to/from Park Royal, Hanger 
Lane, Stonebridge Park and Harlesden 
stations; and the to/from the Grand Union 
Canal.
Green Infrastructure and the environment
h) contributing towards and/or delivering improvements which support the creation of new 
publicly accessible open space in accordance 
with Policies SP8 and EU1, and public access 
into and/or the quality of existing green 
infrastructure assets, including: 
i) Diageo Lake and Gardens;
ii) Wesley playing fields;
iii) linear spaces along the Grand Union Canal; 
iv) Green corridors along railways; and
v) Metropolitan Open Land and green spaces 
along the A40.
i) optimising the use of roof space for food growing 
and embedding other green infrastructure across 
the area, including on-site soft landscaping and 
tree planting; 
j) supporting any applicable actions identified in the 
Thames River Basin Management Plan for the 
River Brent catchment;
k) contributing to and/or delivering measures 
that help support OPDC, the host authorities, 
and where relevant TfL, to improve air quality 
monitoring, and overcome issues identified in 
Local Air Quality Focus Areas around the A40 and 
A406.
Heritage and character 
l) strengthening local identity and character by 
conserving and enhancing the Brent Viaduct and 
other identified non designated heritage assets 
and their settings;
m) ensuring local character is informed by the area’s 
existing heritage, including the Grand Union 
Canal, railway and industrial heritage; and
n) supporting increased building heights where 
this will deliver industrial intensification and SIL 
compliant broad industrial type activities.68
P4
safeguarded site through the West London Waste Plan 
(2015). If 100 Twyford Abbey Road were redeveloped 
for a non-waste use then compensatory provision 
would need to be made in line with the London Plan 
Policy SI9, WLWP and Local Plan Policy EU6.
4.59. There are a number of non SIL sites within Park 
Royal West, including First Central, Lakeside Drive 
and surrounding sites, and the Bashley Road Gypsy 
and Traveller site. Further information is set out in 
the First Central and Lakeside Drive Site Allocations 
and Brewery Cluster (Policy P4C1). Based on the 
residential development capacities proposed for Park 
Royal West, it is expected that tall buildings here will 
predominantly be in the range of 20 to 30 storeys. 
Tall building proposals will be considered against 
all relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations. Provision for Gypsy and Traveller 
accommodation is addressed in the Housing Chapter 
(Policy H8). 
4.60. Critical road and rail infrastructure runs through 
or sits alongside Park Royal West. These provide a 
significant advantage for businesses and make this 
area a highly desirable industrial location. However, 
they also present a number of infrastructure related 
challenges:
a) the A40 (Western Avenue) and A406 (North 
Circular Road) provide important orbital and east-
west connections into and around London, but they 
are often congested;
b) the four key routes that run through Park Royal 
- Coronation Road/Park Royal Road/Acton 
Lane/Abbey Road (referred to as the ‘Big X’) - 
experience high levels of traffic; and
c) the A40 and A406, the railway lines (London 
Overground, Bakerloo and West Coast Main Line) 
form a ‘wall of infrastructure’ which sever the 
area from its surroundings and make walking and 
cycling into Park Royal more challenging. 4.61. A key contributing factor to existing congestion 
levels is the high number of Park Royal’s employees 
currently travelling to work by car – approximately 35% 
of the total trips made by car into Park Royal are from 
within a 5 km radius, which represents the average 
cycle trip length3. There is also a significant amount of 
‘rat-running’ through the estate. These travel patterns 
contribute to high levels of traffic and congestion, 
particularly along the Big X; affecting bus journey 
times/reliability and are also likely to exacerbate 
environmental issues such as noise, dust and poor air 
quality. There is an opportunity to deliver changes that 
address these issues and that improve the functioning 
of the road network and timely business operations and 
deliveries. The interventions proposed to address this 
include:
a) removing through traffic on the Big X; 
b) supporting fast and reliable bus services and 
increasing capacity, including the potential for a 
complementary night shuttle bus service for shift 
workers; 
c) removing and rationalising car parking;
d) supporting more efficient freight movements;
e) better connecting the six rail stations surrounding 
Park Royal, via the Big X with better public realm, 
crossings, traffic calming, CCTV, lighting and 
signage to support walking and cycling; 
f) creating new public spaces and support street 
greening within the town centre; and
g) creating and upgrading pedestrian and cycle 
facilities to deliver a joined up, accessible walking 
and cycle route network.
4.62. The movement of goods is a critical part of 
industrial business operations and a proportion of 
the vehicle flows in Park Royal are attributed to 
this. The continued success of existing businesses 
is of paramount importance; however, there is an 
opportunity to further reduce traffic in the area through 
consolidated delivery and servicing arrangements 
between businesses or increasing efficiency by reducing ‘empty running’ of logistics vehicles. 
Notwithstanding this, there are also opportunities to 
smooth the flow of traffic, including improvements 
to key junctions. Transport for London (TfL) are 
responsible for the A40 and A406 and the local 
authorities are responsible for other roads as the local 
highway authorities. OPDC will be working closely with 
these delivery agencies and will expect development to 
support the implementation of planned improvements. 
4.63. High levels of on-street parking, poor quality 
public realm and limited active and positive frontages 
negatively impact on the general quality of the 
environment and the sense of safety. The key routes 
represent the greatest opportunity to improve the 
functional operation and qualitative perception of the 
area.  These routes should be enhanced by introducing 
additional street greening, new developments with 
active and/or positive frontages and delivering an 
attractive public realm which incorporates space for 
walking and cycling with a robust and consistent 
palette of materials.
4.64. There are very few open spaces in Park Royal 
West, which is unsurprising given its long established 
industrial nature. Whilst there are examples of relatively 
high quality landscaping (Diageo Lake and Gardens), 
this is variable, and much of the open space is private. 
The lack of green infrastructure and tree coverage also 
contributes to the Urban Heat Island (UHI) effect and 
localised outdoor overheating.
4.65. Given the scarcity of open space, any existing 
provision must be protected and, where possible, 
enhanced so that it can continue to provide areas 
of recreation for local residential communities and 
workers. Opportunities must also be taken to provide 
new spaces along the Grand Union Canal, within 
the Brewery Cluster and as part of First Central Site 
Allocations to ensure public access into open spaces 
and/or providing additional greening and tree cover 
where possible. 69
Figure 4.14: Hydroponic Farming - precedent for urban food growing in Park Royal 4.66. The scale and concentration of manufacturing 
industry means that there is the potential for cross 
flows and the reuse of resources. These resources 
could be put to good use and support a range of 
activities as part of promoting the principles of the 
Circular and Sharing Economy (see Policy EU7). For 
example, there is an opportunity to further support the 
food sector which is highly concentrated in Park Royal.  
Organic waste generated by food manufacturing could 
be made into compost to grow fruit and vegetables 
as part of rooftop urban farming projects in Park 
Royal. This approach has been successfully adopted 
on rooftops in New York City. This waste could also 
be used for energy generation. A portion of the fruit 
and vegetables grown on rooftops will also become 
food waste, which can be captured and used again 
to produce compost. In terms of other benefits, 
urban farming would also reduce the UHI effect, 
could improve the productivity of Park Royal’s food 
manufacturing industries and provide a local food 
source for the residents of Old Oak. 
4.67. The mix of industrial architectural styles present 
reflects the varied and continually evolving pattern 
of growth and redevelopment in this area. There are 
a limited number of historically significant buildings, 
but the listed Brent Viaduct, Grand Union Canal 
Conservation Area and underlying industrial heritage 
make a key contribution to local identity and the historic 
distinctiveness of this area4. Significant potential exists 
to interpret and celebrate the social history of this 
area, by reflecting this through street/building naming 
and the design of public art and public realm. Heritage 
assets should be conserved and enhanced as part of 
future development in the area, in accordance with 
Policy D7. In line with relevant typologies identified 
in the Park Royal Intensification Study, OPDC will 
support increased building heights where this will 
deliver industrial intensification and SIL compliant 
broad industrial type activities. Outside of SIL, based 
on the residential development capacities proposed for P4
REFERENCES
1. Park Royal Intensification Study 
2. The Land at Abbey Road Study
3. Park Royal Transport Strategy 
4. Heritage Strategy70
Figure 4.15: Brewery Cluster
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting residential uses when:
i) located above ground floor along key routes; 
and
ii) in other locations, where they provide positive 
frontages onto Lakeside Drive, Diageo 
Lake and Gardens and other new publicly 
accessible open spaces. 
b) delivering appropriate employment uses, with 
ground floor active and/or positive frontages:
i) onto key routes;
ii) along Mason’s Green Lane that connects to 
Park Royal Station; and
iii) along Lakeside Drive.
c) delivering a small quantum of local ‘walk to’ retail 
and social infrastructure uses which meet the 
needs of existing and new residents and accords 
with Policy TCC1.
Public realm and movement
d) delivering a high quality public realm with active 
and/or positive frontages that successfully 
address the different level changes across the 
area;
e) providing new or improving existing walking and/POLICY P4C1: Brewery Cluster
VISION 
A high quality and legible entry point into Park Royal. 
New and improved walking and cycling routes, along 
with a concentration of local services set within an 
attractive public realm, will provide an area of focus 
and vibrancy for the new and existing residential and 
employment uses in the area. 
or cycling routes to make high quality connections 
north-south and east-west, including;
i) to/from Park Royal and Hanger Lane stations, 
particularly improvements to the route and 
footbridge along Mason’s Green Lane;
ii) to/from Twyford Abbey and the A406;
iii) through Diageo Lake & Gardens;
iv) around and across Lakeside Drive; and
v) towards the Grand Union Canal.
f) delivering wayfinding, signage and lighting 
strategies that provide legibility for routes/spaces 
and improve their sense of safety, prioritising 
routes to/from Park Royal and Hanger Lane stations;
g) continuing the use of Coronation Road as an 
important vehicle access and servicing route for 
Park Royal.
Green infrastructure and the environment 
h) supporting the creation of new high quality 
publicly accessible open space that is well 
integrated with the wider open space network, 
including a new publicly accessible open space 
within the First Central Site Allocation;
i) contributing towards and/or delivering 
improvements that support public access into 71
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.68. The Brewery Cluster is focused around a key 
point of entry into the industrial area from Park Royal 
and Hanger Lane rail stations; and to/from the A40. 
Coronation Road is one of the key routes as part of 
the wider ‘Big X’ network alongside Park Royal Road, 
Abbey Road and Acton Lane. It is a heavily trafficked 
route, particularly for vehicles servicing the Park Royal 
industrial area. 
4.69. The Brewery Cluster is one of the few sites 
in Park Royal West which is not designated as SIL. 
Development here can be optimised to take advantage 
of its proximity to local rail stations and other public 
transport modes. A number of new development sites 
around the junction with Coronation Road, Lakeside P4C1
and/or improve the quality of existing green 
infrastructure including:
i) Diageo Lake and Gardens Site of Importance 
for Nature Conservation (SINC); and 
ii) Metropolitan Open Land.
j) contributing to and/or delivering measures 
that help support OPDC, the host authorities 
and where relevant, TfL to improve air quality 
monitoring, and overcome issues identified in 
local Air Quality Focus Areas around the A40 and  
A406.
Building heights
k) contributing to a variety of building heights which 
respond to the context, with tall buildings and 
associated new publicly accessible open space 
focussed along Coronation Road.
Heritage and character
l) ensuring local character is informed by the area’s 
industrial heritage, using the former Guinness 
brewery as a historic reference point to inform the 
design proposals and help to reinforce a degree 
of local distinctiveness.Drive and Rainsford Road have been identified1 that 
can make a significant contribution to homes and jobs 
targets for Park Royal and help address issues in the 
area. 
4.70. The quality and provision of walking and cycling 
routes between stations and First Central, Park Royal 
and to/from Twyford Abbey are key to addressing 
severance from the wider area and encouraging a 
modal shift. However, some of the routes are in need 
of improvement. This is particularly the case for the 
pedestrian and cycle link between Park Royal Station 
and First Central (part of Mason’s Green Lane) which 
has issues related to safety, quality of the environment 
and legibility. A new hotel on Western Avenue provides 
an active frontage onto part of the link, but a greater 
degree of surveillance and improvements to this link 
are required along its length. 
4.71. Despite significant redevelopment in this area 
to provide new offices, around 500 homes and open 
space (known as First Central), there is very limited 
access to town centre and community facilities for 
local workers and residents. Park Royal as a whole 
currently suffers from a lack of facilities for businesses 
and employees, with only one nursery, two gyms, 
four hotels and no conference facilities. Introducing 
these uses could help create a more sustainable 
neighbourhood and business environment, with 
services being closer to where people live and work. 
Any town centre uses would need to be small-scale 
‘walk-to’ facilities, to complement the surrounding town 
centre hierarchy, in accordance with Policy TCC1.
4.72. The potential success of this cluster rests on 
its ability to mediate between the existing residential 
uses and industrial uses in SIL. The introduction of 
new employment uses as part of a mixed use approach 
is important. For example, small manufacturing and 
associated retail operations or small workshops and 
artist studios could complement residential uses 
and create a vibrant and industrious feel to this neighbourhood and help to blur a hard distinction 
between land uses. 
4.73. There are opportunities to deliver this mix of 
uses on development sites focussed along Coronation 
Road (First Central and Coronation Road South). New 
development in this location should incorporate ‘walk 
to’ town centre uses, employment and community 
facilities at the ground floor level to create active 
frontages focused around key routes and Mason’s 
Green Lane. As part of a mixed use approach, 
residential uses would also be appropriate above these 
ground floor frontages or in other locations, where this 
provides positive frontages onto residential focused 
streets and open spaces; and does not compromise 
the function of the SIL in accordance with Policies D5 
and E1. 
4.74. The east side of Lakeside Drive directly adjoining 
the ‘Origin’ industrial development is currently flanked 
by blank industrial facades and grass verges. New 
development here should create a balance of active 
and/or positive frontages on both sides of the street. 
Additional accommodation for SME businesses should 
be provided at the ground floor level and there is 
potential for residential uses above. However, given 
its close proximity to SIL, proposals must demonstrate 
that the layout and quantum of residential uses would 
not undermine the function of surrounding industrial 
uses, in accordance with Policy D5, in line with the 
agent of change principle, and that a satisfactory level 
of residential amenity is provided for occupiers of the 
development.
4.75. All three sites should be progressed in a 
complementary and coordinated way to ensure that the 
neighbourhood, as a whole, is successful. 
4.76. New and upgraded walking and cycling routes 
are needed through this area to connect up to the wider 
network. These connections will help create a more 
intense hub of activity along the key routes to and from 72
Figure 4.16: Existing development near to the Brewery ClusterDrive. This Local Plan formalises this arrangement 
and alternative MOL provision has been designated 
within the Local Plan Policies Map within the Site of 
Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC) to the west 
of this cluster.
4.80. Although it is no longer, the Guinness brewery 
complex was a key part of Park Royal’s industrial 
heritage. New development can take cues from 
this, particularly in terms of the use of materials and 
architectural detailing, street/building naming and the P4C1
Park Royal Station, increasing a sense of security and 
supporting the vibrancy of any proposed ‘walk-to’ town 
centre uses.  There are significant level differences 
across this cluster, with the approach into the heart of 
this cluster being via stepped/ramp access and through 
an underpass. The placement of buildings and their 
positioning in terms of their ‘fronts and backs’ should 
have regard to the difference in levels to make sure 
that existing and new pedestrian and cycle routes are 
overlooked and can provide a pleasant environment for 
people moving through the area. 
4.77. The massing of development will need to 
respond to the building heights of the adjacent existing 
residential blocks to manage the impact on residential 
amenity. Focusing a taller element around the two 
junctions between Coronation Road and Lakeside 
Drive is  supported in principle (see Policy SP9). 
The height of buildings will be subject to detailed 
assessment of its impacts in accordance with all 
relevant policy and guidance. 
4.78. There is a relatively good provision of open 
space immediately within and around the cluster, 
including areas of Metropolitan Open Land (MOL) 
but better connections are required to improve its 
contribution to the All London Green Grid. There is an 
opportunity to provide new civic/publicly accessible 
open space within the First Central Site Allocation 
which could provide the necessary catalyst for 
delivering this objective. Integrating the new publicly 
accessible open space with Diageo Lake and Gardens 
should support better connections between the open 
spaces.
4.79. The development site to the south of Coronation 
Road benefits from an extant permission for a hotel. 
This is on land designated as MOL in the London 
Borough of Ealing’s Local Plan. The Section 106 
agreement for this application (ref ETL/610/1359) 
sets out arrangements to designate alternative MOL 
on land to the south of the southern arm of Lakeside 
design of the public realm. This approach would not 
only ensure the new buildings are locally distinctive, 
but they could also re-tell the history of the area.
4.81. The Brewery Cluster boundary is shown in 
figure 4.15. Site Allocation 38 (1 Lakeside Drive) and a 
portion of Site Allocation 5 (First Central) fall within the 
cluster boundary.
REFERENCES
1. Development Capacity Study Update73
Figure 4.17: Old Park Royal Place
POLICY P5: Old Park Royal
VISION 
Old Park Royal’s established industrial land use 
and historic character will be protected. Today, this 
place is a prominent hub for smaller businesses. 
Opportunities to intensify industrial uses will support 
the continued growth of start-up businesses and 
innovative activities across a range of employment 
sectors. The enhancement of buildings along with 
improvements to the public realm and movement 
network will support a functional and exciting place 
that helps to mediate the transition between industrial 
and mixed use areas. 
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) delivering additional industrial floorspace and 
1,600 new jobs by taking opportunities to intensify 
the use of all sites, but in particular on site 
allocations, and having regard to the locations 
and typologies identified in OPDC’s Park Royal 
Intensification Study;  
b) protecting, re-providing and/or increasing the 
provision of small business units in accordance 
with Policy E3;
c) safeguarding Chase Road site in accordance with 
the West London Waste Plan.
Public Realm and movement
d) contributing towards and / or delivering 
improvements to the function and quality of the 
movement network for all users by:
i) rationalising, minimising and/or removing 
on-street car parking where possible and 74
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.82.  Similar to the majority of Park Royal West, 
Old Park Royal is designated as a Strategic Industrial 
Location (SIL). The same priorities in terms of 
protecting, strengthening and intensifying industrial 
land apply across both places. 
4.83. Old Park Royal was largely developed during 
the early 20th Century and its character is highly 
distinctive from the rest of the industrial area of Park 
Royal West. It is home to a number of historically 
significant buildings linked to its industrial heritage and 
based on this, there is potential for new locally listed 
buildings and a new conservation area referred to as 
St. Leonards Road1. 
4.84. The historic street network which comprises the 
four parallel roads of Minerva, Sunbeam, Gorst and 
Standard (some of which are named after local car 
manufacturers from that time), remains intact. Other 
key features of its past - the smaller plots and the 
densely packed or finer grain arrangement of buildings 
– are also still present and are fundamental to Old 
Park Royal’s character today. The buildings within 
the Standard Road Area of Local Character provide a 
particularly strong historic reference point in terms of 
their layout and architectural forms. Buildings in this 
location are typically laid out perpendicular to the street 
with gable ends at the front and are often hard up 
against the pavement edge or with minimal setbacks. 
All of these features set Old Park Royal apart and 
give rise to a unique industrial heritage that should be 
promoted and/or retained through any redevelopment. 
However, it also means that the area is more sensitive 
to change. The road network is highly constrained practicable to enable walking, cycling and 
public realm improvements;
ii) creating new or upgrading existing continuous 
walking and cycling routes, particularly along 
key routes and towards Park Royal Centre; 
iii) delivering improvements to Chase Road 
and Bashley Road junction and Chandos 
Road and Victoria Road junction to facilitate 
improved traffic flow and/or pedestrian and 
cycle enhancements; and
iv) delivering traffic calming measures, including 
along Bashley Road, Chandos Road and 
Chase Road.
e) contributing towards and / or delivering 
improvements to the function and quality of the 
public realm for all users through:
i) enhanced street greening, public realm and 
active and/or positive frontages, particularly 
along Bashley Road, Chandos Road, other 
key routes and on town centre approaches;
ii) delivering more generous pavement widths 
where this does not have a significant adverse 
impact on the functioning of the highway; and
iii) improved and attractive wayfinding, signage 
and lighting strategies, prioritising Bashley 
Road and Chandos Road and routes to/from 
rail stations.
Green Infrastructure and environment
f) optimising the use of roof space for food growing 
and embedding green infrastructure across the 
area while ensuring the continued successful 
operation of businesses and the movement 
network;
g) contributing to and/or delivering measures to 
improve air quality monitoring, and overcome 
issues identified in the Local Air Quality Focus 
Area around Victoria Road/Old Oak Lane; 
Heritage and character
i) strengthening local identity and character by 
conserving and enhancing the identified industrial as it was not designed to accommodate the type and 
amount of vehicles that both service and move through 
this place today. This will need careful management if 
Old Park Royal is to continue to be a successful and 
attractive business and industrial location. 
4.85. Evidence demonstrates that Old Park Royal 
accommodates a high proportion and density of smaller 
business units relative to that of Park Royal West2. This 
includes a variety of sectors and many highly valued 
independent businesses. It is the combination of the 
built environment, business type, size and employment 
densities which give rise to the lively urban industrial 
environment in Old Park Royal. OPDC will seek to 
protect this concentration of smaller business units 
within the Old Park Royal by prioritising the provision or 
re-provision of small business units when applying the 
policy requirements of Policies E1 and E3.
4.86. Although this is the most intensively used part of 
Park Royal, there is a significant opportunity to deliver 
more jobs within Old Park Royal Place, particularly 
within Site Allocations. Site Allocations have been 
identified for two sites in Old Park Royal – land at 
Bashley Road and 32-36 & 38-42 Minerva Road. 
The land at Bashley Road is a particularly key site. It 
covers over 3.8 ha and has been identified as having 
the capacity to deliver a minimum 30,100 sqm of 
broad industrial type activities. A comprehensive and 
coordinated approach should be taken to the delivery 
of this site to unlock its potential, in accordance with 
Policy SP10. Smaller scale intensification will also 
be achievable in Old Park Royal on other sites3, to 
capitalise on the area’s higher PTALs and to take 
advantage of Old Park Royal’s proximity to Old Oak. 
Delivering this intensification within Site Allocations and 
other sites could equate to 1,600 new jobs and growth 
opportunities across with a range of sectors in Old 
Park Royal although this figure is highly indicative and 
is dependent on site specific constraints. The Chase 
Road site is identified as an existing waste site in the 
West London Waste Plan 2016 (see Policy EU6) so the P5
heritage assets and their settings, particularly by:
i) retaining the urban grain and street pattern; 
and
ii) ensuring a positive relationship between 
streets and the building frontages.75
Figure 4.18: The Torpedo Factory in Old Park RoyalP5
policy also supports the safeguarding and protection 
of this site in accordance with the West London Waste 
Plan (WLWP). If  the site were redeveloped for a non-
waste use then compensatory provision would need 
to be made in line with the London Plan Policy SI9, 
WLWP and Local Plan Policy EU6. 
4.87. The numbers of people driving to work in 
Old Park Royal contributes to high levels of road 
congestion and associated air quality issues across the 
industrial area. High demand for private car parking 
for employees also has an impact on the quality of 
the public realm and the amount of space available 
for walking and cycling. Furthermore, on-street car 
parking and the ‘overspill’ of industrial activities into 
the public realm, including on-street loading and waste 
storage, contribute to an unattractive and cramped 
street environment. There are frequent examples of 
this across Old Park Royal. This situation negatively 
impacts on the quality of the built environment, how it 
is experienced and how attractive it is to users. Whilst 
land will continue to be protected and supported for 
broad industrial type activities, new development and 
intensification will be expected to minimise and/or 
mitigate parking demand by supporting employees to 
use more sustainable travel options in line with Policy 
SP7. Incorporating well designed and adequate access 
and servicing will also ensure that the highway can be 
used appropriately and function more effectively for all 
users. 
4.88. Old Park Royal is sandwiched between the wider 
industrial area of Park Royal West, Old Oak North, 
where industrial intensification is also being planned 
for and other mixed use areas. As a consequence, 
Old Park Royal will have a pivotal role to play as a 
transition area between these areas and become a 
key route between Old Oak and Park Royal in the 
future. This can be facilitated through improvements 
to the existing east-west links along Chandos Road 
and Bashley Road. These streets are flanked by a 
clustering of attractive ‘landmark’ heritage assets, including the Torpedo Factory (see figure 4.18) and 
Rotax Building so they have the potential to become a 
highly distinctive and attractive route into Park Royal. 
The place policy helps to support this objective by:
a) protecting the heritage and character of the area;
b)  improving the quality of the public realm by 
introducing street greening; 
c)  increasing legibility and safety lighting and signage; 
d)  supporting increased flows of people by improving 
the walking and cycling provision; and 
e) supporting intensification and creating additional 
active and positive frontages to animate this route.
4.89. Land adjacent to Old Park Royal will be used as 
HS2 construction sites.  Close to these locations there 
may be opportunities to deliver meanwhile uses which 
could provide much needed natural surveillance and 
support the early activation of the area. OPDC will work 
closely with HS2 Ltd and other relevant stakeholders to 
deliver this aspiration.
4.90. There are no open spaces within Old Park Royal 
and relatively limited publicly accessible open space REFERENCES
1. Heritage Strategy 
2. Park Royal Atlas and Industrial Land Review
3. Park Royal Intensification Study
4. Circular and Sharing Economy Studyprovision across the whole industrial area.  Policies 
SP8 and EU1 will ensure the two publicly accessible 
open spaces in close proximity to the place boundary 
are protected and enhanced to serve local needs. 
Applicants will also be expected to deliver/contribute 
towards green infrastructure, such as trees and green 
walls/roofs, as part of development proposals and 
the public realm (see Policies EU1 and EU2 for more 
guidance).  As described in the Park Royal West place, 
additional initiatives such as urban farming and local 
food production projects could help achieve wider 
objectives and support a transition to a more circular 
economy4. Using currently underused spaces for urban 
farming has a number of benefits, including helping to 
reduce overheating of buildings, potential to improve 
the productivity of Park Royal’s food manufacturing 
industries, and providing a local food source. Where 
possible, developments should also incorporate this as 
part of their proposals.76
Figure 4.19: Park Royal Centre Place
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of a thriving mixed use 
neighbourhood centre by contributing to the 
delivery of 1,400 new jobs and a minimum of 800 
new homes to support OPDC’s 0-10 year housing 
supply;
b) delivering and maintaining a quantum and mix of 
town centre floorspace with ground floor active 
frontages that are appropriately designed and 
serviced to support the town centre, including 
smaller units, to meet anticipated future demand 
in the most up to date Retail and Leisure Needs 
Study;
c) supporting a co-ordinated approach to optimising 
the Central Middlesex Hospital (CMH) site as a 
health and care hub by delivering new healthcare 
and uses related to the hospital function;
d) ensuring a comprehensive and co-ordinated 
approach is taken to the development of the 
ASDA site to support the delivery of retail led 
mixed use development that:
i) delivers a mix of town centre use floorspace, POLICY P6: Park Royal Centre
VISION 
A strengthened and diversified range of new uses, 
services and amenities, including new town centre 
uses, workspaces and homes, alongside the anchor 
uses of Central Middlesex Hospital and ASDA will 
support a more vibrant and coherent neighbourhood 
centre. Improvements to the transport network 
will support walking and cycling, deliver enhanced 
bus services and ensure the road network keeps 
Park Royal moving, better connecting businesses, 
employees, residents and visitors with their 
destinations.
including small units, as ground floor active 
frontages facing onto Park Royal Road and 
Coronation Road;
ii) delivers residential uses above ground floor 
frontages; and
iii) delivers new intensified industrial uses as 
active and/or positive frontages fronting onto 
Western Road and Coronation Road.
e) delivering social infrastructure appropriate to the 
the Neighbourhood Centre and to supporting 
new and existing industrial, health and residential 
uses.Public realm and movement
f) contributing to and/or enabling the delivery of 
high quality public realm, healthy streets and new 
or improved connections to surrounding areas 
shown in figure 4.19, particularly through the 
CMH and ASDA sites;
g) delivering more continuous, active and/or positive 
and legible frontages along the key routes with 
well defined building lines, particularly within the 
ASDA site fronting onto Park Royal Road; 
h) contributing to and/or enabling delivery of new 
and improved cycling routes, to create:77
P6
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.91. Park Royal Centre is a designated 
neighbourhood town centre sitting at the heart of 
London’s largest industrial estate. A large retail 
supermarket (ASDA) and Central Middlesex Hospital 
(CMH) act as anchor uses generating footfall within 
the centre. Other uses include supported housing and 
smaller services such as banks and cafes which help 
provide facilities for local employees, residents and 
visitors but there are still gaps in local provision for 
business focused services, such as meeting spaces. 
OPDC’s Retail and Leisure Needs Study identifies 
the likely amount of town centre floorspace required 
(3,000sqm) within Park Royal Centre based on 
estimates for A class uses prior to changes to the Use 
Class Order in September 2020.
4.92. Both the ASDA and CMH sites are currently 
underutilised. Parts of CMH are currently vacant, 
although a new Primary Care Centre opened in Spring 
2018 providing vital front line services for residents 
and workers in Park Royal. This facility has also been 
designed to potentially expand in future to meet the 
needs of OPDC’s growing population. 
4.93. CMH has a significant role in terms of its 
number of employees/visitors, its function, and land 
take within the centre. Changes here can transform 
the relationship between hospital and rest of town 
centre to create a health and care hub which is fully 
integrated within its context, contributes to an easily 
accessible and inclusive network of ‘healthy streets’ 
and supports wider health and wellbeing outcomes. 
Supporting housing units have already been consented 
and built around the hospital and are appropriate 
given their proximity to the health facilities. Optimising 
the use of the CMH site could deliver potential 
opportunities for other health related services such 
as training or research and development facilities 
or other complementary residential accommodation 
or staff amenity uses. Complementary residential 
accommodation has recently been delivered in the i) continuous cycle lanes in both directions, 
particularly along Coronation Road, Park 
Royal Road, Abbey Road and Acton Lane; 
and
ii) an alternative east-west cycle route linking 
Park Royal station via Park Royal Centre to 
the Grand Union Canal and Old Oak.
i) contributing to, enabling and/or delivering the 
rationalisation of bus movements around Park 
Royal Centre, in particular within the CMH site, 
and enhanced bus infrastructure to support 
existing and planned bus services between Park 
Royal, Old Oak and other key destinations;
j) minimising and, where feasible removing on 
street car parking, particularly along Coronation 
Road, Park Royal Road, Abbey Road and Acton 
Lane; 
k) contributing to, enabling and/or delivering 
improvements to Coronation Road/Park Royal 
Road/Abbey Road/Acton Lane junction that 
remove through traffic and improve their function 
for local business related freight, public transport, 
walking and cycling.
Green Infrastructure and the environment
l) delivering high quality multifunctional publicly 
accessible open spaces;
i) within the Central Middlesex Hospital site; and
ii) within the ASDA site.
Heritage and character 
m) strengthening local identity and character by 
ensuring local character is informed by the area’s 
existing heritage, including the significance of the 
hospital and industrial related heritage.
Building heights
n) contributing to a variety of building heights 
including a single tall building at the north-eastern 
corner of the ASDA site to support local legibility.form of supported housing along Acton Lane.
4.94. The ASDA site includes land that is currently 
vacant or used for surface car parking and offers the 
greatest potential for large scale redevelopment within 
the centre, including potential for early delivery. A mix 
of town centre uses, that can support local workers, 
residents and the industrial estate can be delivered 
here, alongside complementary residential, social 
infrastructure and industrial uses. Given the potential 
scale of the opportunity, future development of the 
ASDA site requires a considered and comprehensive 
approach. Comprehensive redevelopment would help 
deliver an optimal layout and amount of development to 
help support the viability of delivering improvements to 
the road junction. Also comprehensive redevelopment 
would ensure there is more flexibility in the proposed 
layout of uses; this degree of flexibility is required to 
facilitate the reprovision of the store with new town 
centre frontages as well as minimising impacts to SIL.
4.95. The target of 800 homes across the centre 
is a minimum. Early work as part of the Park Royal 
Development Framework Principles document 
highlights the potential to deliver over 1,100 homes 
across a number of sites in the centre. However, 
further work is required to understand the deliverability 
for some of these sites. The housing target will be 
reviewed as part of future iterations of the Local Plan.
4.96. Improvements to the public realm and the 
introduction of more balanced and active/positive 
frontages will aid connectivity and coherence. The 
current layout of the ASDA store is stepped back 
from the street and the front of the site is used for 
surface car parking which negatively impacts on 
the area’s sense of place and creates an immediate 
barrier for those walking and cycling to visit the store. 
Redevelopment on this site must bring the building 
line forward to Park Royal Road and create continuous 
ground floor active and/or positive frontages to help 
balance the centre. New pedestrian/cycle connections 
from adjoining sites will create better links between 78
Figure 4.20: Recent residential development within Park 
Royal Centresimilar/complementary uses or physical routes into/
through the centre. 
4.97. The  junction of Abbey Road, Acton Lane, Park 
Royal Road and Coronation Road – which are the 
roads referred to as the ‘Big X’- sits at the heart of the 
town centre. The Big X forms the basis of the local bus 
network and the primary walking and cycling routes 
connecting Park Royal centre to the six surrounding 
rail stations, and nearby town centres. The junction 
dissects the Park Royal neighbourhood town centre 
and acts as a significant barrier to movement and 
the creation of a coherent centre. A poor pedestrian 
experience and cycling links into the centre make it 
difficult to travel to and navigate around. The Big X 
routes are heavily trafficked, dominated by car parking 
and congested, and this affects bus journey times/
reliability, air quality and the quality of the public realm. 
There is an opportunity to address these issues as 
part of the wider transformation of Park Royal into an 
exemplar industrial estate, and through the following 
focussed interventions:
• removing through traffic on the Big X; 
• supporting fast and reliable bus services and 
increasing capacity, including the potential for a 
complementary night shuttle bus service for shift 
workers; 
• removing and rationalising car parking;
• supporting more efficient freight movements;
• better connecting the six rail  stations surrounding 
Park Royal, via the Big X, with better public realm, 
crossings, traffic calming, CCTV, lighting and 
signage to support walking and cycling; 
• creating new public spaces and support street 
greening within the town centre;
• creating and upgrading pedestrian and cycle 
facilities to deliver a joined up, accessible walking 
and cycle route network.
4.98. At present, the bus routing within Park Royal 
Centre is overly complex, with loops at CMH and P6
ASDA. The highways arrangements around CMH in 
particular are space hungry and detract from what is 
otherwise a large publicly accessible open space in the 
centre of Park Royal. Rationalising the bus routes will 
mean that the public realm in front of the hospital can 
be better utilised as a civic open space and integrated 
with other public open spaces within the centre. Any 
reconfiguration should enable current and future 
network requirements to be appropriately provided for. 
4.99. New publicly accessible open space should 
be provided in Park Royal Centre to contribute to the 
target to deliver 30% public open space (see Policies 
SP8 and EU1). This should include new publicly 
accessible open spaces around the Big X junction 
and enhanced publicly accessible open space at the 
front of CMH. Subject to the rationalisation of the 
bus network on the CMH and removal of surface car 
parking, there is also potential for new publicly open 
space on this site.
4.100. Park Royal Centre has a diverse range of 
buildings and uses within and surrounding it. The 
design and height of new buildings in Park Royal 
Centre will need to appropriately respond to the 
surrounding context and will be subject to an 
assessment of their potential impacts on amenity 
(see Policy D5). A single tall building is supported in 
principle1 on the north east corner of the ASDA site 
in this location where it would support the viability of 
delivering improvements to the Big X and new publicly 
accessible open space. Based on the development 
capacities proposed for Park Royal Centre, it is 
expected that tall buildings will predominantly be in the 
range of 15 to 25 storeys. Tall building proposals will 
be considered against all relevant development plan 
policies and material considerations.
REFERENCES
1. Park Royal Development Framework Principles
79
Figure 4.21: North Acton and Acton Wells Place
POLICY P7: North Acton and Acton Wells
VISION 
North Acton and Acton Wells will be a high density 
mixed use area accommodating tall buildings in 
appropriate locations. An improved street network will 
provide a choice of greened routes to Old Oak, Park 
Royal and West Acton. A new neighbourhood town 
centre will sit within a high quality and coordinated 
public realm along Victoria Road and Portal Way. Old 
Oak major town centre will connect to an enhanced 
North Acton station delivering a range of active uses.
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Development and phasing
a) working positively with stakeholders to mitigate 
the impacts of HS2 construction facilities and 
associated traffic; 
b) supporting the use of Acton Wells to facilitate 
High Speed 2 construction activities as secured 
by the HS2 London – West Midlands Act (2017). 
Land uses
c) supporting the delivery of mixed use high density 
residential and student accommodation by:
i) contributing to the delivery of 6,200 new 
jobs and a minimum of 8,000 new homes, 
including early delivery of a minimum of 5,250 
new homes to support OPDC’s 0-10 year 
housing supply;
ii) delivering appropriate levels of student 
accommodation in accordance with Policy 
H10; and
iii) locating non-residential uses on the ground 
floor fronting onto the busy streets of Victoria 
Road, Wales Farm Road, the A4000, School 
Road and the A40;
d) focusing town centre, social infrastructure, 80
P7
cultural and catalyst uses and Use Class E, B2 
and B8 uses that are appropriately designed and 
serviced to support North Acton Neighbourhood 
Town Centre within the town centre and along Old 
Oak Street;
e)  encouraging the activation of the area by working 
with stakeholders to deliver a range of meanwhile 
uses across:
i) North Acton including around the southern 
station square and along Portal Way; and
ii) Acton Wells including along School Road.
Public realm and movement
f) contributing to and/or enabling delivery of a 
permeable, inclusive and accessible street 
network with new connections to surrounding 
areas as shown in figure 4.21 including Old Oak 
Street west of the potential Old Oak Common 
Lane Station;
g) contributing to and/or enabling improvements 
to Victoria Road and Wales Farm Road as key 
movement routes for walking, cycling, buses and 
vehicular traffic during construction and operation 
phases;
h) contributing to and/or enabling the delivery of 
a network of new and enhanced streets with a 
walking and cycling focus:
i) along Portal Way;
ii) along Old Oak Street to Old Oak South;
iii) along Jenner Avenue; and
iv) through North Acton Station to School Road 
and Victoria Road.
Green infrastructure and the environment
i) contributing to and / or delivering high quality 
well-connected publicly accessible open spaces 
across North Acton and Acton Wells. This should 
include:
i) North Acton Station Squares;
ii) School Road Square;
iii) Victoria Gardens;
iv) connected open spaces along Portal Way; v) Old Oak Common Lane Overground Station 
Square;
vi) Acton Wells Square;
vii) green infrastructure along Victoria Road, 
Wales Farm Road, Chase Road, Old Oak 
Street and new streets; and
viii) sensitive enhancements to Acton Cemetery.
j) contributing to and/or delivering mitigation 
measures that help support OPDC, the London 
Borough of Ealing and where relevant TfL, to 
address air quality issues in the Local Air Quality 
Focus Areas along the A40, Wales Farm Road 
and Victoria Road.
Heritage and context
k) strengthening local identity and character by:
i) conserving and enhancing the Castle Public 
House, other heritage assets and their 
settings; and
ii) ensuring the future local character of buildings 
and the public realm is informed by the 
positive elements of the area’s industrial and 
railway heritage.
Building heights 
l) contributing to a variety of building heights that 
includes:
i) tall buildings across North Acton and Acton 
Wells in appropriate locations in accordance 
with policies SP9, D4 and figure 3.15 that 
do not result in an overbearing wall of 
development;
ii) within Acton Wells East, generally 10 to 12 
storeys along Victoria Road north of Old Oak 
Street;
iii) increased heights and massing adjacent to 
the A40 and railway lines; and
iv) generally lower heights adjacent to sensitive 
locations including Acton Cemetery, existing 
residential neighbourhoods at Wells House 
Road, Midland Terrace and along Jenner 
Avenue.SUPPORTING TEXT
4.101. North Acton and Acton Wells are located 
between Old Oak South in the east and Old Park 
Royal in the west. North Acton, south of the Central 
Line, is home to recently built and permitted high 
density housing and student accommodation along 
with existing employment uses at the Victoria Road 
Industrial Estate and Carphone Warehouse offices. 
Acton Wells, to the north, includes the High Speed 2 
(HS2) construction sites on either side of Victoria Road. 
Both North Acton and Acton Wells are adjacent to 
heavily trafficked roads. These roads provide important 
access into Park Royal and Old Oak but dominate the 
public realm and impact on the quality of the walking 
and cycling environment.
4.102. Development within North Acton and Acton 
Wells presents a number of challenges to the delivery 
of successful long-term place making and sustainable 
communities for the area due to the potential amenity 
issues generated by traffic and the HS2 work sites. 
To mitigate these impacts, proposals should consider 
impacts relevant to their site both in terms of short-term 
implementation and long-term permanent development.
4.103. HS2 construction activities will in the shorter 
term negatively impact on the character and functioning 
of the area. However, in the medium to long-term 
there is significant redevelopment potential that could 
enhance the local environment. To deliver these Infrastructure 
m) Safeguarding for and if appropriate, contribute to 
and/or deliver the proposed Old Oak Common 
Lane Station and land for the delivery of the West 
London Orbital Line station and services within 
Acton Wells; 
n) providing on-site heating systems; and
o) safeguarding Quattro site in accordance with the 
West London Waste Plan.81
Figure 4.22: Bosco Verticale - precedent for tall 
buildings in North Acton and Acton Wells 
(credit: Sebastian Grote)P7
opportunities, this place needs to be redeveloped in a 
coordinated manner accompanied by a coherent and 
high quality public realm and network of open spaces.
4.104. The ongoing redevelopment of North Acton 
will continue and represents some of the earliest 
development in the OPDC area, whereas the 
development of Acton Wells is unlikely to commence 
until after the opening of Old Oak Common Station, 
when the sites are no longer required for construction 
purposes. 
4.105. North Acton and Acton Wells have the 
capacity to deliver a minimum of 8,000 new homes 
during the plan period1. North Acton has emerged 
in recent years as a location for new purpose-built 
student accommodation. To support the delivery of 
a sustainable community within the area, this will 
continue to be supported where proposals accord with 
Policy H10 (Student Housing).
4.106. North Acton can accommodate a range of new 
employment spaces to support the activation of the 
area and continue its mixed use character. The area 
has the capacity to deliver 6,200 new jobs during the 
plan period2 delivered across a range of town centre, 
B2, B8 uses, Use Class E and community and cultural 
uses. This could include catalyst uses, which would 
be considered in accordance with Policy TCC7. These 
uses will play an important role in providing positive 
and active frontages across the area and in particular 
in those locations where residential uses may not be 
appropriate at ground level.
4.107. North Acton neighbourhood town centre will build 
on the existing town centre uses to provide services 
to support both the existing and new residential and 
employee communities. In the longer term, Old Oak 
major town centre will continue through Acton Wells 
connecting to North Acton neighbourhood town centre. 
This will support the activation of the area and walking 
and cycling desire lines between stations. Meanwhile uses around the HS2 works sites will be important 
in helping to reduce the impact on the amenity of 
surrounding areas and support activation of this place.
4.108. At the time of the publication of this Local Plan, 
the Quattro site in Acton Wells is safeguarded within 
the West London Waste Plan (2015). Proposals 
should accord with this designation or any future policy 
guidance provided within an updated West London 
Waste Plan or other Development Plan Document. If  
the site were redeveloped for a non-waste use then 
compensatory provision would need to be made in line 
with the London Plan Policy SI9, WLWP and Local Plan 
Policy EU6. In regard to this, the waste site ceased 
operation in November 2018 when the site was first 
used by HS2 Ltd and its waste use has been relocated 
by Quattro to other sites elsewhere in West London. 
4.109. The public realm within North Acton is currently 
of a poor quality and lacks coordination between 
different development sites. For an emerging high 
density area, creating a high quality public realm is 
fundamental to the delivery of a high quality place. 
Proposals should deliver an improved and coordinated 
public realm and movement network across North 
Acton which includes the need to deliver a range of 
positive and active frontages on to the public realm, 
creates clear definition between public and private 
spaces and mitigates level changes to support walking 
and cycling routes3. 
4.110. The movement network will need to be centred 
on the existing Victoria Road and Wales Farm Road as 
key north-south movement routes to support all modes 
of transport during the construction and operational 
phases of Old Oak4. This will include the provision of 
segregated cycle lanes and generous footpaths to 
support walking and cycling.
4.111. In addition to the walking and cycling 
infrastructure along Victoria Road and Wales Farm 
Road, the section of Victoria Road directly south 82
Table 4.1: Approach for Building Heights in North Acton and Acton Wellsof North Acton Station has the opportunity to be 
enhanced to support walking and cycling and the 
vibrancy and vitality of the new neighbourhood town 
centre. Portal Way will also provide an important 
all-modes route focused on walking and cycling. This 
route should begin at the southern edge of Old Park 
Royal and continue south through Acton Wells, North 
Acton Station along Portal Way and across the A40 to 
West Acton and across Wales Farm Road to Jenner 
Avenue. Development proposals should also support 
the provision of a potential new walking and cycling 
route from North Acton to Wormwood Scrubs, should 
connections across railway infrastructure be feasible. 
4.112. North Acton and Acton Wells currently have limited access to publicly accessible open space.  
Acton Cemetery provides the only sizeable publicly 
accessible open space but its functions are limited 
given its character and use. Access to nearby publicly 
accessible open spaces at North Acton Playing Fields 
and Wormwood Scrubs are obstructed by the road 
and rail network. The continued redevelopment of 
the area at high densities will require a range of high 
quality multifunctional publicly accessible open spaces. 
These will need to be a range of sizes with a variety of 
functions that reflect their surrounding land uses and 
activities5.
4.113. To support the health and wellbeing of local 
people, new development will need to contribute to improving air quality along the A40, Wales Farm Road 
and Victoria Road through identified measures agreed 
by OPDC and the London Borough of Ealing, where 
relevant6. This may include street greening, shaping 
the form of development and using specific high quality 
sustainable materials (see Policy EU8).
4.114. North Acton and Acton Wells has historically 
been an area of industry. This historical character has 
been eroded and will continue to be so to enable the 
construction of Old Oak Common Station. However, 
the redevelopment of this place offers the opportunity 
to conserve and enhance the remaining assets, the 
OPDC heritage themes7 and ensure new development 
reflects the existing and evolving local character in 
terms of design, construction and operation. 
4.115. North Acton and Acton Wells has already been 
established as a place for tall buildings. This approach 
will continue to be supported. As new high density 
and tall buildings are delivered, it is important these 
take account of the surrounding sensitive locations, 
public transport access and the emerging context of 
surrounding sites (see Policy SP9). To deliver this 
approach, the range of heights outlined in table 4.1 is 
proposed.
4.116. The development of high density mixed use 
areas will necessitate the provision of a substantial 
amount of social and physical infrastructure. Within 
North Acton and Acton Wells, the Local Plan identifies 
that there is a need for one super nursery and one 
health hub. Further details on the phasing are set 
out in the IDP. In accordance with Policy SP10, an 
equitable equalisation mechanism will be applied 
to the delivery of any onsite social infrastructure to 
ensure even sharing of the costs of delivering facilities. 
OPDC will also employ a retrospective pooling 
contribution mechanism, to provide additional planning 
contributions towards delivery of the facility from other 
appropriate developments (see Policy SP10).P7
Tall buildings across North Acton and Acton Wells in 
appropriate locations in accordance with policies SP9, D4 
and figure 3.15 that do not result in an overbearing wall 
of development. Based on the development capacities 
proposed for North Acton and Acton Wells and existing 
planning approvals, it is expected that tall buildings 
south of the Central Line will predominantly be in the 
range of 20 to 55 storeys and tall buildings north of the 
Central Line will predominantly be in the range of 20 to 35 
storeys. Tall building proposals will be considered against 
all relevant development plan policies and material 
considerations.To respond to the existing context of tall buildings and 
optimise development opportunities to support legibility 
and secure additional benefits for the community and 
wider area.  
Generally 10 to 12 storeys facing on to Victoria Road. To provide massing that encloses the street and 
complements the scale of Old Park Royal.
Increased heights and massing adjacent to the A40 and 
railways. To help address impacts of air and noise pollution from 
the A40 and railways. This will also need to respond to 
relevant sensitive locations.
Generally lower heights adjacent to sensitive locations 
including existing residential neighbourhoods at Wells 
House Road, Midland Terrace, along Jenner Avenue and 
along Long Drive.To ensure development ensure appropriate levels of 
residential amenity.83
REFERENCES
1. and 2. Development Capacity Study Update
3, 4, 5 and 8 Victoria Road and Old Oak Lane Development 
Framework Principles 
6. Air Quality Study 
7. Heritage Strategy 4.117. North Acton Station has been identified for a 
series of phased upgrades. Proposals should support 
and contribute to these upgrades, which will improve 
the station’s capacity and accessibility. Further policy 
requirements are provided within Policy P7C1.  
4.118. Development proposals within Acton Wells 
should safeguard land to enable the potential delivery 
of the West London Orbital Line, which is proposed to 
include an interchange with Old Oak Common Lane 
Station and passenger services making use of the 
existing Dudding Hill Line. OPDC strongly supports 
the delivery of the West London Orbital and is working 
with TfL, west London boroughs and other relevant 
stakeholders to undertake further work to develop 
the business case for the scheme, including options 
for funding. The scheme is formally recognised in 
the London Plan. Development proposals should 
also safeguard land for the potential delivery of the 
Chiltern Line to Old Oak Common Station. Applicants 
should refer to OPDC’s IDP for the most up-to-date 
requirements.
4.119. Policy EU10 promotes the delivery of low carbon 
heat networks across the OPDC area. However, 
OPDC’s North Acton District Energy Network Feasibility 
Study concludes that a low carbon heat network that 
serves the whole of North Acton is not viable. It may 
however be possible to establish small networks 
serving 2 or 3 developments using low carbon heat 
sources like an aquifer. As such, applicants will be 
expected to work with OPDC and Ealing Council 
to investigate the possibility of establishing small 
local energy networks. Where this is not possible 
developments will be required to deliver on site 
solutions.
4.120. The delivery of the subsurface portion of HS2 
rail infrastructure through Old Oak requires the use of 
natural ventilation to support its functioning. This will 
require the provision of an open air ‘ventilation box’ 
within Acton Wells West. This will have an impact on 
future development capacity and design. To ensure this P7
impact is addressed and to help create a high quality 
place, OPDC will work positively with stakeholders 
such as HS2 Ltd and land owners to agree approaches 
that help to optimise development and continue to 
deliver transport functions.84
Figure 4.23: North Acton Town Centre Cluster
POLICY P7C1: North Acton Town Centre Cluster 
VISION 
A vibrant high density neighbourhood town centre, 
focused on an enhanced North Acton Station and 
new station squares. Active throughout the day, a 
range of town centre uses will strengthen the area’s 
identity. High quality and coordinated public realm, 
framed by active frontages will guide people to their 
destinations.
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of a neighbourhood town 
centre by clustering a range of permanent and 
meanwhile town centre uses and Use Class 
E uses, that are appropriately designed and 
serviced to support the town centre, around 
the existing southern and new northern station 
squares, along Victoria Road south of North Acton 
Station and along Portal Way with residential 
above. 
Public realm and movement
b) contributing to enhancing access to North Acton 
Station;
c) supporting the delivery of Victoria Road to the 
south of the station square as high quality shared 
vehicular and public realm space; and
d) contributing to and / or delivering new and 
improved walking and cycling infrastructure and 
routes as shown in figure 4.23.
Green infrastructure and the environment 
e) contributing to and / or delivering a new northern 
station square;Infrastructure
f) supporting enhancements to North Acton Station 
to deliver the station as an integral part of the 
town centre including:
i) increased capacity;
ii) step-free access;
iii) entrances onto station squares; and
iv) 24 hour ungated high quality walking and 
cycling north - south routes.
Development and phasing
g) enabling the delivery of development over and 
around North Acton Station and railway.85
Figure 4.24: North Acton StationP7C1
access2. This could include provision of new gatelines, 
capacity enhancements, inclusive access, new building 
additions and a new 24 hour link from north and south, 
linking the existing southern and new northern station 
squares. Applicants will need to work with OPDC, TfL, 
the London Borough of Ealing and other stakeholders 
to define a preferred approach and contribute to the 
delivery of these proposals. 
4.126. Development opportunities around the station 
will be delivered across a number of phases with areas 
to the north of the station in Acton Wells required 
for HS2 construction works. To reflect the changing 
context, station enhancements and associated development will need to be appropriately adaptable 
to respond to and support development over the long 
term. Development over and around the station will be 
supported if feasible and should be optimised reflecting 
the public transport access and local movement 
network.
4.127. The North Acton Town Centre Cluster boundary 
is shown in figure 4.23. Site Allocations 12 (Holbrook 
House), 16 (The Portal) and portions of Site Allocations 
18 (3 Portal Way) and 41 (1 Portal Way) fall within the 
cluster boundary.SUPPORTING TEXT
4.121. North Acton Station will continue to be a key 
transport interchange that provides high levels of public 
transport access. To ensure people are able to access 
the station and that the activation of the town centre 
is supported, significant public realm improvements 
will be required. These improvements will need to 
be delivered through joint working between OPDC, 
TfL and the London Borough of Ealing alongside 
other stakeholders such as a landowners and local 
communities. 
4.122. North Acton neighbourhood town centre has 
been designated to provide local services to existing 
and new communities1. Active meanwhile and 
permanent town centre and Use Class E uses will be 
supported within this new centre that are appropriately 
designed and serviced to support the role of the town 
centre. These should provide active and positive 
frontages with residential above. Active uses should 
continue at ground and lower levels along Victoria 
Road and Portal Way to help activate these key routes. 
4.123. North Acton Station is the main destination in 
North Acton and will eventually be the meeting place of 
Old Oak Street and Portal Way. Victoria Road, directly 
south of North Acton Station, currently has a poor 
pedestrian environment. This stretch of Victoria Road 
has the potential to evolve into a piece of high quality 
public realm delivering a range of functions framed by 
active town centre and employment uses. 
4.124. Proposals should contribute to the delivery of a 
new square, or alternative public realm layout, to the 
north of North Action Station. This square should be 
designed to mitigate the impacts of the HS2 ventilation 
box in Acton Wells. 
4.125. To support the functioning of the station and 
support high density development, North Acton Station 
will require enhancements to increase its capacity and 
REFERENCES
1. Retail and Leisure Needs Study 
2. North Acton Station Feasibility Study86
Figure 4.25: Old Oak Common Lane Station Cluster
POLICY P7C2: Old Oak Common Lane Station Cluster
VISION 
Old Oak Common Lane Station will be a high quality 
public transport interchange that is fully integrated 
with Old Oak Street providing continuous walking 
and cycling routes between Old Oak South and 
Acton Wells. It will be accompanied by a new station 
square to the west, framed by active town centre and 
employment uses.
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of Old Oak major town 
centre by clustering permanent and meanwhile 
town centre and Use Class E uses, that are 
appropriately designed and serviced to support 
the town centre, along Old Oak Street with 
residential above.
Public realm and movement
b) working positively and proactively with TfL to 
ensure delivery of a high quality public route 
between Old Oak South and Acton Wells that:
i) supports a continuous public realm and 
walking and cycling route that successfully 
manages level changes within its design;
ii) is integrated with a proposed new Old Oak 
Common Lane Station;
iii) provides sensitive walking and cycling access 
to Midland Terrace;
iv) supports active frontages which are integrated 
with surrounding development opportunities; 
and
v) conserves the residential amenity of Midland 
Terrace and Wells House Road in accordance 
with Policy D5.Green infrastructure and the environment 
c) contributing to and / or delivering a publicly 
accessible station square on Old Oak Street to 
the west of the station.
Development and phasing
d) supporting the delivery of a proposed new Old 
Oak Common Lane London Overground Station 
to enhance public transport access and as an 
integral part of the built environment by providing:
i) ground floor entrances onto the station 87
Figure 4.26: Shoreditch High Street Overground StationP7C2
route. Entrances should be clearly located onto Old 
Oak Street with interchange functions on the station 
square to the west of the station. Further work will 
be required to define the detailed design of Old Oak 
Street between the two stations and any other routes. 
However, emerging feasibility studies by Transport 
for London identify that Old Oak Street may need to 
be delivered as a cycling and footbridge through the 
station. By clustering active town centre and Use Class 
E uses around the station square, or alternative public 
realm layout, the activation of this space will assist in 
local legibility and access to the station.  SUPPORTING TEXT
4.128. The potential Old Oak Common Lane Station 
is a TfL transport requirement, to provide an 
appropriate interchange between services within Old 
Oak Common Station and other local services. The 
Station will need to be designed to support this role. 
The station is not currently considered to be needed 
to support the quantum of development envisaged in 
this plan; however, it is identified in the London Plan 
as a scheme that Local Plans should support and, 
to support strategic transport needs, development 
should safeguard for and if appropriate, contribute 
to and / or deliver the station. Particularly given the 
station’s important strategic function for wider transport 
connectivity and its strong business case, OPDC 
strongly supports the delivery of this rail station and will 
be working proactively with TfL, Network Rail and other 
relevant stakeholders to secure its delivery.
4.129. The station is being designed to serve the North 
London Line Richmond branch and the proposed  West 
London Orbital, running from Hounslow to Brent Cross 
and making use of the existing Dudding Hill Line with 
trains potentially stopping at Old Oak Common Lane 
Station. This is one of the schemes identified in table 
10.1 in the London Plan and supported by its Policy 
T1. Proposals should safeguard for the delivery of any 
infrastructure associated with this connection and if 
appropriate, contribute to or otherwise facilitate delivery 
of the scheme. Applicants should refer to OPDC’s IDP 
for the most up-to-date requirements.
4.130. The station should also be designed to support 
the delivery of Old Oak Street through the station as 
a continuous 24 hour ungated walking and cycling 4.131. The development sites surrounding Old Oak 
Common Lane Station will be developed across a 
number of phases. The delivery of development should 
support and enable the delivery of the station and 
vice versa, the delivery of the station should support 
and enable the delivery of an optimised approach to 
development.
4.132. The Old Oak Common Lane Cluster boundary 
is shown in figure 4.25. A portion of Site Allocation 11 
(Acton Wells East) falls within the cluster boundary.
squares;
ii) 24 hour ungated walking and cycling east 
west access routes; and
iii) step-free access.88
Figure 4.27: Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane Place
POLICY P8: Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane
VISION 
Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane will be 
a place that sensitively integrates transport routes, 
existing neighbourhoods and new development. It 
will be a place that mediates between comprehensive 
mixed use redevelopment and industrial 
intensification.
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of a vibrant mixed use 
place by:
i) contributing to the delivery of 1,700 new jobs 
and a minimum of 2,750 new homes over 
the plan period including early delivery of 
a minimum of 1,200 homes to contribute to 
OPDC’s 0-10 year housing supply; and
ii) delivering ground floor town centre uses 
within the Old Oak major town centre.
b) supporting the functioning of the Willesden 
Junction Bus Depot site as SIL by:
i) retaining the bus depot use unless it is no 
longer demonstrated to be required or a 
suitable alternative location is agreed with 
Transport for London; and
ii) providing broad industrial type activities with 
active frontages facing on to Station Road and 
positive frontages on to Harley Road;
c) supporting the delivery of a mixed used 
neighbourhood within the Westway Estate and 
adjacent sites facing on to Wormwood Scrubs by:
i) delivering a mix of housing and compatible 
industrial and/or town centre floorspace, 
including space for small businesses, to 
make use of the close proximity to Old Oak 89
Figure 4.28: Victoria Road looking south to North ActonCommon Station in accordance with Policy 
E2; and
ii) delivering town centre uses, social 
infrastructure and/or community facilities on 
the ground floor with residential above directly 
facing Wormwood Scrubs.
Public realm and movement
d) contributing to and /or enabling improvements to 
existing routes and junctions and delivery of new 
routes as shown in figure 4.27;
e) ensuring new and improved routes can 
accommodate walking, cycling, bus and other 
vehicular traffic during the construction and 
operational phases by:
i) delivering improvements to underpasses;
ii) delivering segregated cycle lanes along 
Victoria Road, Old Oak Common Lane and 
where possible on Old Oak Lane; and
iii) widening Old Oak Common Lane to include 
generous footpaths and segregated cycle 
lanes.
Green infrastructure and the environment
f) delivering a high quality, well-connected, network 
of multifunctional publicly accessible open 
spaces. This should include contributing towards 
and/or the delivery of:
i) enhancements to Cerebos Gardens and 
Midland Terrace child play space;
ii) enhancements to and expansion of Old 
Oak Community Gardens within the Island 
Triangle;
iii) Brunel Gardens within the Westway Estate;
iv) new and improved spaces within Old Oak 
major town centre; and
v) green infrastructure and linear spaces along 
Old Oak Lane, Old Oak Common Lane, 
Victoria Road.
g) support amenity and health and wellbeing by:
i) ensuring development mitigates the impacts 
of noise and air pollution generated by the Old Oak Sidings waste facility, SIL uses within 
the Willesden Junction Bus Garage site and 
construction activities including associated 
vehicle movement; and
ii) contributing to and/or delivering measures 
that help support OPDC, the local authorities 
and, where relevant TfL, to address air quality 
issues in the Local Air Quality Focus Areas 
along Victoria Road and Old Oak Lane, 
including street greening.
Heritage and character
h) strengthening local identity and character by:
i) conserving and enhancing heritage assets 
including the Old Oak Lane Conservation 
Area, Grand Union Canal Conservation Area 
and their settings; and
ii) ensuring future local character is informed 
by the area’s existing heritage including the 
railways, Grand Union Canal, residential and 
industrial heritage.Building heights 
i) contributing to a variety of building heights that 
respond to public transport access and sensitive 
locations including delivering:
i) a range of heights within the Westway Estate 
and adjacent sites facing onto Wormwood 
Scrubs including greater heights in the north 
of the site along the rail line and lower heights 
adjacent to existing housing to the south and 
next to Wormwood Scrubs;
ii) a range of heights on the Willesden Junction 
Bus Garage site, if demonstrated to be 
available for SIL compliant broad industrial 
type activities, including greater heights in the 
east of the site on to Station Road and lower 
heights adjacent to housing in the west of the 
site; and
iii) generally lower heights directly adjacent 
to sensitive locations including the Grand 
Union Canal, Wormwood Scrubs and existing 
residential neighbourhoods of the Island 
Triangle, Shaftesbury Gardens, Midland 
Terrace, Wells House Road, Harley Road and 
East Acton.
P890
P8
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.133. The place of Old Oak Lane and Old Oak 
Common Lane follows the route of these streets, 
connecting Harlesden in the north to Wormwood 
Scrubs in the south. Positioned between mixed use 
areas and Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL), it is a 
place of transition in terms of land use, built form and 
character and will play an important role in integrating 
the OPDC area with surrounding locations. This 
transition is reflected by its diverse mix of employment 
and residential uses and the four established 
residential neighbourhoods of the Island Triangle, 
Shaftesbury Gardens, Midland Terrace and Wells 
House Road. The Grand Union Canal also crosses 
the place which is complemented by The Collective 
development and associated new canalside space. 
4.134. The area is shaped by the road and rail network 
with both Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane 
providing important north-south routes that result in 
high levels of vehicular traffic. This traffic dominates 
the public realm resulting in a poor walking and 
cycling environment and, alongside the railways, 
provides a barrier to local permeability that isolates 
existing neighbourhoods. During the construction 
of development within Old Oak South and Old Oak 
Common Station, this traffic will increase resulting in 
further impacts on amenity and the functioning of the 
public realm if not appropriately mitigated. Further 
impact on amenity from construction activities could 
be created by the High Speed 2 (HS2) construction 
activities and post-construction developments in the 
adjacent locations of Channel Gate and Acton Wells.
4.135. The early delivery of development within Old 
Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane is supported but 
does present a number of challenges. This includes the 
impacts generated by construction traffic and activities 
on HS2 work sites. Applicants should appropriately 
mitigate against these impacts in the design of 
development. OPDC will work closely with HS2 Ltd and the London Borough of Ealing to minimise disturbance 
caused by construction activities to enable the timely 
delivery of homes and jobs within this place.
4.136. Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane is 
identified to have the capacity to deliver a minimum 
of 2,750 new homes and a capacity of 1,700 new 
jobs during the plan period1. Primary development 
opportunities are within the Westway Estate, Oaklands 
North and Atlas Junction. This development potential 
provides the opportunity for new and improved 
connections to be embedded across the area, 
for existing neighbourhoods to be integrated with 
surrounding areas and for the Old Oak major town 
centre to be established at Atlas Junction. 
4.137. The Willesden Junction Bus Garage is within 
a SIL designation. In accordance with London Plan 
policy and to support the local industrial economy, 
industrial and/or transport uses should be delivered in 
this location. To ensure these uses positively contribute 
to activating the public realm, proposals should 
provide active and positive frontages to the street. The 
Willesden Junction Bus Garage site is surrounded 
by existing housing directly to the north and uses on 
the site should mitigate their impacts on residential 
amenity in accordance with Policy D5. Within the site, 
development will be reliant on agreement with TfL that 
the bus depot services are no longer required or a 
suitable alternative site has been secured. 
4.138. At the Westway Estate, there are currently a 
number of employment uses. Although the area is 
not within SIL, there is an opportunity to reprovide 
some of this employment floorspace within mixed 
use development that reflects the site’s proximity to 
Old Oak Common Station and potentially to North 
Acton Station2. Elsewhere, housing at the ground floor 
and above would complement the adjacent housing 
along Long Drive to the south. Sites facing onto Old 
Oak Common Lane have the potential to deliver uses 
that provide a positive relationship to the street while mitigating the impact of vehicular traffic. These uses 
could be employment or community uses and should 
be designed to respond appropriately to Wormwood 
Scrubs.
4.139. Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane 
are important north-south movement routes and are 
defined as key connectors. Currently, the design of 
the highways and the high amounts of vehicular traffic 
using them create poor walking and cycling routes 
and poor quality public realm. These issues will be 
amplified during the construction of Old Oak South 
and Old Oak Common Station as significant amounts 
of HS2 and other construction traffic will be moving 
between Old Oak South, Acton Wells and Channel 
Gate. To support and enhance their transport roles 
for all modes, a series of interventions are proposed 
including segregated cycle lanes and high quality 
footpaths3. 
4.140. To complement this enhanced north-south 
movement route, new and improved east-west 
connections are required to support access to the 
surrounding Places of Channel Gate, Park Royal 
and Old Oak South4. Specifically, improvements are 
required to the existing roundabout at Atlas Junction to 
support pedestrian and cycling desire lines and along 
the Grand Union Canal southern towpath (see Policy 
P3). New connections are required to support the 
continuation of Old Oak Street into Acton Wells (see 
Policies P7 and P7C2) and potentially between the 
Westway and Victoria Road Industrial Estates. OPDC 
will work with London Borough of Ealing, TfL and HS2 
to deliver these improvements.
4.141. Access to publicly accessible open spaces within 
Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane is currently 
restricted to a series of roadside spaces, including 
Cerebos Gardens and Wormwood Scrubs to the south 
of the place. The potential development sites provide 
opportunities to enhance and expand existing open 
spaces and deliver new open spaces5 that contribute 91
Figure 4.29: Old Oak Community Gardens
to the 30% open space requirements set out in Policy 
SP8. These include:
a) Cerebos Gardens and Midland Terrace play space 
– enhanced to mitigate impacts of traffic and 
improve access;
b) Old Oak Community Gardens – enhanced and 
expanded to support the amenity of the Island 
Triangle neighbourhood and Channel Gate;
c) Brunel Gardens – as a new green publicly 
accessible open space providing a range of 
functions to support new and existing communities;d) Atlas Junction spaces – new and enhanced 
roadside spaces providing spill out space for retail, 
leisure and eating and drinking uses;
e) canalside spaces – new publicly accessible open 
space(s) on the Willesden Junction Maintenance 
depot providing space for canalside leisure 
activities and eating and drinking uses; and
f) roadside green infrastructure and linear spaces – 
new and enhanced ecology and spaces to support 
air quality, resilience to climate change and visual 
amenity.4.142. To support the health and wellbeing of local 
people, new development will need to contribute to 
improving air quality along Victoria Road and Old Oak 
Lane through identified measures6 and in discussions 
with OPDC.
4.143. Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane has 
a wealth of residential and industrial heritage reflected 
in the existing and proposed heritage assets7. Although 
some of these may be lost, the development of sites 
offers the opportunity to conserve and enhance the 
remaining assets. The OPDC heritage themes seek 
to ensure new development reflects the existing and 
evolving local character in terms of their design, use 
and operation.
4.144. Across Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common 
Lane there are a range of building heights. Delivery 
of building heights, including tall buildings set out in 
Policies P8C1 and SP9 needs to be considered in light 
of sensitive locations such as the existing residential 
neighbourhoods and Wormwood Scrubs. Based on the 
development capacities proposed for Old Oak Lane 
and Old Oak Common Lane, it is expected that tall 
buildings will predominantly be in the range of 20 to 
25 storeys. Tall building proposals will be considered 
against all relevant development plan policies and 
material considerations.
4.145. The Westway Estate, Willesden Junction Bus 
Garage and Midland Gate sites offer opportunities to 
deliver greater height in areas closer to public transport 
access and help to mitigate impacts of railway 
infrastructure and lower heights to respond to adjacent 
residential areas and Wormwood Scrubs.
REFERENCES
1. Development Capacity Study Update
2. and 5. Victoria Road and Old Oak Lane Development 
Framework Principles
3. and 4. Victoria Road and Old Oak Lane Development 
Framework Principles and Public Realm, Walking and Cycling 
Strategy
6. Air Quality Study
7. Heritage StrategyP8
92
Figure 4.30: Atlas Junction Cluster
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of this portion of the 
Old Oak major town centre by clustering active 
town centre and Use Class E uses, that are 
appropriately designed and serviced to support 
the town centre, along existing streets and new 
routes shown in figure 4.30 on ground and lower 
floors with residential above;
b) supporting the activation of the canal and 
canalside spaces by delivering and/or enabling:
i) Use Class E uses, that deliver high levels 
of activation, fronting on to the Grand Union 
Canal; 
ii) new residential, leisure and visitor moorings 
adjacent to The Collective, Willesden 
Junction Maintenance Depot, triangle site and 
Oaklands North; and
iii) meanwhile uses.
Public realm and movement
c) delivering a high quality public realm by 
contributing to and/or delivering:
i) Union Way as an all modes access route 
providing walking and cycling access to the 
Grand Union Canal towpath; andPOLICY P8C1: Atlas Junction Cluster
VISION  
As part of Old Oak major town centre, Atlas Junction 
will provide local services for communities centred 
on an improved Atlas Junction and Union Way. Active 
uses will sit beside high quality canalside spaces 
helping to establish this stretch of the canal as a 
place to visit and enjoy.93
ii) public realm improvements and high quality 
footpaths, segregated cycle lanes and street 
level crossings along Victoria Road, Old 
Oak Lane, Old Oak Common Lane and Atlas 
Road.
d) delivering a high quality walking and cycling route 
to the canal from Old Oak Lane that mediates 
level changes.
Green infrastructure and the environment 
e) supporting health and wellbeing and resilience to 
climate change by delivering and/or contributing 
to new high quality publicly accessible canalside 
open spaces:
i) as part of the Willesden Junction Maintenance 
Depot site; 
ii) within the triangle site; 
iii) as part of Oaklands North; and
iv) on the north of the canal.
Heritage and design
f) conserving and enhancing local character by:
i) ensuring wider railway heritage is used to 
inform the character of new development; and
ii) supporting views along the railway at Old Oak 
Common Lane bridge and along the canal at 
Old Oak Lane bridge.
Building heights
g) contributing to a variety of building heights 
including:
i) on the eastern side of Old Oak Lane, building 
heights should be taller close to the canal, 
comparable to the existing height of The 
Collective, and should decrease in height to 
respond appropriately to the existing Victoria 
Terrace; 
ii) on Oaklands North, generally 6 to 8 storeys 
facing on to the Grand Union Canal, with 
generally 10 storeys along Union Way; and
iii) on the western corner of Atlas Junction, heights of generally 8 to 10 storeys.
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.146. The Atlas Junction town centre cluster is 
located at a key crossroads connecting key routes 
between Old Oak South, Channel Gate, Park Royal 
and Harlesden. The cluster has the potential to be a 
location for early activation of the wider area, knitting 
together new development at The Collective and 
Oaklands. It will also help to stitch together new and 
existing neighbourhoods and provide a focal point for 
communities.
4.147. Reflecting its local accessibility and existing 
town centre uses, Atlas Junction is well placed to serve 
nearby existing and new residential and business 
communities. To support these uses, the area has been 
designated as part of the Old Oak major town centre. 
The existing Collective development demonstrates 
the development potential within Atlas Junction. The 
Willesden Junction Maintenance Depot, the adjacent 
Power House and the sites on the east and west of 
Atlas Junction represent an opportunity to coordinate 
and optimise development to help establish this part of 
the major town centre.
4.148. Adjacent to the canal, meanwhile uses on, and 
within the envisaged development of, the Willesden 
Junction Maintenance Depot and Power House should 
provide active street level leisure, eating and drinking 
uses1. These meanwhile and permanent uses have the 
potential to continue the activation of the Grand Union 
Canal that has been generated by The Collective and 
to tie in with the wider food and beverage quarter along 
the Grand Union Canal. Moorings in these locations 
will also assist in supporting the use of the canal and 
adjacent spaces.
4.149. Town centre and employment uses will contribute 
to the activation of the streets and public realm through the delivery of active frontages. This will be important 
during the early phases of development to support the 
functioning of the town centre for local communities. 
4.150. The Collective and Oaklands developments 
will establish new residential communities in the 
early phases of development. To support local 
people reaching their destinations, development 
should contribute to the delivery of Union Way and 
its associated walking and cycling connection to the 
Grand Union Canal towpath and to a new/enhanced 
pedestrian/cycle bridge into Old Oak North. High 
quality footpaths and segregated cycle lanes need to 
be delivered along Old Oak Lane, Old Oak Common 
Lane, Union Way and Atlas Road that are supported by 
new and improved street crossings and hard wearing 
high quality materials2. 
4.151. In addition to walking and cycling, a substantial 
amount of freight and construction traffic will pass 
through the cluster. This movement will need to be 
supported to facilitate the construction of Old Oak 
Common Station, wider Old Oak and Park Royal.
4.152. The development of the Willesden Junction 
Maintenance Depot and Power House adjacent to the 
Grand Union Canal provides the opportunity to deliver 
a new publicly accessible canalside open space that 
connects to other open spaces along the canal to 
the east and adjacent to The Collective. To deliver 
accessible and inclusive access to the canal, this open 
space will need to integrate level changes in its design. 
This should be supported by the delivery of publicly 
accessible open space on the triangle of land between 
the railway tracks. To the north of the canal, sites 
facing the Willesden Junction Maintenance Depot and 
The Collective have the potential to provide canalside 
publicly accessible open spaces. 
4.153. Across Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common 
Lane there are a range of building heights. The current 
tallest building is The Collective adjacent to the P8C194
Figure 4.31: The Collective, Atlas JunctionP8C1
Grand Union Canal. Development sites provide the 
opportunity to help support local legibility to stations 
and Old Oak town centre and provide appropriate 
densities to make the best use of land and optimise 
development. Building heights have been informed 
by the Victoria Road and Old Oak Lane Development 
Framework Principles and Channel Gate Development 
Framework Principles supporting studies. Development 
of the Willesden Junction Maintenance Depot and 
sites to the south should reflect the existing height of 
The Collective in the north of the site and decrease to 
respond to the existing Victoria Terrace. On the east 
and west corners of Atlas Junction, building heights 
provide the opportunity to help define the western 
corner of the junction providing 8 to 10 storeys to 
create a suitable enclosure to the junction and along 
Victoria Road.
4.154. The Atlas Junction Cluster boundary is shown 
in figure 4.30. Site Allocations 21 (Willesden Junction 
Maintenance Depot), 23 (Oaklands) and 24 (Oaklands 
North) and portions of Site Allocation 26 (Channel 
Gate) fall within the cluster boundary.
REFERENCES
1. and 2. Victoria Road and Old Oak Lane Development 
Framework Principles95
Figure 4.32: Channel Gate Place
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant the following:
Development and Phasing
a) supporting the use of the area to facilitate High 
Speed 2 construction activities as secured by the 
High Speed London – West Midlands Act (2017);
b) supporting the early delivery of development 
on lands not required to facilitate High Speed 2 
construction activities.
Land uses
c) supporting the creation of a thriving, residential 
led mixed use neighbourhood that contributes to 
the delivery of a minimum of 3,100 new homes 
and 600 new jobs during the plan period;
d) contributing to the delivery of the Old Oak major 
town centre by delivering vibrant town centre 
uses, appropriately designed and serviced 
to support the town centre, at Atlas Junction, 
Channel Gate Street and along the Grand Union 
Canal;
e) contributing to the activation of this place and 
creation of a Cultural Quarter, delivering cultural 
and catalyst uses;
f) supporting the local economy by delivering a 
range of employment workspaces across Channel 
Gate, including:POLICY P9: Channel Gate
VISION 
Channel Gate will be a high quality residential led 
neighbourhood centred on the Grand Union Canal. 
A new Local Park, town centre and community 
uses and linkages with the adjacent existing 
neighbourhoods will ensure that Channel Gate is a 
vibrant new place.96
Figure 4.33: Aerial view of Channel Gate and surrounds
i)within the Old Oak major town centre;
ii)along V
ictoria Road; and
iii)in areas of transition between primarily
residential character and primarily industrialcharacter
.
g)supporting the retention or potential relocation/reincorporation of the Willesden Freight 
Terminal
and Park Royal Bus Depot;
h)ensuring that industrial uses deliver anappropriate level of amenity for residentialneighbourhoods and activate the public realm bydelivering appropriate uses, positive, and wherepossible, active frontages at ground and lowerfloors and high quality façade design:
i)
adjacent to residential led development andexisting residential neighbourhoods;
ii)
facing the Grand Union Canal; and
iii)along existing and enhanced key routes andpedestrian and cycle routes.
Public realm and movement
i)
contributing to, and enabling, the delivery of ahigh quality
, legible, permeable, inclusive and
accessible street network by:
i)contributing to, and enabling, the delivery ofthe new street network shown in figure 4.9A;
ii)
delivering new and improved walking andcycling routes throughout Channel Gate,including new accesses to Old Oak Lane andV
ictoria Road;
iii)ensuring permeability through the site alongChannel Gate Street for all transport modes,including for double decker buses;
iv)
safeguarding for and if relevant andappropriate, contributing to and / or deliveringpotential future connections to Park Royal inthe west, and to Old Oak Lane in the north;and
v)
retaining existing and /or providing sufficientalternative access capacity to the WillesdenFreight 
Terminal and Park Royal Bus Depot;
andP9
vi)supporting opportunities for freightconsolidation.
Green infrastructure and the environment
j)
contributing to and/or delivering an integratednetwork of high quality
, multi-functional publicly
accessible open spaces and green infrastructureacross Channel Gate. This should include:
i)
Channel Gate Local Park of a minimum 2hectares in size;
ii)
supporting the amenity of existing residentialcommunities by delivering and /or contributingto the expansion and enhancement of OldOak Community Gardens, and other spacesadjacent to the Island 
Triangle area;
iii)delivering other new areas of publiclyaccessible open space across Channel Gate,including new canalside spaces, and spacesto support new community uses.
k)
locating sensitive uses away from pollutionsources and mitigating the impacts of noise andair pollution generated by rail and road transportor other industrial activities;
l)
supporting and/or enabling opportunities forheat recovery from adjacent industrial activitiesthat could contribute to a decentralised energynetwork within Channel Gate and the wider area.
Heritage and character
m)
strengthening local identity and character byconserving and enhancing the Grand Union CanalConservation 
Area, the adjacent Old Oak Lane
Conservation Area and their settings; and
n)ensuring future local character is informed by theareas 
existing heritage, including the Grand Union
Canal and the industrial heritage of the area.
Building heights
o)contributing to a variety of building heights acrossChannel Gate that respond to sensitive locationsand optimise development capacity by delivering:i)
generally , 6 to 10 storeys along Victoria Road;
ii)generally
, 6 to 8 storeys fronting the Grand
Union Canal;
iii)lower heights and appropriate massingadjacent to the Island 
Triangle;
iv)increased heights and massing adjacent torail lines and freight activity to mitigate impacton residential amenity;
v)
tall buildings at appropriate locationsthroughout Channel Gate in accordance withPolicies SP9 and D4; and
vi)
heights appropriate to support intensifiedindustrial uses on the Willesden JunctionDepot.97
P9
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.155. Channel Gate sits to the northern and southern 
edges of the Grand Union Canal to the west Old Oak 
Lane and Victoria Road, and east of Park Royal. The 
majority of the site either side of the canal is required 
by HS2 Ltd to support the construction of Old Oak 
Common Station, though the site also includes other 
industrial uses which are not directly impacted by HS2 
construction activities.
4.156. Channel Gate has the potential to play a key 
role in the regeneration of Old Oak and Park Royal. 
The size of the area, coupled with the arrangement 
of land ownership, its location near to existing 
neighbourhoods, Harlesden town centre, Willesden 
Junction and the future Old Oak Common Station, 
access to existing key routes and setting on the Grand 
Union Canal will help deliver a major new residential 
led, mixed use community in the heart of the OPDC 
area. 
4.157. The Channel Gate Development Framework 
Principles (CGDFP) identifies that the area has the 
capacity to deliver a minimum 3,100 new homes and 
600 new jobs during the plan period, alongside the 
retained or reincorporated Park Royal Bus Depot and 
Willesden Freight Depot Terminal, which could also be 
rationalised subject to operational requirements. Given 
the size of the Channel Gate area and links to Old Oak 
Common Station, Willesden Junction and North Acton, 
there is the potential for these minimum homes and 
jobs targets to be exceeded through a co-ordinated 
and comprehensive approach to redevelopment of the 
site. 
4.158. While the majority of the area will be required 
by HS2 Ltd as a construction site for the Old Oak 
Common Station, there is the potential for earlier 
delivery of development on other sites within Channel 
Gate, particularly along Victoria Road and within the 
Atlas Junction cluster. This will provide early place making opportunities by helping to establish the 
Old Oak major town centre and providing improved 
connections to surrounding areas. Early delivery of 
development within Channel Gate will need to mitigate 
the impacts from HS2 construction activity and should 
support a comprehensive approach to redevelopment 
of the area in later years.
4.159. New town centre uses will be needed to support 
new communities in Channel Gate and surrounding 
areas, and development should help deliver the 
Old Oak major town centre. The town centre within 
Channel Gate should primarily be focused within the 
Atlas Junction cluster, where the intersection of key 
routes, Grand Union Canal and new Channel Gate 
Local Park provide the opportunity to deliver a vibrant 
new quarter for leisure, eating and drinking uses.
4.160. During the use of Channel Gate for HS2 
construction activities, there may be opportunities 
to deliver meanwhile uses which provide natural 
surveillance and support the early activation of the 
area in conjunction with the early delivery of new 
development. OPDC will work closely with HS2 Ltd and 
other relevant stakeholders to deliver this aspiration. 
4.161. Channel Gate will require a new high quality 
movement network that provides access into and 
through the area, and supporting and/or safeguarding 
access to surrounding areas. This new network will be 
underpinned by Channel Gate Street, a new key route, 
allowing all modes access through the site from Atlas 
Junction to Old Oak Lane, including a bridge crossing 
of the Grand Union Canal. In addition to Channel Gate 
Street, a series of new local streets and pedestrian 
and cycle routes will be required to ensure permeability 
within the site, and to nearby destinations including 
Old Oak Common, Willesden Junction, Harlesden 
town centre and North Acton. The movement network 
should deliver the requirements for Healthy Streets by 
prioritising walking and cycling and integrating urban 
greening with the streetscape. While not currently envisioned to be delivered within the plan period, 
proposals should also safeguard land for a future 
crossing of the Dudding Hill Line, connecting Channel 
Gate to Park Royal in the West.
4.162. The Grand Union Canal runs directly through 
Channel Gate and will be a key defining feature in 
the character and function of the area. Proposals 
should help to deliver improvements to the canalside 
environment in line with Policy P3, particularly widening 
of the canal towpath to support its importance as a 
walking and cycling corridor. Careful consideration 
should be given to how level differences are managed 
to support activation of the canal, particularly where 
town centres uses are being delivered. Where 
industrial uses are retained adjacent to the canal, 
natural surveillance should be provided through active 
and positive frontages along the length of the canal. 
4.163. Proposals will need to carefully consider the 
relationship between new and existing residential 
neighbourhoods and retained industrial uses, 
particularly in relation to the Willesden Freight Terminal. 
Community, leisure or light industrial uses could assist 
in providing an effective transition from areas of a 
primarily residential character to those of a primarily 
industrial character. The impacts of freight operations 
on the Island Triangle neighbourhood and surrounding 
areas will need to be effectively mitigated to deliver a 
high quality environment in accordance with Policy D5. 
4.164. Within Channel Gate, 30% of the area brought 
forward for mixed use development should be provided 
as publicly accessible open space. This should include 
the delivery of the new Channel Gate Local Park, of 
a minimum 2 hectares in size, located either side of 
the Grand Union Canal. Careful consideration will 
need to be given to how the park interacts with the 
canal towpath and how passive surveillance over 
both spaces can be provided. An area of search is 
currently identified for this Local Park recognising that 
further detailed work is required to define its precise 98
boundaries. If appropriate, OPDC will seek to apply an 
equitable equalisation mechanism to ensure delivery 
of the Local Park is not constrained by site ownership 
boundaries.  The new Local Park should be supported 
by a network of smaller open spaces across the area, 
and by embedding green infrastructure into the street 
network (see Policies SP9 and EU1). Proposals should 
support the expansion and enhancement of the existing 
Old Oak Community Gardens to help to provide a 
buffer between industrial activities on the Willesden 
Freight Terminal and deliver an appropriate level for 
existing residents. 
4.165. A range of building heights and typologies will 
be needed to deliver the spatial vision for Channel 
Gate. Proposals should respond appropriately to The 
Island Triangle and Grand Union Canal which are 
identified as sensitive locations (see Policy SP9 and 
figure 3.15), while heights along Victoria Road should 
provide an appropriate sense of enclosure to the 
street while responding to existing residential areas 
to the south. Canalside level changes will also need 
to be appropriately considered in building heights and 
massing. In less sensitive locations, there is the scale 
and opportunity for development to establish a new 
context where higher densities and heights may be 
delivered, particularly adjacent to areas of industrial or 
freight activity. Based on the development capacities 
proposed for Channel Gate, it is expected that tall 
buildings will predominantly be in the range of 20 to 
30 storeys. Tall building proposals will be considered 
against all relevant development plan policies and 
material considerations.
4.166. Channel Gate benefits from a number of 
adjacent heritage assets including the Grand Union 
Canal and the Old Oak Lane Conservation Area. The 
wider industrial heritage, canal and railway heritage 
are identified as heritage themes in the OPDC Heritage 
Strategy. OPDC’s Character Areas Study also identifies 
positive elements of industrial character. Together 
these elements should be used to inform the design of new development in Channel Gate to help deliver a 
locally distinctive neighbourhood.
4.167. Within the northern part of Channel Gate, 
the Willesden Freight Terminal provides a valuable 
opportunity to increase levels of sustainable rail 
freight transport with access to regional and national 
networks. Proposals should support its continuing 
operation and development adjacent to it should 
support its functioning as a terminal in terms of its 
design, land use and access. OPDC would support 
opportunities for freight consolidation users on the site, 
subject to agreement of terminal operators and other 
stakeholders. OPDC would also support use of the 
terminal as a means of moving goods and construction 
material to and from the area with a goal of removing 
additional vehicle traffic from the street network. 
4.168. To the south, OPDC will support the retention 
and effective operation of the Park Royal Bus Depot. 
A comprehensive approach to the redevelopment of 
Channel Gate would allow for the relocation of the bus 
depot within the site and optimise the delivery of mixed 
use development in a coordinated manner. Subject 
to the agreement of Transport for London, should the 
bus depot no longer be required or is located to a 
suitable alternative site outside of Channel Gate, then 
OPDC would support delivery of the site for mixed use 
development. OPDC would also support proposals 
for the colocation of the bus garage with mixed use 
development where this is in accordance with other 
relevant policies. 
4.169. The development of high density mixed use 
areas will necessitate the provision of social and 
physical infrastructure. Within Channel Gate, the 
Local Plan identifies that there is a need for one super 
nursery, one community hub and one sports centre. 
Further details on the phasing are set out in the IDP. 
These requirements are based on current population 
and child yield projections, which could change 
over time thereby impacting on the size and type of facilities required (see Policy TCC3). Proposals should 
appropriately safeguard land for and contribute to and/
or deliver these and other infrastructure requirements 
set out in the Local Plan, in accordance with Policy 
SP10. An equitable equalisation mechanism will be 
applied to the delivery of the secondary school, to 
ensure even sharing of the costs of delivering the 
facility. OPDC will also employ a retrospective pooling 
contribution mechanism, to provide additional planning 
contributions towards delivery of the facility from other 
appropriate developments (see Policy SP10).P999
Figure 4.34: Scrubs Lane Place
POLICY P10: Scrubs Lane
VISION 
Scrubs Lane will be a characterful and well 
connected neighbourhood sitting as a hinge between 
surrounding areas. Development will continue its 
employment heritage and will integrate space for 
living, creating and working.100
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.170. Scrubs Lane sits as a hinge between a series 
of surrounding neighbourhoods that are undergoing 
significant change and growth. To its north is Harlesden 
Town Centre and Willesden Junction Station where 
significant enhancements are proposed to ensure 
the station better serves local communities. To its 
west is Old Oak North which will undergo significant 
redevelopment and industrial intensification during the 
lifetime of OPDC’s Local Plan and will be supported by 
ancillary uses and new open spaces and connections. 
Old Oak Common Station will also be within 10 minutes 
walking distance of Scrubs Lane, accessed via a new 
pedestrian and cycle link from the Grand Union Canal. 
To its south is White City Opportunity Area which has 
already seen significant housing and employment 
delivery, with further growth planned. Finally, to its east 
is the Kensal Canalside Opportunity Area where an 
additional 3,500 homes and series of canalside spaces POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land Uses
a) supporting the delivery of a range of residential-
led mixed use development along Scrubs Lane by 
contributing to the delivery of 1,100 new jobs and 
a minimum of 3,500 new homes including 2,450 
new homes within the first 0-10 years;
b) delivering a range of ‘walk to’ town centre uses 
focussed within the identified five clusters, 
providing local services for people living and 
working in the Scrubs Lane Place;
c) supporting the local economy and strengthening 
local identity by delivering high quality ground 
and lower floor employment floorspace on sites 
fronting Scrubs Lane and existing or proposed 
yard spaces, consisting of appropriately designed 
and serviced small business units for B2, B8 and 
E uses along its length;
d)  supporting residential amenity by locating 
housing:
i) above the ground and lower floors onto 
Scrubs Lane and railway lines; and
ii) at the ground floor away from Scrubs Lane 
where appropriate. 
Public realm and movement
e) contributing to and/or enabling the delivery of 
improved connectivity by:
i) supporting Scrubs Lane’s role as a connector 
route;
ii) contributing to the delivery of a new 
continuous generous 5 metre wide footpath 
along the west of Scrubs Lane;
iii) contributing to the delivery of high quality 
segregated cycle lanes with associated 
junction requirements; P10
iv) contributing to the delivery of an improved 
footpath, with widening where possible, along 
the east of Scrubs Lane;
v) improving existing, safeguarding for and 
creating new east–west routes at each cluster 
and along Wormwood Scrubs Street that 
provide access to Old Oak North, Old Oak 
South, the Grand Union Canal, St. Mary’s 
Cemetery and Kensal Canalside Opportunity 
Area;
vi) contributing to delivering new walking and 
cycling connections to Wormwood Scrubs and 
Little Wormwood Scrubs; and
vii) working positively with stakeholders to deliver 
new connections over and/or under railways 
and the Grand Union Canal.
Green infrastructure and the environment
f) delivering a high quality, well-connected, network 
of multifunctional open spaces. This should 
include:
i) contributing to and/or delivering new publicly 
accessible open spaces and public realm 
improvements at each cluster;
ii) high quality green infrastructure, including 
street greening, along the length of Scrubs 
Lane; and
iii) yards as open spaces along the canal to 
support employment uses and as communal 
or private open spaces for housing.
Heritage and character
g) strengthening local identity and character by
i) conserving and enhancing the St. Mary’s 
Cemetery, Grand Union Canal and 
Cumberland Park Factory conservation areas, 
and Kensal Green Cemetery Grade I Listed 
Historic Park and Garden and their settings; 
and
ii) ensuring future local character is informed 
by the area’s existing heritage including the 
cemeteries, railways, Grand Union Canal and industrial heritage.
Building heights
h) contributing to a variety of building heights which 
respond to public transport access and sensitive 
locations by delivering:
i) north of the Grand Union Canal, generally 
6-8 storey heights onto Scrubs Lane and the 
Grand Union Canal and 6-10 storey heights 
onto Harrow Road;
ii) south of the Grand Union Canal, generally 
6-10 storey heights onto Scrubs Lane with 
lower heights adjacent to Little Wormwood 
Scrubs;
iii) generally lower heights opposite the 
Cumberland Park Factory Conservation Area;
iv) increased heights adjacent to the railway; 
v)  within clusters, a variety of building heights 
including generally a single tall building; and
vi) visual permeability between tall buildings.101
Figure 4.35: Cumberland Park Factory, Scrubs LaneP10
are planned. As this hinge, Scrubs Lane has the ability 
to deliver enhanced connections which tie together 
these surrounding neighbourhoods and deliver a high 
quality place which makes a significant contribution to 
local homes and jobs provision in its own right. 
4.171. Scrubs Lane is currently home to an established 
business community comprising a variety of economic 
sectors including a significant amount of creative 
industries. There are also residential terraces north 
and south of the West Coast Main Line. Established 
residential neighbourhoods are located surrounding 
Scrubs Lane to the east in College Park, to the north 
along Brunel Court and further to the south in North 
Kensington adjacent to Little Wormwood Scrubs. The 
City Mission Church and nursery at 2 Scrubs Lane are 
important centres for the community and the nursery 
was designated as an Asset of Community Value in 
November 2015.
4.172. Cargiant own and operate 18 hectares of 
adjoining land in Old Oak North as a contiguous car 
plant employing directly and indirectly over 2,000 
people. Cargiant’s operational land includes properties 
located on Scrubs Lane. Therefore, it is appropriate 
that the sites owned and occupied by the Cargiant 
operation in Scrubs Lane will be safeguarded from 
other uses whilst those sites are used in conjunction 
with the main Cargiant operations on Hythe Road 
and Salter Street1. Equally, development proposals to 
support the intensified operational use of these sites 
will be supported.
4.173. OPDC has produced a Scrubs Lane 
Development Framework Principles (SLDFP) 
document to provide further detail on the area’s 
development capacity, land use mix and infrastructure 
required to support the needs of development and 
create a high quality place. The principles within this 
document inform the policy for this place. 
4.174. A significant proportion of early development will 
be seen on Scrubs Lane. Scrubs Lane has the capacity 
to deliver a minimum of 3,500 new homes and 1,100 
new jobs in the plan period2. Once OPDC’s Local Plan 
has been adopted, the Scrubs Lane place would have 
been de-designated from SIL and would comprise 
land allocated for housing. In accordance with Mayoral 
affordable housing policy, sites brought forward for 
housing on Scrubs Lane would therefore be eligible for 
the Mayor’s fast track approach to affordable housing 
viability at 35% affordable housing.
4.175. The new community along Scrubs Lane will need 
to be supported by a suitable range of amenities and 
services. Scrubs Lane sits within a network of existing 
and proposed centres of activity including Harlesden 
town centre, Kensal Rise, the future Kensal Canalside 
development, the proposed redevelopment of Linford 
Christie Stadium, White City, the future Old Oak major 
town centre alongside pockets of ancillary active uses 
within Old Oak North. However, there is a need for 
clusters, which are located at places where Scrubs 
Lane is crossed by east-west movement routes. The 
clusters will have a key role in sustaining the presence 
of active uses to support this new community, add 
life to the street and ultimately support the delivery of 
Lifetime Neighbourhoods in accordance with Policy 
SP23. 
4.176. Town centre uses will differ from cluster to 
cluster depending on each cluster’s specific character 
- please see the cluster policies for further detail. They 
will be expected to include a mixture of small scale 
‘walk-to’ town centre uses, community and employment 
uses that have a good relationship to the street. 
Examples may include shops, cafés, restaurants, 
community spaces, gyms and local office space. These 
uses could be permanent or temporary but will crucially 
provide an ‘activation’ role in helping to draw people 
to the area to activate and build a sense of place and 
community. 
4.177. To deliver Scrubs Lane’s employment capacity 
and continue to enhance its industrial character, sites 
fronting onto Scrubs Lane will be expected to deliver employment uses at ground floors fronting on to 
Scrubs Lane and railways. This will also help to deliver 
appropriate levels of amenity for residential uses 
above. These employment spaces will need to accord 
with Policies E2 and E3 with regard to their design and 
operation, be compatible with housing as part of mixed 
used residential development and provide positive and/
or active street frontages. 
4.178. Scrubs Lane is currently a key connector 
route, facilitating freight and passenger movement to 
Harlesden in the north and White City and Shepherd’s 
Bush in the south. East - west connectivity is currently 
poor with only one access into Old Oak North at Hythe 
Road, one pedestrian route into St. Mary’s Cemetery, 
one stepped access to the southern Grand Union 
Canal towpath and one access to the Mitre Industrial 
Estate. To enhance east-west connectivity new and 
improved connections are proposed at Laundry Lane, 
Hythe Road, along the Grand Union Canal southern 
towpath and through the delivery of Wormwood 
Scrubs Street providing access to Kensal Canalside 
Opportunity Area.
4.179. Scrubs Lane may need to accommodate 102
REFERENCES
1. In a statement issued on 13 December 2019, the OPDC confirmed 
that it no longer intended to seek to acquire land owned by Cargiant 
and would make the necessary amendments to the draft Local Plan 
to confirm that this part of Old Oak North will remain a business and 
employment location for the foreseeable future. 
2. Development Capacity Study Update
3, 4, 5 and 7 Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles Update
6. Heritage StrategyP10
increased vehicular movement generated by the 
construction and operation of new development. To 
address the impacts of this, there is an opportunity to 
introduce:
a) new bus routes with greater frequencies to serve 
the increase in population with any parking 
provided off-street;
b) segregated cycle lanes linking with the surrounding 
cycling network including the Cycle Future Route 
23 linking Wembley to Fulham being delivered from 
2022. These will need to appropriately integrate 
with any enhanced or new junctions into Old Oak 
North;  
c) a generous 5 metre wide foot path to the west of 
Scrubs Lane, which will provide a pleasant walking 
environment and will help to provide space for 
new street greening that will encourage new active 
uses to spill out onto the street to add vibrancy and 
character; and
d)  improvements to the public realm along the eastern 
side of Scrubs Lane4 to provide a more pleasant 
environment for existing and future residents and 
workers in this location.
4.180. OPDC will work with TfL and the relevant local 
highway authority to deliver these improvements.
4.181. Access to Wormwood Scrubs and Little 
Wormwood Scrubs is restricted by railways, buildings, 
vegetation and the street itself. To help people get to 
these open spaces, sensitive new connections and 
improvements to existing connections will be required.
4.182. To support place making and provide facilities for 
new and existing communities, new publicly accessible 
open spaces and public realm improvements should 
be delivered as early as is feasible. Requirements for 
these publicly accessible open spaces can be found 
in the proceeding cluster policies with further detail in 
OPDC’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
4.183. Yard spaces are a significant element of the historic character of the Cumberland Park Factory 
Conservation Area. To support and continue this 
character, new development north of the canal 
should incorporate yards onto the street and next to 
the railway for servicing employment uses and as 
communal and/or private residential open space5. 
Their design and function should appropriately protect 
residential amenity and should include sustainable 
drainage systems (SuDS) and other elements of green 
infrastructure. Their design should support the delivery 
of a defined street frontage along the length of Scrubs 
Lane.
4.184. Scrubs Lane has significant heritage assets6. 
This historic context results from its industrial and 
manufacturing history which is demonstrated by both 
Cumberland Park Factory Conservation Area and the 
concentration of diverse and creative small businesses 
along and behind the street. Combined with the St. 
Mary’s Cemetery and Grand Union Canal conservation 
areas and Local Heritage Listings, Scrubs Lane has 
a rich historical context that can positively shape new 
development.
4.185. The historic character and the surrounding 
context provide opportunities to conserve and enhance 
historic assets and shape a coherent building heights 
strategy along Scrubs Lane. New development needs 
to be delivered in a way that supports the achievement 
of homes and jobs targets, responds appropriately to 
sensitive locations and delivers an appropriate sense 
of enclosure to the street avoiding a canyon effect. As 
such, the heights and responses outlined in table 4.2 
should be delivered.103
Table 4.2: Building height guidance for development at Scrubs Lane
North of the canal, generally 6-8 storey 
heights onto Scrubs Lane with 6-10 onto 
Harrow RoadTo provide an appropriate sense of enclosure to the street in response to the width of Scrubs Lane, with 
increased height onto Harrow Road. 
Within this overarching approach to height, the context of each individual plot will also need to be taken into 
account when considering the most appropriate arrangement of heights on each site.
South of the Grand Union Canal, 
generally 6-10 storey heights onto Scrubs 
Lane with lower heights adjacent to Little 
Wormwood ScrubsTo provide an appropriate scale of massing that reflects the existing railway infrastructure and sensitive locations 
of Wormwood Scrubs and Little Wormwood Scrubs.
Lower heights opposite the Cumberland 
Park Factory To conserve and enhance the Cumberland Park Factory Conservation Area.
Generally 6 to 8 storey heights fronting 
onto the Grand Union CanalTo conserve and enhance the canal’s designation as a Site of Importance for Nature Conservation and 
conservation area and provide an appropriate sense of enclosure to Mary Seacole Gardens as a publicly 
accessible open space.
Increased heights adjacent to the railway To help manage the impact of railway noise on local amenity, respond to less-sensitive locations and respond to 
the increased massing in Old Oak North. 
Within clusters, a variety of building 
heights including generally a single tall 
buildingGenerally, a single tall building within each cluster is considered to be more appropriate than the:
• uncoordinated delivery of tall buildings along Scrubs Lane; and
• delivery of increased heights and massing along the length of Scrubs Lane.
The exception to this approach is the Hythe Road cluster where additional tall buildings are considered to be 
appropriate to reinforce the emerging spatial hierarchy of the local and wider context and aid legibility and 
wayfinding to Hythe Road as the existing route into Old Oak North that will be enhanced.
These six locations for tall buildings will support legibility at key east-west intersections with the street, help to 
meet homes and jobs targets, maintain the character of Scrubs Lane, support the delivery of social infrastructure 
and open space and manage impacts on the townscape and heritage assets. 
Based on the development capacities proposed for Scrubs Lane, it is expected that tall buildings will 
predominantly be in the range of 20 to 25 storeys. Tall building proposals will be considered against all relevant 
development plan policies and material considerations.
Any proposal for a tall building will need to be of the highest design quality. These will be determined on a 
case by case basis and will be subject to the detailed assessment of its impacts in accordance with all relevant 
policies and guidance. Specific consideration will need to be given to impacts on views from surrounding areas.
The definition of tall buildings is stated in Policy D4. 
Visual permeability To help create a high quality townscape and visual amenity. This will enable views across Old Oak as well as to 
and from surrounding areas.P10104
Figure 4.36: Harrow Road Cluster
Green infrastructure and the environment
e) supporting health and wellbeing and resilience 
to climate change by delivering new publicly 
accessible open space on Ellisland Way adjacent 
to 2 Scrubs Lane.
Building heights
f) contributing to a variety of building heights by:
i) locating a single tall building at the south 
western corner of the Scrubs Lane and 
Harrow Road junction to support local 
legibility; and
ii) delivering 8 to 10 storeys on to Harrow Road.P10C1: Harrow Road Cluster
VISION 
A community and employment focused cluster framed 
by the prominent corner of Harrow Road and Scrubs 
Lane and a new connection to Willesden Junction.
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of a community and 
employment focused cluster by:
i) clustering active Use Class B2, B8 and 
E uses, that are appropriately designed 
and serviced for small business units, and 
community uses along Harrow Road and 
Ellisland Way;
ii) delivering residential uses above the ground 
floor adjacent to the railway, Scrubs Lane and 
Harrow Road; and
iii) reproviding the floorspace of a church use 
and associated community use at 2 Scrubs 
Lane on site including new fitted out building 
space at community use rent levels.
Public realm and movement
b) supporting local connectivity by delivering 
Ellisland Way as a new walking and cycling route 
and safeguarding for a long-term new route to 
Willesden Junction Station;
c) supporting activation of the public realm by 
creating a well-defined active frontage onto 
Scrubs Lane, Harrow Road and Ellisland Way;
d) contributing to the improvement of public realm 
on Harrow Road to support access to Harlesden 
town centre.105
Figure 4.37: Lewis Cubitt Park, Kings Cross
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.186. The Harrow Road cluster sits at the busy 
junction of Harrow Road and Scrubs Lane.
4.187. To support the activation of Ellisland Way and a 
high quality street environment along Harrow Road and 
Scrubs Lane, active and appropriately designed and 
serviced employment (Use Class B2, B8 and E uses) 
and community uses with a good street presence are 
required on both streets. Where this is not possible, 
development should provide positive frontages. To help 
mitigate impacts on residential amenity, housing should 
be located above the ground floor, opposite the railway, 
along Scrubs Lane and Harrow Road with opportunities 
to provide housing at ground level where possible 
along Ellisland Way1.
4.188. The City Mission Church and associated 
community uses provide important services to the 
local community which is reflected in the designation 
of the community use as an Asset of Community Value 
in November 2015. To ensure the continued delivery 
of social infrastructure, the floorspace of these uses 
should be reprovided.
4.189. Harrow Road will continue to be a heavily 
trafficked road connecting with an improved route 
to Willesden Junction. In the long-term and if 
demonstrated to be feasible, to create a high quality 
walking and cycling environment, Ellisland Way should 
provide an additional choice for walking and cycling 
between Willesden Junction and Scrubs Lane2. If 
demonstrated to be feasible, there may also be the 
opportunity for Ellisland Way to be delivered as a 
vehicular route.
4.190. Working with the different ground levels, there 
is an opportunity to provide a publicly accessible open 
space adjacent to 2 Scrubs Lane on Ellisland Way (see 
figure 4.36) and support the delivery of 30% publicly 
accessible open space in accordance with Policy SP8.4.191. The Chandelier Building is home to a diverse 
range of small businesses. These occupiers and 
the form of the building reflect the evolving historic 
industrial development along Scrubs Lane and are 
considered to positively contribute to local character. 
As such, it is identified as a Local Heritage Listing3. 
Proposals should seek to retain the Chandelier 
Building in accordance with Policy D7 and demonstrate 
how they have fully explored its retention.
4.192. Delivering a single tall building at the junction 
of Harrow Road and Scrubs Lane and heights of 8 to 
10 storeys elsewhere is considered to be appropriate 
in principle4, subject to detailed assessment of the 
impacts in accordance with all relevant policy and 
guidance. This location is considered to support wayfinding to the retained community uses and 
Harlesden town centre. The massing of any 
development will need to respond to the lower building 
heights of the adjacent residential neighbourhoods of 
College Park and Brunel Court to manage the impact 
on the townscape of Scrubs Lane and residential 
amenity. To help to define the junction of Harrow Road 
and Scrubs Lane, the corner of 2 Scrubs Lane should 
provide a well-defined and consistent urban edge.
4.193. The Harrow Road Cluster boundary is shown 
in figure 4.36. A portion of Site Allocation 27 (Harrow 
Road) falls within the cluster boundary.
REFERENCES
1, 2 and 4. Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles Update
3. Heritage Strategy and Local Heritage ListingsP10C1
106
Figure 4.38: Laundry Lane Cluster
open space in advance of the potential delivery of 
Laundry Lane as a new route to Old Oak.
Heritage and character
d) enhancing local character by:
i) delivering views along the railway from the 
Laundry Lane Bridge; and
ii) conserving and enhancing the heritage 
significance of 26-30 Scrubs Lane and 
existing ghost signage in accordance with 
Policy D7.
Building heights
e) contributing to a variety of building heights 
including locating a single tall building on the 
northern side of Laundry Lane to support local 
legibility.Policy P10C2: Laundry Lane Cluster
VISION 
A residential led cluster with employment and town 
centre uses centred on Laundry Lane as a publicly 
accessible open space / potential new route into Old 
Oak North and to the east, enhanced connections to 
St Mary’s Cemetery.
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of a mixed use cluster by:
i) focusing employment and town centre uses at 
ground and lower floor levels; and
ii) delivering residential uses above employment 
and town centre uses where appropriate 
standards of amenity can be provided.
Public realm and movement
b) supporting local connectivity by:
i) safeguarding for and if relevant and 
appropriate, contributing to and / or delivering 
Laundry Lane access road and bridge, 
connecting Old Oak North to Scrubs Lane, as 
a high quality vehicular route;
ii) delivering a high quality crossing across 
Scrubs Lane and safeguarding land to deliver 
improved access into St. Mary’s Cemetery; 
and
iii) delivering active frontages along Laundry 
Lane and the western side of Scrubs Lane.
Green infrastructure and the environment
c) supporting health and wellbeing and resilience 
to climate change by contributing to and/or 
delivering Laundry Lane as a publicly accessible 107
Figure 4.39: Neo Bankside, Southwark Street, London
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.194. The Laundry Lane cluster is located on the 
former site of the Willesden Laundry which is reflected 
by ghost signage located at 26-30 Scrubs Lane. 
4.195. It is located at the point where the potential 
key route of Laundry Lane would join Scrubs Lane, 
providing an east-west connection to Old Oak North if 
required to support industrial intensification. Proposals 
should safeguard for and if relevant and appropriate, 
contribute to and/or deliver Laundry Lane as part of the 
Cumberland Business Park Site Allocation and ensure 
level changes are addressed in its design. In advance 
of the delivery of Laundry Lane Bridge, development 
proposals should deliver a publicly accessible open 
space. The open space should contribute positively to 
the character of the area, informed by local industrial 
character and local heritage designations. Hard and 
green landscaping will be appropriate.
4.196. Active ground floor uses, such as town centre 
and employment uses, will support the activation of 
the public open space / route into Old Oak North and 
Scrubs Lane. Residential uses will be appropriate 
above the ground floor.
4.197. Time-limited access to St. Mary’s Cemetery is 
currently provided via a gate. To support access to 
and from the cemetery, a new pedestrian and cycling 
crossing should be delivered from Laundry Lane1. 
Any improved access to the cemetery will be explored 
in discussion with the management company for St. 
Mary’s Cemetery.
4.198. The ghost signage on the northern façade of 26-
30 Scrubs Lane provides a link to the area’s industrial 
past and positively contributes to the character of the 
area2. This should be conserved and enhanced in 
accordance with Policy D7. The Laundry Bridge should 
be designed to enable people to have views along the 
length of the railway line to reflect the local railway heritage and enhance local character.
4.199. Publicly accessible open space should be 
delivered within this cluster to support the strategic 
target to deliver 30% publicly accessible open space 
(see Policy SP8), help to mediate the level changes 
required along Laundry Lane   to bridge over rail 
infrastructure and support the delivery of east-west 
walking and cycling connections between Old Oak 
North, Scrubs Lane and St Mary’s Cemetery.
4.200. Delivering a single tall building to the east of 
the railway and north of Laundry Lane is considered 
to be appropriate in principle3, subject to detailed 
assessment of its impacts in accordance with REFERENCES
1. Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles Update
2. Heritage Strategy
3. Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles Updateall relevant policy and guidance. This location is 
considered to support wayfinding to Laundry Lane as 
both a publicly accessible open space and a route into 
Old Oak North.
4.201. The Laundry Lane Cluster boundary is shown 
in figure 4.32. 24 Scrubs Lane which comprises the 
northern site of Site Allocation 39 (Cargiant Scrubs 
Lane) falls within the cluster boundary. A portion of Site 
Allocation 28 (Cumberland Business Park) falls within 
the cluster boundary.P10C2108
Figure 4.40: Hythe Road Cluster
accessible open space at the new access point 
into St. Mary’s Cemetery.
Heritage and character
d) enhancing local character by conserving 
and enhancing the heritage of the railway 
infrastructure and associated spaces.
Building heights
e) contributing to a variety of building heights 
including two tall buildings at the Scrubs Lane 
and Hythe Road junction.Policy P10C3: Hythe Road Cluster
VISION 
A retail, leisure, employment and community focused 
cluster framed by railway and industrial heritage 
that connects Old Oak North, to Scrubs Lane and 
on to St. Mary’s Cemetery. This cluster will provide 
improved walking, cycling and vehicular access into 
Old Oak North.
POLICY 
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of a retail, leisure, 
employment and community focused cluster by 
clustering these active uses at the junction of 
Hythe Road, Scrubs Lane and any other access 
routes required into Old Oak North. 
Public realm and movement
b) supporting local connectivity by:
i) enhancing Hythe Road as an all modes key 
route, with significant enhancements to the 
walking and cycling environment;
ii) providing a crossing across Scrubs Lane 
to deliver a new walking and cycling route 
and supporting a future access point into St. 
Mary’s Cemetery from Hythe Road; and
iii) in the long term, support the potential 
relocation of the vehicular access to Old Oak 
Sidings and EMR sites to release the existing 
route for publicly accessible open space and/
or yard space. 
Green infrastructure and the environment
c) supporting health and wellbeing and resilience 
to climate change by delivering new publicly 109
Figure 4.41: 100 Union, Union Street, London - precedent for high density provision of SME space
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.202. The Hythe Road cluster is located at the main 
access point into Old Oak North along Hythe Road. 
In future, access into Old Oak North will be enhanced 
in this location, through an improved Hythe Road 
providing all modes access with improved walking and 
cycling infrastructure1. 
4.203. To support the cluster’s role as a key place of 
activity on Scrubs Lane, a range of active ground floor 
land uses should be provided around the junction 
fronting a high quality and robust public realm. 
This should include small-scale ‘walk-to’ uses to 
complement the wider town centre hierarchy. 
4.204. The Hythe Road cluster provides an opportunity 
to continue the walking and cycling route from Hythe 
Road into St. Mary’s Cemetery via a new crossing 
of Scrubs Lane. To support this opportunity, a new 
high quality access point into the cemetery should be 
delivered in discussion with the management company 
for St. Mary’s Cemetery2. Development adjacent to 
the new access point should support this route by 
contributing to the delivery of new publicly accessible 
open space fronted by active uses.
4.205. The existing Old Oak Sidings and European 
Metal Recycling waste management sites are currently 
accessed through Mitre Yard along the Haul Road. In 
the longer term, and if demonstrated to be feasible, 
there is an aspiration to work with landowners to 
provide a new vehicular access to these sites. The 
resultant spaces would then be made available for 
new publicly accessible open space and/or yards for 
workspaces3. As such, proposals should demonstrate 
how they will provide positive and/or active frontages in 
the long term while mitigating environmental impacts of 
freight traffic in the short term.
4.206. Hythe Road runs beneath a number of railway 
lines and the Haul Road. The supporting infrastructure of these connections alongside adjacent spaces 
provide an opportunity to celebrate the transport 
heritage of Old Oak. Therefore, development should 
contribute to enhancing these structures and spaces 
through measures such as lighting, painting and/or 
other suitable improvements4.
4.207. Delivering two tall buildings, one on either side 
of Hythe Road, is considered to be appropriate in 
principle5, reflecting the location’s role as the main 
access point into Old Oak North and Hythe Road as 
the key existing east to west route linking to onward 
walking and cycling routes. Any tall buildings will be 
subject to detailed assessments of their impacts in 
accordance with all relevant policy and guidance. The 
delivery of these two buildings will need to ensure their 
location and form deliver appropriate levels of amenity 
for building users and for the public realm. Having two tall buildings at this location is considered to reinforce 
the emerging spatial hierarchy of the local and wider 
context while supporting wayfinding to the routes 
into Old Oak and St. Mary’s Cemetery and managing 
impacts on surrounding heritage assets. 
4.208. The Hythe Road Cluster boundary is shown in 
figure 4.40. Mitre House which comprises the southern 
site of Site Allocation 39 (Cargiant Scrubs Lane) falls 
within the cluster boundary. Cumberland House and 
car park comprise the middle site of Site Allocation 39 
and fall within the cluster boundary. A portion of Site 
Allocation 29 (Mitre Yard) also falls within the cluster 
boundary.
REFERENCES
1-5. Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles Update
P10C3110
Figure 4.42: Mitre Canalside Cluster
POLICY P10C4: Mitre Canalside Cluster
VISION 
A leisure, eating, drinking and community focused 
canalside location that celebrates the striking 
relationship of infrastructure and canal heritage with 
residential uses, active canalside spaces and uses.
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) supporting the delivery of a leisure, eating, 
drinking and community focused cluster by:
i) clustering publicly accessible active 
community, Use Class E uses, that deliver 
high levels of activation, facing on to Mary 
Seacole Gardens, the Grand Union Canal and 
at the junction between 115-129 Scrubs Lane 
and Mitre Wharf; and
ii) contributing to and/or enabling new 
residential, leisure, commercial, casual and 
visitor moorings and associated infrastructure.
Public realm and movement
b) supporting local connectivity by:
i) contributing to the improvement of walking 
and cycling access from Mitre Bridge to the 
southern canal towpath; and
ii) delivering walking and cycling routes to the 
canal at Mitre Wharf.
Green infrastructure and the environment
c) supporting health and wellbeing and resilience to 
climate change by: 
i) increasing the size, quality and accessibility 
of Mary Seacole Gardens by contributing 
to its enhancement with landscaping improvements, building setbacks and 
activation by surrounding uses; and
ii) contributing to the delivery of a new publicly 
accessible canalside open space on Mitre 
Wharf.
Heritage and character
d) enhancing local character by conserving and 
enhancing the Grand Union Canal Conservation 
Area, its setting and Local Heritage Listings.
Building heights
e) contributing to a variety of building heights 
including:
i) locating a single tall building at 115-129 
Scrubs Lane; 
ii) ensuring the massing and height of development at Mitre Yard supports the 
functions of Mary Seacole Gardens; and
iii) ensuring the massing and height of 
development steps up away from Scrubs 
Lane while responding well to development at 
115-129 Scrubs Lane.
Infrastructure
f) supporting local connectivity by contributing to 
the delivery of a new walking and cycling bridge 
alongside the Mitre Bridge and linked railway 
bridge if feasible.111
Figure 4.43: Canal towpath at Mitre Bridge (credit: OPDC by Mattr Media Ltd)SUPPORTING TEXT
4.209. The Mitre Canalside Cluster will be a visually 
prominent location when arriving from the south. 
4.210. Reflecting the assets of the Grand Union 
Canal and Mary Seacole Gardens, the cluster has 
the opportunity to be a focus for delivering a range of 
active community and leisure canalside uses that will 
capitalise on the high footfall delivered by the improved 
Mary Seacole Gardens and development on Mitre 
Wharf1.
4.211. Moorings play an important role in supporting 
the historic canalside character, in meeting housing 
need and in providing space for employment and 
leisure activities. To support these roles, existing 
and new permanent and temporary moorings should 
be delivered in agreement with the Canal and River 
Trust, other relevant canal-side landowners and local 
residential mooring associations2.
4.212. The delivery of a separate walking and cycling 
bridge alongside the Mitre Bridge and linked railway 
bridge would be supported if demonstrated to be 
required and feasible3. This will enable a continuous 
high quality walking and cycling route along Scrubs 
Lane.
4.213. Mary Seacole Gardens is a cherished local 
publicly accessible open space that provides a positive 
setting to the Grand Union Canal. The adjacent 
waste transfer facility has a negative impact on the 
environmental quality of this open space. Following 
the relocation of the waste transfer sites, the amenity 
of Mary Seacole Gardens will improve and there is 
an opportunity for development within the cluster 
to contribute to improving this publicly accessible 
open space by providing active town centre uses, 
landscaping and public realm improvements4. The 
delivery of active leisure uses will support the local canalside character, recognising the location of the 
former nearby Mitre Tavern. 
4.214. This cluster is defined by the railway, canal, 
social and industrial heritage of the area. As such, 
development should contribute to conserving and 
enhancing the Grand Union Canal Conservation 
Area, the Mitre Bridge and the linked railway bridge 
as proposed locally listed structures and the adjacent 
railway bridge given its positive impact on local 
character. This may include measures such as lighting, 
painting and/or other suitable improvements5.
4.215. Delivering a single tall building at 115-129 
Scrubs Lane is considered to be appropriate in 
principle, subject to detailed assessment of its impacts REFERENCES
1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles 
Update
5. Heritage Strategyin accordance with all relevant policy and guidance6. 
This location is considered to support wayfinding to the 
destination canalside uses, new and enhanced east-
west routes and from the south.
4.216. The Mitre Canalside Cluster boundary is shown 
in figure 4.42. Portions of Site Allocations 29 (Mitre 
Yard), 30 (North Kensington Gate South) and 31 (Mitre 
Wharf) fall within the cluster boundary.
P10C4112
Figure 4.44: Mitre Way ClusterPOLICY P10C5: Mitre Way Cluster
VISION 
A residential-led neighbourhood centred on 
Wormwood Scrubs Street. 
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the cluster 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) Supporting the delivery of a mixed use cluster by:
i) Focusing Use Class E uses, that are 
appropriately designed and serviced for small 
business units small scale walk to town centre 
uses at ground floor levels; and
ii) delivering residential uses above Use Class E 
and town centre uses.
Public realm and movement
b) Supporting local connectivity by:
i) contributing to and / or delivering Wormwood 
Scrubs Street;
ii) contributing to and / or delivering a new 
walking and cycling route from Wormwood 
Scrubs Street to Scrubs Lane;
iii) safeguarding land for the longer-term delivery 
of the western portion of Wormwood Scrubs 
Street;
iv) safeguarding land for the longer-term delivery 
of an all modes connection from Mitre Way to 
Scrubs Lane;
v) delivering new streets including walking and 
cycling routes to Little Wormwood Scrubs; 
and
vi) locating active frontages on Scrubs Lane, 
Wormwood Scrubs Street and Mitre Way.Green infrastructure and the environment
c) Supporting health and well-being and resilience to 
climate change by contributing to the delivery of a 
new publicly accessible open space in the east of 
the cluster to support walking and cycling access 
from Scrubs Lane to Wormwood Scrubs Street.
Heritage and character
d) Enhancing local character by:
i) delivering views from Scrubs Lane along 
Wormwood Scrubs Street; and
ii) positively responding to the Historic Scrubland and Open Space heritage theme.
Building heights
e) Contributing to a variety of building heights 
including locating a single tall building on the 
North Pole East Depot at the junction of Mitre 
Way and Wormwood Scrubs Street.113
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.217. The Mitre Way Cluster will be where the existing 
Scrubs Lane and future Wormwood Scrubs Street 
meet, providing a key navigation point for these north-
south and east-west routes.
4.218. The cluster of small-scale walk-to town centre 
and Use Class E uses will frame this meeting point 
and will be well-served by bus routes and walking 
and cycling routes. A new walking and cycling route 
will navigate differences in ground levels to connect 
Wormwood Scrubs Street to Scrubs Lane, providing 
access to bus routes and TfL’s Cycle Future Route 23. 
In the longer-term, a potential new all modes route will 
connect Mitre Way to Scrubs Lane further improving 
access. Wormwood Scrubs Street itself will provide 
new bus services to Kensal Canalside Opportunity Area 
and in the longer term to Old Oak Common Station. 
This will bring the amenities of Harlesden, White City, 
Old Oak South, Kensal Canalside, Ladbroke Grove, 
Wormwood Scrubs and Little Wormwood Scrubs within 
easy reach of residents and employees within and 
around the Mitre Way cluster.
4.219. New and enhanced routes within the cluster 
will benefit from active frontages, helping people 
to navigate to their destinations. A popular local 
destination is Little Wormwood Scrubs. Located in the 
London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham, Little 
Wormwood Scrubs is outside of the OPDC area but 
will be on the doorstep of the Mitre Way cluster and 
surrounding residential areas. Providing new sensitive 
access points to Little Wormwood Scrubs and ensuring 
its character informs the character of new development 
across the Mitre Way cluster will be important for 
integrating Mitre Way with this open space.
4.220. Delivering a single tall building at the junction 
of Mitre Way and Wormwood Scrubs Street is 
considered to be appropriate in principle, subject to detailed assessment of its impacts in accordance 
with all relevant policy and guidance. This location 
is considered to support wayfinding to the new east-
west connection to Kensal Canalside in the short- to 
medium-term and to Old Oak Common Station in the 
longer-term. 
4.221. The Mitre Way Cluster boundary is shown in 
figure 4.44. Portions of Site Allocations 40 (North Pole 
East Depot), 32 (Big Yellow) and 34 (Mitre Industrial 
Estate) fall within the cluster boundary. P10C5114
Figure 4.45: Willesden Junction Place
POLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Land uses
a) Supporting earlier delivery of new homes and jobs 
within the plan period including by:
i) optimising development on and/or adjacent to 
the station and tracks; 
ii) supporting development on the western 
side of Willesden Junction station that 
contributes to a coordinated delivery of 
Willesden Junction Station upgrades and the 
enhancement of Station Approach;
b) Delivering a range of high quality employment 
and/or town centre uses across Willesden 
Junction where residential uses are less 
appropriate; and
c)  Encouraging activation of the area by delivering 
a range of meanwhile uses with active and/or 
positive frontages on ground floors, particularly 
along Station Approach and around Willesden 
Junction Station.
Public realm and movement 
d) Ensuring station upgrades are delivered in a 
phased and co-ordinated manner. Upgrades 
should also not result in reduced access to public 
transport services provided by the station for areas to the north of Willesden Junction;
e) Contributing to and/or delivering a permeable, 
inclusive and accessible movement network as 
shown in figure 4.45.
Green infrastructure and environment
f) Delivering a high quality, well-connected, network 
of multifunctional publicly accessible open 
spaces, including embedding green infrastructure 
along Station Approach and within other streets.
Heritage and character
g) Strengthening local identity and character by:
i) conserving and enhancing the Willesden 
Junction substation and water tower in 
accordance with Policy D7; andPOLICY P11: Willesden Junction
VISION 
Willesden Junction will be a busy destination 
within Old Oak. An enhanced station will provide 
better public transport connections and new and/
or enhanced routes will improve connectivity 
to Harlesden and Old Oak. New high density 
development, where feasible and appropriate, will 
support the creation of a mixed use neighbourhood.115
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.222. Willesden Junction today is a busy place where 
people interchange between London Overground 
and London Underground (Bakerloo). 6.7 million 
passengers use services at Willesden Junction 
Station annually. By comparison, the average for 
London Overground managed stations is 2.9 million 
passengers. Many of those passengers continue 
their onward journey by bus or on foot to nearby 
destinations such as Harlesden or Park Royal.
4.223. The area is currently dominated by railway 
infrastructure with freight lines to the north of the 
station, West Coast Mainline (WCML) tracks to the 
south and the Bakerloo and London Overground tracks 
that directly serve the station. This rail infrastructure 
severs this place from its surroundings and contributes 
to the area’s poor pedestrian and cycle access. 
4.224. Willesden Junction is on the northern boundary 
of Old Oak. To the north is Harlesden district town 
centre, a well-established existing local area, and 
immediately to the south is Old Oak North. It is critical 
that high quality walking and cycling routes are 
provided that connect Old Oak North with Willesden 
Junction and Harlesden so that employees and visitors 
can access industrial uses.
4.225. In the future, there will be an increasing number 
of people making use of this station. Therefore, its role 
as an important transport interchange will continue and 
opportunities should be taken to optimise development 
across this place where it proves feasible.4.226. The public transport access already available at 
Willesden Junction provides the opportunity for new 
high density development and employment uses on 
land in and around the station. OPDC will work with 
landowners and stakeholders to facilitate delivery of 
homes, town centre uses and employment space, 
including over- and adjacent-station development 
where deliverable. 
4.227. In addition to supporting new residential uses, 
the delivery of new town centre uses focused around 
Willesden Junction station will ensure it can positively 
integrate into its surroundings and help create a 
new place. Town centre uses should be delivered to 
complement other established and planned centres, 
particularly Harlesden district town centre (see Policy 
TCC1). Meanwhile uses can also play an important role 
in helping to activate the area in the early years. 
4.228. Willesden Junction needs to be supported by a 
high quality movement network that facilitates access 
across it and to the surrounding areas north and south. 
Improving the southern walking route to Old Oak 
North is of particular importance and will need to be 
supported by wayfinding elements and public realm 
improvements. If feasible, the delivery of step-free 
access would be supported. Step free access from 
all station entrances to platforms should ensure any 
routes to, from or through the station are accessible to 
all. Intermodal transport facilities should be located in a 
high quality interchange area close to station entrances 
to enhance the sense of arrival. 
4.229. Delivery of a high quality east-west unpaid 
pedestrian and cycle route through or adjacent to 
the station would provide permeability and connect 
Harlesden Town Centre with the station. The link 
should be direct, step free, safe, open 24 hours and 
well integrated into the wider public realm. 
4.230. There will be a need to enhance Station 
Approach to provide a high quality integrated ii) encouraging the retention and reuse 
of heritage assets for meanwhile and 
employment use where appropriate and 
feasible.
h) ensuring local character is informed by the area’s 
railway heritage.
Building heights
i) Contributing to a variety of building heights that 
respond to public transport access and sensitive 
locations by:
i) supporting the delivery of tall buildings 
in Willesden Junction in accordance with 
Policies SP9 and D4; 
ii) delivering increased heights and massing 
adjacent to railway lines to mitigate impacts 
on the public realm and residential amenity; 
and
iii) appropriately responding to existing 
residential areas to the north.
Infrastructure
j) Supporting local and regional connectivity by 
ensuring the timely delivery of upgrades to 
Willesden Junction station:
i) to address issues with current rail capacity; 
ii) to support anticipated future growth;
iii) to deliver new and improved station 
entrances;
iv) to integrate the station seamlessly with the 
wider movement network; and
v) to support and enable the delivery of 
development on or around the station, where 
feasible.
k) Supporting the delivery of an enhanced 
intermodal interchange that:
i) can successfully manage the demands of 
competing transport modes and interchange 
requirements for walking, cycling, buses, rail, 
taxis, private vehicles and the impact of future 
modes; andii) is phased to deliver early enhancements to 
the current interchange facilities along Station 
Approach;
l) supporting and safeguarding for the potential 
delivery of new platforms on the West Coast Main 
Line.P11116
P11
station design should seek to improve the passenger 
experience, facilities, wayfinding and support the 
delivery of public realm within and surrounding the 
station. There is an opportunity to ensure that any 
future upgrades safeguard the ability to deliver West 
Coast Main line platforms at Willesden Junction to 
enhance accessibility and connectivity.
4.234. Opportunities to unlock development potential 
across this area to deliver new residential, commercial 
and town centre uses will be supported in principle. 
However it is recognised that this would need to 
resolve operational railway requirements in agreement 
with TfL, Network Rail and the Department for 
Transport. Where development is feasible, proposals 
should seek to optimise development capacity on and/
or adjacent to the station and tracks and ensure the 
station is seamlessly integrated with the development 
of the wider area to ensure it acts as part of the wider 
townscape through investment in the public realm.connection to Harlesden town centre and so that it 
continues to perform an important role as a point of 
arrival and interchange.
4.231. Historically, Willesden Junction has been 
characterised by railway infrastructure and areas used 
to support the functioning of the railway1. A number of 
railway related heritage assets and positive historic 
elements provide the opportunity to inform the design 
of development and can play a role in strengthening 
local identity. This includes the Willesden Junction 
electricity substation and water tower which could be 
retained, enhanced and lit in the short/medium term. 
Should development be viable on these sites in the 
future, it may not be possible to retain these heritage 
assets and this will be managed in accordance with 
Policy D7 (Heritage). 
4.232. A range of building heights are expected across 
Willesden Junction reflecting the high levels of public 
transport access. It will be important for development 
to deliver heights in a coordinated manner to optimise 
development while mitigating impacts on existing 
residential amenity, in particular with regards to 
overshadowing and privacy.
4.233. Early evidence indicates that the station is in 
need of upgrading to improve current congestion in the 
peak periods and improve the passenger experience2. 
Capacity enhancements will also be needed at the 
station to accommodate future growth, with passenger 
numbers forecast to potentially more than double in 
the morning peak and nearly triple in the evening peak 
by 2041. Station upgrades will need to be agreed 
with stakeholders including TfL and Network Rail 
and should be delivered in a phased manner to best 
facilitate the coordinated redevelopment of the station 
and surrounds whilst ensuring that the station can 
continue to function and serve the local community. 
Upgrades should also not result in reduced access 
to public transport services provided by the station 
for areas to the north of Willesden Junction. The REFERENCES
1. Heritage Strategy and Character Area Study 
2. Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costing Study 117
Figure 4.46: Wormwood Scrubs Place
POLICY P12: Wormwood Scrubs
VISION 
Wormwood Scrubs will continue to be a cherished 
publicly accessible open space, important ecological 
asset and a protected area of Metropolitan Open 
Land. New sensitive connections to the north and 
east alongside carefully considered improvements will 
bring Old Oak and White City closer together making 
the Scrubs more accessible to locals and Londoners.118
SUPPORTING TEXT
4.235. Wormwood Scrubs is a locally cherished open 
space covering almost 68 hectares. It is the largest 
publicly accessible open space in the London Borough 
of Hammersmith and Fulham and provides local people 
and Londoners with the opportunities to have access 
to nature, playing fields and space for recreation and 
relaxation. The Scrubs is held in trust by the London 
Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham and managed P12
Figure 4.47: Wormwood Scrubs looking eastPOLICY
Proposals should plan positively to deliver the place 
vision by contributing and / or delivering where 
appropriate and relevant as follows:
Delivery
a) Agreeing any proposals with the Wormwood 
Scrubs Charitable Trust and London Borough of 
Hammersmith and Fulham;
b) Supporting the long-term management and 
maintenance of Wormwood Scrubs and the Old 
Oak Community Centre by securing appropriate 
resources.
Green infrastructure and open space
c) Conserving and enhancing Wormwood Scrubs 
in its role as a Metropolitan Park for use by all 
Londoners through sensitive enhancements;
d) Protecting Wormwood Scrubs as Metropolitan 
Open Land (MOL) by ensuring proposals accord 
with Policy EU1;
e) Conserving and enhancing the Local Nature 
Reserve and Site of Importance for Nature 
Conservation designations by ensuring proposals 
accord with Policy EU2; and
f) Supporting climate change resilience by 
delivering SuDS which address current surface 
water flooding issues on Wormwood Scrubs and 
which can potentially contribute, if required, to a 
strategic SuDS network.
Public realm and movement 
g) Improving access to Wormwood Scrubs for all 
Londoners by ensuring development contributes 
to new and improved sensitive walking and 
cycling:
i) access points shown in figure 4.46; and
ii) routes, that are designed to accommodate 
current and future levels of usage, across, 
to and from Wormwood Scrubs to the 
surrounding area;h) Providing safe and legible pedestrian and cycle 
connections between Wormwood Scrubs and 
Little Wormwood Scrubs; and
i) Supporting the character of Wormwood Scrubs by 
ensuring the future proposed Wormwood Scrubs 
Street to the north of Wormwood Scrubs relates 
sensitively to the open space.119
will be conserved and enhanced in accordance with 
Policy EU2. Wormwood Scrubs’ character as a publicly 
accessible open space that is more wild than tamed, 
will inform how the regeneration of the area relates 
to Wormwood Scrubs. This range of designations, 
management arrangements and local interest of 
community groups will enable Wormwood Scrubs 
to be conserved and sensitively enhanced so it may 
successfully respond to the impacts resulting from the 
opening of Old Oak Common Station and the wider 
regeneration of Old Oak and Park Royal.
4.240. In 2016, the Wormwood Scrubs Survey 
was carried out to help understand people’s views 
of Wormwood Scrubs and identify any potential 
opportunities for sensitive improvements. The 
outcomes of the survey showed that the most popular 
improvements were cited as a café, toilets, litter 
management, lighting and security and new play 
equipment. Other recommended enhancements to 
Wormwood Scrubs include providing high quality 
access to nature, natural play and trails, and improved 
leisure and sports facilities2. Any essential ancillary 
facilities will only be acceptable if they maintain the 
openness of the Scrubs reflecting its designation as 
Metropolitan Open Land. These facilities could include 
uses such as changing rooms, public toilets and nature 
education facilities.  In delivering and / or contributing 
to high quality playing fields, existing playing fields 
should be retained and / or replaced at an equal or 
higher quality and function in accordance with Policy 
TCC5.  The existing playing fields and areas in the east 
and west of the Scrubs are identified to be susceptible 
to surface water flooding which restricts their access 
and their use. Sensitive interventions within and around 
Wormwood Scrubs will be required to address this 
flooding which, if required, could also fulfil a more 
strategic management role3 (see Policy EU3). 
4.241. The London Borough of Hammersmith and 
Fulham is also developing a management plan for 
Wormwood Scrubs.4.242. Walking and cycling access to Wormwood 
Scrubs is currently restricted by railways in the 
north and vegetation and poor quality walking and 
cycling routes in the east and west. As such, existing 
communities and proposed new communities in the 
OPDC area to the north are not able, and will not 
be able to easily make use of the open space. The 
Wormwood Scrubs Act states that the Scrubs should 
be used as an area for exercise and recreation for the 
inhabitants of the metropolis. The London Plan also 
supports its function as a Metropolitan Park, providing 
for the strategic open space needs of the London 
area. As such, sensitive new walking and cycling 
connections to Wormwood Scrubs to help connect 
communities to the open space and surrounding 
destinations are needed to help meet the requirements 
of the Act and the London Plan4. New and enhanced 
access should be provided from all areas around the 
Scrubs and be of a sufficient capacity to enable people 
to reach these destinations. The following key walking 
and cycling routes and enhancements are proposed:
a)  from Old Oak Common Station and surrounds;
b) a potential route east of Old Oak Common Station 
via a high quality bridge;
c) from Scrubs Lane via new and improved sensitively 
designed points of access; 
d) from Old Oak Common Lane via a widened 
footpath and segregated cycling lane; and
e) from Wormwood Scrubs Street running parallel to 
the northern boundary of the Scrubs.
4.243. However, as development proceeds, there 
may be a need for additional or alternative locations/
alignments for these accesses. The most up to date 
requirements are set out in figure 4.46 and OPDC’s 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP).by the Wormwood Scrubs Charitable Trust who will 
need to agree to any enhancements. OPDC will also 
work with other stakeholders, including the London 
Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham and community, 
including the Friends of Wormwood Scrubs. The 
Ministry of Defence also continue to have rights of use 
for military training purposes.
4.236. To support sensitive enhancements and 
the successful management and maintenance of 
Wormwood Scrubs and the Old Oak Community 
Centre, OPDC will work closely with stakeholders to 
secure long-term revenue funding.
4.237. Wormwood Scrubs’ roles are reflected in its 
designations and statutory protections. The Scrubs is 
designated as Metropolitan Open Land (MOL) within 
the London Plan and as a Metropolitan Park within 
the Mayor of London’s All London Green Grid. In 
accordance with London Plan policies managing MOL 
and Policy EU1, Wormwood Scrubs will continue to be 
protected as MOL and publicly accessible open space 
fulfilling a wide variety of functions.
4.238. The playing fields within the Scrubs provide a 
key function in catering for the sporting, leisure and 
recreational needs of the surrounding metropolitan 
area.
4.239. In addition to these planning designations, the 
Scrubs benefits from protection by the Wormwood 
Scrubs Act (1879), the Commons Act (2006) and 
relevant parts of the Ministry of Housing and Local 
Government Provisional Order Confirmation (Greater 
London Parks and Open Spaces) Act (1967). The 
Wormwood Scrubs Act sets out provisions ensuring 
that the space is made available for all Londoners for 
exercise and recreation. The Scrubs also has a number 
of biodiversity designations reflecting its diverse range 
of habitats that give the Scrubs a sense of wildness. 
These designations include Local Nature Reserves 
and Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation1 and P12
REFERENCES
1. Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation Statement
2. Environmental Standards Study
3. Integrated Water Management Strategy
4. Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy, Environmental 
Standards Study, Scrubs Lane Development Framework Principles 
Update120
Chapter 5
DESIGN121
5.1. Design relates to all components of the built 
environment. Delivering a high quality and well-
designed built environment for both Old Oak and Park 
Royal is fundamental to successful place making. It is 
also critical to long-term sustainability, resilience and 
ensuring integration with surrounding neighbourhoods. 
5.2. High quality design has a number of positive 
interdependencies with sustainability. It can help 
improve people’s physical, mental and emotional health 
and wellbeing. Good design is also a fundamental 
component in supporting and establishing an area’s 
identity and informing people’s perception of a place. 
It can contribute to people’s sense of pride for where 
they live, work and play which in turn contributes to 
supporting thriving communities and a resilient local 
economy.
5.3. This chapter does not deal with the spatial 
locations for the elements of design and should 
be read in conjunction with the place policies and 
strategic policies contained within chapters 3 and 4 and 
specifically with Policy SP6 (Places and Destinations) 
and Policy SP9 (Built Environment). It also has strong 
linkages with the Environment and Utilities Chapter 
(chapter 6) and the Transport Chapter (chapter 7).
5.4. The chapter comprises a series of Principles for 
securing high quality design and design policies.Introduction
Design Policies:
• Principles for securing high quality design
• D1: Public realm 
• D2: Accessible and inclusive design
• D3: Well-designed buildings
• D4: Tall buildings
• D5: Amenity 
• D6: Key views 
• D7: Heritage 
• D8: Play spaceFigure 5.1: Gasholder Park, Kings Cross - precedent for delivering good growth by design and responding to local 
heritage122
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Character Areas Study 
• Environmental Modelling Framework Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Heritage Strategy
• Old Oak Outline Historic Area Assessment
• Precedents Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Views Study POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI3Principles for Securing High Quality Design
5.5 OPDC will support development proposals 
where they have been subject to a high quality and 
comprehensive design process resulting in high 
quality design outcomes. To deliver this the following 
design principles have been developed to help guide 
development:  
1) For all development proposals, they should, where 
relevant and appropriate:
i) commit to using mechanisms to secure 
delivery of design quality, as defined in 
submission documents, where these elements 
are not approved on the grant of planning 
permission; 
ii) make use of the OPDC Place Review Group 
and OPDC Community Review Group; and
iii) engage positively and proactively with OPDC 
and relevant statutory consultees as early as 
possible in the design proces.
2) For major development proposals, they should, 
where relevant and appropriate:
i) demonstrate use of best practice in developing 
project briefs;
ii) clearly demonstrate how different options for 
site development have been considered as 
part of the pre-application process;
iii) undertake proactive engagement with the 
community and potential end users to inform 
design in line with OPDC’s Statement of 
Community Involvement (SCI);
iv) consider committing to providing a Section 106 
monitoring contribution if the original design 
team is not retained for the detailed design 
stage; and
v)  for outline or hybrid applications, include 
binding design codes with the application 
material to inform design within development 
parameters at the reserved matters stage.SUPPORTING TEXT
5.6. Delivering on the principles of Good Growth will 
require a high quality development design process. 
The requirements for achieving high quality design 
are set out in the NPPF, the London Plan, Policy 
SP9 (Built Environment), the Places Chapter and 
the Design Chapter. The principles for securing high 
quality design should be embedded from the beginning 
of the development design process and should be 
proportionate to the size and/or potential impact of the 
proposal.
5.7. The development design process should deliver 
a high quality proposal supported by appropriate 
evidence that has been informed by an iterative 
process with clear development options considered 
with OPDC officers and submitted as part of planning 
applications for determination. OPDC will expect applicants to demonstrate a commitment to high quality 
design and not to include inappropriate substitutions 
which compromise the quality of design. To support 
this approach, mechanisms, such as Section 106 
agreements and conditions will be used to ensure 
that design quality is carried through into the detailed 
design and construction of the development.  
5.8. The OPDC Place Review Group is an 
independent body used by OPDC to advise on the 
production of planning policy and development 
proposals. This group draws on its membership 
of experts from planning, landscape architecture, 
architecture, conservation, engineering and other built 
environment sectors. The OPDC Community Review 
Group is formed of local community representatives. 
The advice provided to OPDC by both these groups is 
valuable to the development design process. Proposals 
will be expected to be reviewed by these groups where 
relevant and appropriate. Further details regarding 
these groups is available on OPDC’s website.
5.9. A critical component of successful proposals is 
ensuring that the design considers the people using 
and impacted by the development. As such, major 
applications will be supported where they demonstrate 
effective engagement with local communities and 
potential end users of the development. Further 
information is set out in OPDC’s SCI. Continued 
learning following the implementation of development 
is also important. 
5.10. Amendments to the design of major applications 
can have a significant impact on the quality of 
the design by virtue of their scale and impact on 
surroundings. A s106 monitoring contribution can 
be offered to provide reassurance that if the original 
architects or landscape architects are not retained for 
the detailed design stage, the OPDC can commission 
design advice to ensure that the original design quality 3) For proposals referable to the Mayor, they should, 
where relevant and appropriate provide digital 
modelling and supporting data in an agreed format 
with OPDC officers during the development of 
design and at submission.123
is maintained in its consideration of detailed design 
proposals. Contributions will need to be agreed on 
a case-by-case basis depending on the site specific 
circumstances. 
5.11. Major outline or hybrid applications should be 
supported by design guidelines secured as part of 
Section 106 agreements and / or planning conditions  
to ensure the delivery of high quality detailed design 
at reserved matter stage(s). Design codes should 
relate specifically to the proposal. Applicants will be 
expected to discuss the scope of their content with the 
case officer early in the development design process 
to ensure a sufficient level of detail is provided. OPDC 
will expect design codes to include a sufficient level 
of detail for ground floors and where development 
addresses the street and wider public realm.
5.12. Proposals referable to the Mayor are defined in 
the glossary. Given the potential significant impact of 
these proposals, these schemes will require substantial 
analysis during their determination. To support this 
process, proposals will be expected to provide 
digital models and any other relevant data to OPDC, 
in formats agreed by OPDC officers, during pre-
application discussions and at submission.Figure 5.2: Tate Modern - precedent for delivering high quality design within a high density area124
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP8, SP9 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1 and EU2 
• Transport Policy T1
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Character Areas Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Precedents Study 
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling StrategyPOLICY D1: Public Realm 
a) Proposals will be required to contribute positively 
to the delivery of Healthy Streets and a high-
quality, inclusive, accessible and coordinated 
multi-functional public realm by:
i) ensuring the design of the public realm is an 
integral part of the scheme’s design;
ii) ensuring a coordinated approach between 
sites to improve existing public realm and 
provide new public realm;
iii) delivering public realm and its component 
elements that respond to and enhance positive 
aspects of existing character;
iv) using coordinated high-quality durable, 
adaptable and sustainable materials, finishes 
and details;
v) supporting the activation of the public realm 
through maximising the use of positive and / or 
active frontages;
vi) supporting the coordinated design, delivery, 
operation and management of infrastructure; 
vii) providing a balanced approach between 
security and design of the public realm that 
delivers appropriate security measures; and
viii) providing and adhering to a clear, coordinated 
and robust public realm and open space 
management and maintenance strategy.
b) Proposals should, where feasible, include 
publicly accessible private realm that will be 
managed in accordance with the Mayor’s Public 
London Charter and be available for unrestricted 
continuous public use and access on a 24 hour 7 
day a week free of charge basis;
c) Proposals for advertisements will be required to:
i) have a positive impact on associated buildings 
and surroundings in terms of their scale, form, 
location and illumination; and
ii) have a neutral or positive contribution to 
amenity and public safety.SUPPORTING TEXT
5.13. The public realm acts as a way of siting 
buildings in their context. It provides access to, and 
a means to enjoy buildings. The public realm has the 
ability to ‘make a place’ and contribute to achieving the 
Mayor’s aspirations to deliver Healthy Streets. It has 
many functions including providing space for recreation 
and social interaction, space for nature, supporting 
movement, climate change mitigation and adaptation 
and utilities provision. The OPDC Public Realm, 
Walking and Cycling Strategy identifies that within 
a high density context, delivering and coordinating 
these elements to create a high quality public realm is 
critical to enable OPDC to achieve its aspirations (as 
set out in Policy SP9) for delivering a high quality built 
environment.
5.14. The long term development of the OPDC area 
requires careful consideration of how the design, 
delivery and management of new and improved 
public realm is coordinated. Policy SP10 sets out this 
approach for all development. Proposals should ensure 
the design of the public realm is considered early in the 
development design process and that consideration 
is given to the integration of the public realm with 
the surrounding built form and that it responds to 
local context and character. Proposals should make 
reference to the OPDC Character Areas Study (2018) 
to help deliver a network of distinctive places and 
neighbourhoods. In light of this, proposals will be required to submit material that clearly sets out how 
they have considered adjacent and connected sites, 
including highways, footpaths, servicing and entrances, 
to demonstrate how the consideration and coordination 
of the design, delivery and management of the public 
realm has been carried out. 
5.15. Component parts of the public realm should be 
integrated with the wider townscape and should be 
delivered to provide an uncluttered environment. Street 
planting should also consider the requirements set 
out in Policy EU2 to contribute to the delivery of high 
standards of environmental sustainability. 
5.16. Developers will need to work collaboratively 
to deliver a coordinated range of materials, finishes 
and details that respond to and enhance local 
character.  Durability will be key within the high 
density environment created in the OPDC area. 
Temporary materials may need to be utilised during the 
construction phase and be coordinated with adjacent 
permanent areas of public realm. Policy EU8 provides 
guidance for using sustainable materials. 
5.17. Proposals should define how they will support 
the activation of the public realm including the location 
of positive and active frontages to support natural 
surveillance and the positioning of seating or other 
elements of street furniture to encourage social 
interaction. These elements should be focused in 
appropriate locations of publicly accessible open 
spaces, town centres, clusters, canalside spaces and 
other accessible locations with good levels of direct 
sunlight (see Policy D5). The provision of positive 
and active frontages is also applicable to temporary 
frontages including hoardings. The provision of well-
designed hoardings will be particularly important for 
longer-term development sites such as those provided 
for transport infrastructure sites.
5.18. To enable the effective management of the 
public realm and minimise disruption to its users, 
proposals should be designed to coordinate and 
support the functioning and access of subsurface 125
transport, utility, green and data infrastructure. 
Proposals should draw from best practice in delivering 
coordinated infrastructure such as the integrated 
approach carried out at Kings Cross. OPDC will expect 
proposals to demonstrate how they are implementing 
appropriate technologies, such as sensors, to help 
coordinate the design, delivery, functioning and 
management of infrastructure in the public realm. See 
Policy EU11 for further guidance on smart technology.
5.19. Integrating security and resilience for 
emergency requirements within the public realm 
is important, specifically in busy areas such town 
centres, around catalyst uses and at rail stations. 
However, these components should also respond to 
the local character and context and not detract from 
the functioning of the public realm. Proposals should 
have regard to the appropriate guidance published by 
the National Counter Terrorism Security Office and the 
Centre for the Protection of National Infrastructure and 
should carry out early engagement with the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime, the local Metropolitan 
Police Crime Prevention Design Advisor, other relevant 
emergency services and Counter Terrorism Security 
advisors.
5.20. Proposals should be supported by clear public 
realm management and maintenance strategies as 
part of their Green Infrastructure and Open Space 
Management Plans (GIOSSMPs) that are proportionate 
to the type of planning application and informed by 
the latest OPDC, GLA and/or TfL public realm design 
guidance. The relevant local authority should be 
consulted on their content at the earliest opportunity. 
These should set out responsibilities and indicative 
costs and funding arrangements for activities such 
as cleaning, landscaping maintenance, repair and 
replacement.
5.21. The development of a new and improved street 
and public realm network will require privately owned 
land to be provided for public access and use. To create a well connected and permeable movement 
network, OPDC requires that suitable access 
arrangements are provided across this land and rights 
of use are secured for the public with required closures 
carefully managed. This will need to be implemented 
in accordance with the Mayor’s Public London Charter. 
Potential reasons for closure could include responding 
to a case of emergency or danger to the public, 
maintenance requirements and servicing. 
5.22. Advertisements can come in a range of formats 
and can include digital, illuminated and large-scale 
shrouds. Both large scale advertisements and a 
proliferation of smaller advertisements could potentially 
have a negative impact on amenity and public 
safety if not managed and designed appropriately 
to address their impacts. As such, OPDC will expect 
advertisements to be well-designed and have a neutral 
and/or positive impact on the public realm.D1
Figure 5.3: New square at Elephant and Castle - precedent for delivering high quality public realm
PLACEHOLDER
126
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP3, SP4, SP8 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policy EU1
• Transport Policies T1, T2, T3, T4, T5 and T6
• Housing Policies (All)
• Employment Policies (All)
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI3
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Precedents Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Social Infrastructure Needs Study UpdatePOLICY D2: Accessible and Inclusive Design
Proposals will be supported where they: 
a) deliver development that is compliant with the 
latest guidance on accessible and inclusive 
design as an integral part of their design;
b) deliver accessible design solutions that meet 
the requirements of all users at all stages of 
their lives and contribute positively to removing 
barriers that currently exist; and
c) demonstrate whether engagement with relevant 
stakeholders has informed proposals.
SUPPORTING TEXT
5.23. Securing inclusive and accessible design is a 
fundamental component of delivering successful place 
making and sustainable communities.
5.24. The redevelopment of Old Oak and Park Royal 
represents an unparalleled opportunity to deliver a 
new part of London that is accessible and inclusive for 
all sections of the community. Policy SP2 recognises 
the importance of this and seeks to deliver inclusive 
Lifetime Neighbourhoods whilst Policy SP9 recognises 
the importance of access and inclusivity in the design 
of the built environment.  5.25. To support this, OPDC will require proposals 
for buildings, open spaces, the public realm and 
infrastructure to adhere to the latest guidance on 
accessible and inclusive design. Proposals should 
demonstrate how this will be delivered as an integral 
part of the overall design to deliver useable and 
comfortable environments for all, at all times of the day. 
5.26. The existing transport infrastructure, level 
changes and poor quality congested environment 
restrict accessibility across the area. In accordance 
with this policy and Policy SP9, development will 
need to demonstrate a clear strategy for removing 
these barriers and addressing level changes, utilising 
creative solutions where appropriate and relevant.5.27. Applicants will be required to work with a 
range of stakeholders to achieve this aspiration and 
demonstrate whether this engagement has informed 
the design of development within applicants’ Design 
and Access Statements. Stakeholders include the 
OPDC Place Review Group, OPDC Community Review 
Group, local access groups and the GLA Strategic 
Access Panel. This engagement will be expected 
throughout the design development process as set out 
in the Principles for Securing High Quality Design.
5.28. OPDC’s sister organisation, the London Legacy 
Development Corporation (LLDC) has published 
Inclusive Design Standards which could be used to 
inform proposals.
Figure 5.4: Peter’s Hill - precedent for delivering accessible and inclusive design as an integral part of the design of 
the public realm
PLACEHOLDER
127
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Housing Policies (All)
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies TCC2
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Character Areas Study
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study 
• Energy, Overheating and Daylight in Tall Buildings Study
• Environmental Modelling Framework Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Heritage Strategy
• Precedents Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Views StudyPOLICY D3: Well-Designed Buildings
a) Proposals for new buildings, alterations and 
extensions will be supported where they:
i) respond positively to the character of the 
existing context and / or positively contribute to 
the delivery of new positive character;
ii) make a positive contribution to the existing 
and future townscape including delivering high 
quality active façade design and maximising 
the delivery of positive frontages with particular 
attention paid to corners, entrances and 
openings;
iii) use high-quality durable, adaptable and 
sustainable materials, finishes and details that 
enhance local character;
iv) deliver well designed internal spaces that are 
suitable for their intended use, are adaptable 
and contribute to a high quality of life for 
building users;
v)  deliver floorspace and elements of their design 
that support the sharing economy; and
vi) provide a balanced approach between 
security and design of development that 
maximises buildings’ resilience and fire 
safety in accordance with the latest Building 
Regulations and London Plan policies and  
delivers appropriate security measures.
b) Proposals will be supported where roofs are: 
i) designed to minimise the provision of, and 
visibility of, plant and building services 
equipment;
ii) optimised in terms of their use for biodiversity, 
renewable energy generation and green open 
space, including play space; and
iii) designed to a high quality when viewed 
from the public realm and upper floors of 
surrounding buildings.
c) Proposals for publicly accessible commercial 
uses, including shopfronts, will be supported 
where they:
i) provide open, positive and active frontages on 
to the public realm that contribute to creating a SUPPORTING TEXT
5.29. The delivery of high quality design that responds 
to and enhances existing and emerging character is 
fundamental to the successful regeneration of Old Oak 
and Park Royal. This will be of particular importance 
where buildings are well used, such as rail stations, 
civic, cultural and other public buildings and OPDC will work positively with stakeholders to ensure that such 
buildings are of an outstanding design quality. 
5.30. A key component to the delivery of well 
designed buildings is the consideration of their 
relationship to their surrounding context. By relating 
well to existing positive elements of the local character 
and context, proposals can enhance positive elements 
of character and help to inform new character areas to 
nurture a sense of place. This will be critical during the 
long term development of the OPDC area. Alongside 
information within OPDC’s Character Areas Study, 
the historic environment will be key in informing this 
process. See Policy D7 and OPDC’s Heritage Strategy 
for further information. 
5.31. The interface between the design of a building 
and public realm needs careful consideration to 
ensure they complement one another and enhance 
the local character and environment (see Policy 
D1). Components of buildings should enhance 
and support townscape and the functions of the 
public realm, including, maximising the delivery of 
positive and active frontages, at the ground and 
lower floors. Other elements of the façade will need 
to be considered, including corners, entrances and 
access points, that are designed and coordinated to 
complement the public realm and adjacent buildings. 
High quality facades should seek to create a sense 
of depth, animation and texture. Amenity will also 
be an important factor in considering how a building 
contributes to the townscape. Policy D5 provides 
relevant guidance. 
5.32. Materials that are durable, adaptable and 
sustainable will play a key role in delivering a network 
of distinctive and resilient places. The form of 
development in the OPDC area will require the use 
of materials that are hard-wearing, weather well and 
are adaptable. This is specifically relevant to schemes 
where temporary materials may need to be utilised 
during the construction phase. For both permanent 
and temporary materials, the use of sustainable rhythm to the street frontage;
ii) respond to the internal design of the 
commercial floorspace;
iii) relate sympathetically to the design and 
materials of the upper parts of the building, 
adjoining buildings and shopfronts and parts of 
existing shopfronts that are being retained; 
iv) do not result in the loss or partial loss of 
existing shopfronts which are of architectural 
interest; and
v) deliver appropriate position, materials and 
robustness of alarm boxes, waste storage, air 
conditioning units, security rollers, shutters and 
cameras and forecourt trading facilities.
d) Proposals should achieve BREEAM Excellent 
rating for non-residential development.128
Figure 5.5: Trafalgar Place, Elephant and Castle
Terrorism Security advisors.
5.37. New high density development will provide an 
extensive area of roof space alongside existing roof 
space. Roof space provides opportunities to deliver 
a range of functions if appropriately designed and 
maintained. It offers the potential to help OPDC meet 
its environmental standards by providing open space, 
access to biodiversity, play space, space for renewable 
energy generation and visual amenity from both the 
street and adjacent buildings. To support these diverse 
roles, building services and plants should be minimised 
where feasible and appropriately screened and 
integrated within the design of the roof space.
5.38. Publicly accessible commercial uses, including 
shopfronts have an important role in place making 
as they are the most significant interface between 
buildings and the public realm. New commercial 
ground floor A-class floorspace that is accessible to 
the public should demonstrate how the design of the 
shopfront has an active frontage and is accessible, 
relates to the internal design of floorspace, public realm 
and architecture of the building and adjacent buildings. 
Solid and perforated roller shutters can have a negative 
impact on the public realm. Where roller shutters are 
considered necessary, internal perforated shutters with 
high amounts of visibility should be located within the 
shop unit.
5.39. To conserve and enhance local character, 
OPDC will seek to retain existing shop fronts it 
considers to be of architectural interest. Design should 
also carefully consider the location, materials and 
robustness of alarm boxes, canopy boxes and security 
cameras to avoid undermining the appearance of new 
developments. 
5.40. Ensuring development is environmentally 
sustainable is critical to delivering the Local Plan 
spatial vision. To deliver and demonstrate this, non-
residential development, both stand-alone and as part 
of mixed use development, will be expected to deliver 
the Building Research Establishment Environmental coordinated materials will be critical (see Policy EU8). 
5.33. For the internal design of buildings, spaces will 
need to be well designed and submission material 
should include detailed information setting out how 
they are suitable for their intended use including 
reference to the latest guidance and / or standards. 
5.34. To further support the efficient use of space, 
proposals should demonstrate how they are supporting 
the sharing economy. The sharing economy enables 
the efficient use of space and resources while 
contributing to facilitating social interaction. Further 
information can be found in OPDC’s Circular and 
Sharing Economy Study. This may include providing 
shared facilities such as laundries and providing 
access to ‘occasional use’ assets such as tools and 
communal kitchens. 
5.35. Integrating security and resilience for 
emergency service requirements within developments 
is critically important, specifically within tall buildings 
and in busy areas such town centres, around catalyst 
uses and stations. Approval may be required under 
the Building Regulations to make sure that existing 
and proposed development is constructed or adapted 
appropriately. The London Plan also provides guidance 
to deliver the highest standards of fire safety including 
requirements for major development proposals.  
Building Regulations are separate from planning 
guidance. Approval under Building Regulations does 
not mean that planning permission has been given, nor 
does a planning permission imply approval under the 
Building Regulations.
5.36. Components required for security should 
respond to the local character and context. Proposals 
should have regard to the appropriate guidance 
published by the National Counter Terrorism Security 
Office and Centre for the Protection of National 
Infrastructure and carry out early engagement with 
the Mayor’s Office for Policing and Crime, the local 
Metropolitan Police Crime Prevention Design advisor, 
other relevant emergency services and Counter D3
Assessment Method (BREEAM) Excellent rating. 
BREEAM is the most widely recognised UK industry 
standard for assessing environmental standards 
in non-residential buildings. As an independent 
assessment process it provides an objective way to 
assess the quality of development.  The assessment 
rates buildings from unclassified to outstanding. 10% 
of new non-domestic buildings are achieving Excellent. 
Where environmental considerations are designed into 
a development from the start they are achieving this at 
very little additional cost. OPDC therefore will require 
all new non-domestic buildings to achieve a minimum 
of Excellent. Residential development will be expected 
to accord with the relevant latest London and national 
guidance.129
Figure 5.6: Aldgate Place, Whitechapel 
(credit: Allies and Morrison)
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies, SP2, SP3 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU, EU2, EU4, EU5  
     and EU9
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC3
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Character Areas Study
• Environmental Modelling Framework Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Heritage Strategy 
• Precedents Study
• Tall Buildings Statement Update
• Views StudyPOLICY D4:  Tall Buildings
provides guidance for the delivery of tall buildings that 
will be used in determining applications. Policy SP9 
and the Places Chapter set out the spatial approach for 
tall building locations across the OPDC area.
5.42. Tall buildings have the potential to positively 
shape the skyline of the local area and west London. 
However, if tall buildings are not adequately designed 
they can negatively impact on the functions of adjacent 
buildings, public realm, spaces and heritage assets. 
Considering the design, elegance, architectural 
treatment and materials of a tall building, how the 
lower floors relate to the public realm and relationship 
to other existing and planned buildings, will all be of 
particular importance when considering the effect of a 
tall building on the skyline and surrounding areas. 
5.43. To ensure proposals for tall buildings have a 
positive impact, OPDC will expect the architectural 
design to be of the highest quality. Proposals should 
clearly demonstrate through appropriate townscape 
analysis, including verified views, how they positively 
contribute to an elegant skyline. 
5.44. Tall buildings should deliver significant benefits 
for both the surrounding built environment and existing 
and future communities. Benefits could include 
provision of publicly accessible open space, social 
infrastructure and affordable workspace. Any proposed 
benefits should be clearly set out as part of an 
applicant’s Planning Statement. Due to the prominence 
of tall buildings and interest of existing communities, 
OPDC will expect applicants to demonstrate 
proactive engagement with the community and other 
stakeholders on issues including the location, height, 
scale, massing and design of tall buildings to enable 
the design of proposals to respond to comments.
5.45. Managing potential harmful impacts of 
proposals is a critical component in determining the 
appropriateness of a tall building. Proposals should 
accord with Policy D5 and relevant London Plan 
policies in protecting amenity and be supported by 
information clearly demonstrating how they do not SUPPORTING TEXT
5.41. Tall buildings within the OPDC area are defined 
as those above 15 storeys or 48 metres above ground 
level. High quality tall buildings at appropriate locations 
shown in figure 3.15 will be a component element 
of the built character and environment of the OPDC 
area and will be supported where they accord with the 
relevant development plan policies. The London Plan Proposals for tall buildings will be supported as an 
appropriate form of development in principle where 
they: 
a) accord with latest relevant national guidance, 
London Plan policies, Policy SP9 and relevant 
policies within the Places Chapter;
b) deliver significant benefits for the surrounding area 
and communities including promoting legibility to 
destinations; 
c) demonstrate whether proactive engagement with 
the community and other relevant stakeholders, 
including the Greater London Authority and 
Historic England has informed the design of 
proposals; and
d)  accord with relevant guidance for RAF Northolt 
safeguarding zones.adversely impact on their surroundings. Specific 
consideration should be given to the impacts on the 
amenity of existing residential neighbourhoods and 
publicly accessible and private open spaces.
5.46. Old Oak and Park Royal is located within the 
safeguarding zone surrounding RAF Northolt and 
consultation should be carried out with the Defence 
Infrastructure Organisation on any buildings which 
exceed the height threshold of 91.4m above ground 
level.130
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP3 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU2, EU4, EU5  
     and EU9EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Air Quality Study 
• Energy, Overheating and Daylight in Tall Buildings Study
• Environmental Modelling Framework Study
• Environmental Standards StudyPOLICY D5: Amenity 
5.50. There are a number of existing employment, 
town centre and residential uses within and around 
the OPDC area and it is important that the amenity 
and continuing effective function of these uses is 
appropriately safeguarded. To ensure this, OPDC 
will employ the Agent of Change principle. The onus 
will be on the applicant (as the Agent of Change) to 
demonstrate that existing uses can continue to function 
and/or that their amenity is not unacceptably harmed. 
5.51. Privacy levels can impact on the usability of a 
space. For residential uses, careful consideration will 
need to be given to the design and location of habitable 
rooms, including the location and design of bedrooms 
to mitigate light pollution.  
5.52. Apartments will comprise the majority of 
housing in the OPDC area. Private open space will 
mainly be provided as balconies alongside terraces 
and roof gardens. These private open spaces need 
to be positioned where they are comfortable to use 
and of sufficient size to enable them to be used as 
outside living space. Private and communal open 
spaces should preferably have a southerly aspect to 
benefit from direct sunlight during the day. To support 
their usage, where possible, they should be positioned 
away from, or designed to mitigate, sources of noise 
and poor air quality that would make them unpleasant 
to use. Facilities to support food growing, should be 
incorporated into balcony, terrace and roof design and 
loading capacity.
5.53. Enclosing balconies as glazed, ventilated 
winter gardens should be explored at higher storeys, 
in locations exposed to Noise Exposure Category C 
or D or areas of high wind. Winter gardens should be 
thermally separated from the interior with drainage 
integrated with the floor. SUPPORTING TEXT
5.47. New development will need to deliver a 
high standard of amenity during the construction 
and operation of development in terms of privacy, 
overshadowing, air quality, noise and light pollution, 
daylight/sunlight, wind and microclimate for future 
building users and neighbours. This should be 
demonstrated within a Daylight, Sunlight and 
Microclimate Assessment, supporting applications 
where the proposed development has the potential 
to affect the amenity of sensitive neighbouring uses, 
which could include uses such as housing, publicly 
accessible open spaces and social infrastructure such 
as schools.
5.48. OPDC’s Environmental Modelling Framework 
Study and OPDC’s Environmental Standards Study 
show that to deliver a high standard of amenity within 
a high density environment, specific approaches are 
required that complement recognised methodologies. 
OPDC has developed the OPDC Environmental 
Modelling Framework shown in table 5.1, to identify 
which methodologies for measuring appropriate levels 
of amenity are most effective for a high density area. 
These methodologies may evolve over time and it will 
be important to discuss and agree with OPDC officers 
which methodology is most appropriate to use. 
5.49. Proposals should seek to achieve the 
benchmarks in table 5.1, however OPDC recognises 
that there may be instances where a degree of 
flexibility will be required where development will 
deliver other substantial benefits for the wider area. Proposals will be required to deliver an appropriate 
standard of amenity by: 
a) achieving the benchmarks for amenity set out in 
table 5.1 or alternatives agreed with OPDC; 
b) implementing the Agent of Change principle so 
that:
i) new development does not materially affect 
the ongoing functioning of existing employment 
uses and/or town centre uses; and
ii) new development does not cause 
unacceptable harm to the amenity of existing 
uses;
c)  maximising the quality and availability of daylight 
and direct sunlight within buildings and to the 
public realm;
d) delivering appropriate levels of privacy; 
e) ensuring bedrooms are located away from and / or 
designed to mitigate light pollution;
f) ensuring proposals that include residential private 
and / or communal open space:
i) receives direct sunlight for a reasonable period 
of the day;
ii) supports integrated solutions for food growing; 
and
iii) are located away from and/or designed to 
mitigate air, light and noise pollution.
g) minimising the effects of the urban heat island 
effect including by mitigating overheating of 
buildings and public realm where impacts are 
identified by utilising appropriate mitigation 
measures, and
h) minimising excessive wind speeds generated by 
development by mitigating negative impacts on 
buildings and the public realm where identified 
including through the use of green infrastructure.131
Objective Masterplanning Scale Building Scale Justification
Internal Daylight Metric: 
Vertical Sky Component (VSC) 
Benchmark: 
Building Research Establishment 
(BRE) 209 (2011)
Min. 15% VSC at the centre of 
the lowest window where daylight 
is required.
Method: 
BRE 209 (2011) methodology.Metric: 
Vertical Sky Component (VSC) and 
Average Daylight Factor (ADF) 
Benchmark: 
BRE 209 (2011) VSC: Min. 15% at the 
centre of the lowest window where 
daylight is required. ADF: 1% for 
bedrooms, 1.5% for living rooms, 2% for 
kitchens.
Method: 
BRE 209 (2011) methodology supported 
by detailed calculations with radiance-
based engine.• OPDC’s Environmental Modelling Framework Study recommends the use of the Useful Daylight Illuminance 
(UDI) metric and WELL Building Standards as a benchmark to measure internal daylight for proposals at both 
the masterplanning and building scales.  
• At the masterplanning scale, this approach relies on assumptions to be made for each proposal on a 
case-by-case basis. However, in light of the level of detail provided for outline planning applications at the 
masterplanning scale, these assumptions may not be reflected in the related detailed planning applications 
limiting their use. Therefore, OPDC considers that the use of the recognised BRE 209 methodology, measuring 
the VSC of proposals, is more appropriate for the level of detail provided for masterplan scale applications. 
• At the building scale, UDI relies on the use of detailed localised climatic modelling. This considers the annual 
variation in exterior illumination generated by the sun’s position and cloud cover. However, in considering 
this approach, relevant modelling information is currently not available for the OPDC area. As such, OPDC 
considers that the use of the recognised BRE 209 methodology, measuring the VSC and ADF of proposals, is 
more appropriate given current availability of information. Should detailed data be made available, OPDC will 
work with applicants to determine the approach to use.
• For both scales, OPDC welcomes the use of emerging best practice methodologies to measure internal 
daylight. This should be discussed and agreed with OPDC.
Internal Sunlight Metric: 
Annual Probable Sunlight Hours (APSH) 
Benchmark: 
Building Research Establishment (BRE) 209 (2011) min. 5% APSH between 
equinoxes and 25% annually 
Method: 
APSH on solar collecting façades with radiance-based model.• In addition to daylight, direct sunlight can contribute to making an indoor space pleasant and enjoyable. 
Sunlight also provides direct solar gains which can passively heat a space during the winter, but could also 
contribute to overheating in summer. The requirements of the BRE Guidelines are based on Annual Probable 
Sunlight Hours (APSH) and set a minimum of 25% APSH over the entire year and 5% APSH during winter 
months. The OPDC Environmental Modelling Framework Study identifies that using radiance based modelling 
is appropriate.
Outdoor Sunlight 
on Public RealmMetric: 
Sunlight hours in external space 
Benchmark: 
BRE 209 (2011) 2 hour sunlight on 21st March over half the area and 4 hour in 
dedicated play space. Also consider seasonal sunlight throughout the year in 
combination with air temperatures. 
Method: 
Radiance-based model. Use UMI’s Outdoor Comfort Module to perform 
seasonal analysis of sunlight hours and temperatures when available.• Whilst much of peoples’ time is spent indoors, it is vital to provide a welcoming outdoor environment which 
encourages physical activity, social interaction and community cohesion. Sunlight in the public realm plays 
a major role in encouraging the above activities because it can draw people outdoors to interact with others, 
nature and the built environment. This is an important element to consider when planning a high density 
development and to best ensure the effective use of the planned public realm. To deliver this, proposals should 
consider the cumulative design of a group of buildings to best deliver good levels of daylight and sunlight 
throughout the year, including during the winter months. 
• OPDC’s Environmental Modelling Framework Study identifies that the standard metric used to assess outdoor 
sunlight provision is direct sunlight hours falling on a space. The BRE Guide recommends that outdoor spaces 
should receive at least 2 hours of sunlight over half the space on 21st March. Based on a review of best 
practice, the OPDC Environmental Modelling Framework Study identifies that for areas of dedicated play 
space, at least 4 hours of sunlight on 21st March should be achieved.
Urban Wind Metric: 
Wind speeds and associated 
frequencies 
Benchmark: 
Follow BRE 380 best practice 
guidance. 
Method: 
Wind rose-based assessment Metric: 
Wind speeds and associated frequencies 
Benchmark: 
Lawson Wind Comfort Criteria and 
consideration of dispersion of pollution 
and urban heat island effect 
Method: 
Wind tunnel testing as a priority. If 
it is agreed that this is not required, 
developers should use of Computational 
Fluid Dynamics.• High density development and tall buildings can significantly impact wind speeds and characteristics, natural 
ventilation, temperature, pollution levels, local comfort and health and wellbeing. This can in turn influence the 
use of publicly accessible open spaces. Creating a comfortable environment is an important component of 
successful place making. Proposals referable to the Mayor of London (defined in the Mayor of London Order 
2008) are therefore required to undertake this modelling. 
• The OPDC Environmental Modelling Framework Study identifies that the common approach to modelling of 
urban wind at the masterplanning scale currently utilises wind roses alongside qualitative considerations based 
on best practice principles, such as BRE 380 Guide. This approach is recognised to currently be appropriate 
subject to future parametric modelling being made available. 
• The study also identifies that the standard modelling of urban wind at a building scale is carried out using 
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) or wind tunnel testing which tend to focus on pedestrian comfort using 
the Lawson Comfort Criteria. This is considered to be appropriate for Old Oak and Park Royal; however, 
consideration will also need to be given to modelling impacts of the urban heat island effect. D5
Table 5.1: OPDC Environmental Modelling Framework132
Energy Efficiency 
- Control of Solar 
GainsMetric: 
Summer façade irradiation 
Benchmark: 
None. Compare with Part 
L reference case to identify 
potential issues 
Method: 
Radiance-based model Metric: 
Internal temperatures (naturally ventilated) 
or cooling energy use (mechanically 
cooled) 
Benchmark: 
Pass two of Chartered Institution of 
Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) 
TM52 overheating criteria or minimise 
cooling energy use. 
Method: 
Dynamic thermal simulation at building 
scale.• While ensuring adequate daylight and solar access is essential in providing a healthy built environment, this 
must be considered alongside energy efficiency and thermal comfort.
• Increased summer solar gains can result in overheating in naturally ventilated buildings and increased energy 
use in mechanically cooled buildings.
• At a masterplanning scale, summer irradiance levels is identified by the OPDC Environmental Modelling 
Framework Study as an appropriate metric that should be compared to Building Regulations Part L to identify 
issues.
• At a building scale, the Study identifies that internal temperatures or cooling energy use are appropriate 
metrics. Detailed dynamic thermal analysis is recommended to assess the risk of summer overheating from 
solar gains. In accordance with the study, the industry best practice of using CIBSE TM52 should be utilised.
Energy Use - 
Space HeatingMetric: 
Space heating energy use 
Benchmark: 
Minimise energy use beyond 
compliance with Part L 
Method: 
UMI ‘shoeboxer’ or degree-
day approach for comparative 
assessmentMetric: 
Space heating energy use 
Benchmark: 
Minimise energy use beyond compliance 
with Part L 
Method: 
Thermal simulations at building scale.• On the one hand, a consequence of designing for improved daylighting is the potential increase in building 
heat losses through the fabric due to higher glazing ratios and greater envelope-to-space ratio. This can result 
in increased space heating energy use. On the other hand, maximising access to sunlight will likely increase 
winter solar gains and reduce space heating energy use.
• The OPDC Environmental Modelling Framework Study identifies that Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
(MIT) have developed Urban Modelling Interface software using the industry standard Energy Plus simulation 
which enables the efficient and effective modelling of space heating at a masterplan scale. The study 
recommends the use of the approach for assessment of schemes.
• At a building scale, detailed space heating use compared to Building Regulations Part L is recommended by 
the study to be undertaken with detailed thermal simulations carried out.Table 5.1 (continued)D5
Objective Masterplanning Scale Building Scale Justification
5.54. High density development can give rise to 
the urban heat island effect. As Building Regulations 
become more stringent, buildings are increasingly 
suffering from overheating. The reasons for this are 
complex and are set out in the OPDC Environmental 
Standards Study but multi-storey high density 
development is particularly susceptible to overheating. 
In light of this, proposals referable to the Mayor of 
London (defined in the Mayor of London Order 2008) 
should undertake urban heat island and wind modelling 
to identify and assess the cumulative impact of existing 
and committed development and to mitigate impacts 
where necessary.
5.55. The use of green infrastructure including but 
not limited to trees, open space, embankments, 
water features, the Grand Union Canal, fountains 
and streams and open water bodies can significantly 
reduce the urban heat island effect. However, these elements need to be carefully designed in order to 
balance the need for winter solar gain and sufficient 
daylight, with protection against overheating.  Dynamic 
models should be used and the effectiveness of these 
interventions assessed as part of a post occupancy 
survey to evaluate building performance. Green 
infrastructure can also be an effective way to screen 
and protect sites against turbulence, wind tunnelling 
and noise caused by high density development.133
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Heritage Strategy 
• Views StudyPOLICY D6: Key Views
Proposals that impact on a key view will be supported 
where they contribute positively to the character and 
composition of identified key views relevant to the 
proposal.
SUPPORTING TEXT
5.56. Development within the Old Oak and Park Royal 
area will be visible from the surrounding areas. This 
new development can help to positively shape key 
views from within and outside of the area. Development 
can also provide visual interest and contribute to 
informing the local character and identity of the area. 
5.57. The level of development proposed at Old Oak 
and parts of Park Royal will be visible from certain 
locations across London and can help to mark its 
location as a major new centre. OPDC will seek to 
ensure that the new skyline of Old Oak and Park 
Royal makes a positive contribution to the character 
and identity of the wider area through its composition 
and quality in key views. To deliver this, proposals 
within the OPDC area will need to carefully coordinate 
their layout and massing to ensure that key views 
experienced will contribute to creating a successful and 
distinctive place. 
5.58. The OPDC Views Study identifies the following 
types of key view:
a) Panoramas – views taken from across London at 
elevated publicly accessible locations;
b)  Kinetic views – views taken from around that show Old Oak and Park Royal along elevated movement 
routes;
c) Open space views - views taken from nearby 
publicly accessible open spaces;
d) Linear views – views taken along streets, paths and 
the Grand Union Canal within and round Old Oak 
and Park Royal; and
e)  Heritage views – views relating to the setting of 
heritage assets.
5.59. Proposals that impact on the key views shown 
in figure 5.8 should define, assess and justify the 
impact on the relevant view and clearly demonstrate 
how it delivers a positive contribution to the relevant 
key views. Some views may require a greater level of 
assessment, while some views may require less, such 
as kinetic views, where it would be difficult to identify 
a specific point to assess the view from. Information for assessing impacts on views should be contained 
within a Townscape/Visual Impact Assessment. Other 
views relevant to each proposal will also need to be 
identified by the applicant in discussion with OPDC, 
and assessed and justified as required. Given heritage 
assets within and around the area, this process will 
also likely require input from Historic England.
5.60. Assessments should include verified daytime, 
evening and night-time views that consider tree 
coverage and cumulative impacts from other permitted 
development, proposals and relevant OPDC planning 
guidance. This information should be provided in static 
images and as digital modelling data in a format to be 
agreed with OPDC. Specific consideration will be given 
to how the silhouette, bulk, massing and elevational 
treatment of development impacts on key views.
Figure 5.7: A view of central London from Wormwood Scrubs
134
Northwick Park 
Hyde ParkHarrow on the Hill 
Richmond Park Herne HillGladstone Park Alexandra Palace
Central Line
District Line
Circle LineA40Grand Union CanalMetropolitan LineOverground
North Circular
Figure 5.8: Key Views
Panoramic views
Kinetic views
Open space views
Linear views
Heritage views
135Figure 5.8: Key Views
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Character Areas Study 
• Heritage Strategy
• Old Oak Outline Historic Area Assessmentimproving access to heritage assets while ensuring that 
any harm to significance is minimised and outweighed 
by the public benefit of securing access. 
5.65. Heritage Impact Assessments supporting all 
proposals affecting heritage assets should include a 
description of the significance of any heritage assets 
and their settings affected to ensure consistency with 
the NPPF, the London Plan and relevant Historic 
England guidance. An analysis of the resultant impact 
of the development on the heritage asset and its 
setting should also be provided. The level of detail of 
this material should be proportionate to the significance 
of the asset affected. Heritage assets will play a key 
role in shaping local character across the OPDC area. 
Proposals will be required to demonstrate how they 
are promoting the significance of assets including 
improving public access and celebrating assets within 
the design of a development or use of an asset where 
appropriate. The OPDC heritage themes also play an 
important role in helping to enhance local identity. As 
such, Heritage Impact Assessments should also set out 
how proposals exhibit an understanding of the relevant 
OPDC heritage themes and any relationships between 
them. 
5.66. To ensure the significance of conservation 
areas are not negatively impacted by the approved 
demolition of buildings within their area, applications 
for replacement buildings should be secured prior to 
commencement of demolition. Exceptions to this may 
be made where the building to be demolished clearly 
detracts from the conservation area and removal 
will result in an enhancement to the areas character 
or appearance. Where possible, proposals should 
demonstrate intent of implementation.
5.67. Although non-designated heritage assets, as set 
out in table 5.2, do not benefit from statutory protection, 
proposals that seek to conserve and enhance these 
assets will be supported. The sequential approach POLICY  D7: Heritage
a) Proposals should conserve and enhance the 
historic environment;
b) OPDC will give great weight to the conservation 
and enhancement of the significance of 
designated heritage assets, including their 
settings. Proposals harming the significance of a 
designated heritage asset will require clear and 
convincing justification having regard to their 
heritage interest, reasonable alternatives to avoid 
or mitigate harm and delivery of public benefits;
c) Proposals should: 
i) reflect in their design a positive response to 
non-designated heritage assets; and 
ii) avoid an unjustified adverse effect on the 
significance of non-designated heritage assets;
d) Proposals to demolish a building in a Conservation 
Area will only be permitted after approval of and 
commitment to the construction of a replacement 
building; and
e) Proposals that affect or have the potential to affect 
archaeological heritage assets will be supported, 
where they demonstrate the appropriate level of 
investigation and recording.SUPPORTING TEXT
5.61. Old Oak and Park Royal has a rich social, 
cultural and built heritage that reflects its change from 
a rural landscape to an industrial powerhouse and 
transport hub. Heritage assets refer to designated and 
non-designated assets. The area’s historic context 
also plays an important role in helping to inform 
place making and generating social, economic and 
environmental benefits. The scale of development 
planned across the OPDC area will mean that new 
development will be visible from surrounding areas. 
New development should recognise the significance 
and value of heritage assets and promote, conserve 
and enhance these. In addition to Policy D7,  guidance 
set out within the National Planning Policy Framework 
(NPPF), the London Plan and Policy SP9 will be 
utilised to consider proposals’ impacts on heritage 
assets. OPDC will also make use of the Greater 
London Historic Environment Record and OPDC 
heritage designations and guidance for conservation 
areas, Local Character Areas, the Local List and 
Buildings of Local Heritage Interest.
5.62. OPDC’s Heritage Strategy (2018) provides a 
detailed analysis of Old Oak and Park Royal’s heritage. 
The recommendations set out in the strategy are 
outlined in table 5.2.
5.63. Designated heritage assets within the OPDC 
area consist of Statutory Listed Buildings and 
conservation areas. These benefit from protection 
in the NPPF and legislation, which should be 
implemented alongside Policy D7(b). Policy D7(b)  
also applies to non-designated heritage assets of 
archaeological interest that are demonstrably of 
equivalent significance to scheduled monuments.
5.64. Ensuring development contributes to promoting 
and enhancing the significance of heritage assets and 
their settings can include the viable reuse of assets and 
ensuring the relevant lost asset informs the character 
of new development. It can also include the principle of 136
D7
Designated Heritage Assets Non-Designated Heritage 
AssetsOPDC Heritage Themes
These include statutory listed 
buildings and structures, 
Registered Parks and Gardens 
and conservation areas. 
OPDC will maintain a list of 
designated heritage assets 
and identify these on the 
Policies Map.These include Local 
Character Areas, Locally 
Listed Buildings and 
Buildings of Local Heritage 
Interest.
OPDC will maintain a list 
of non-designated heritage 
assets and identify these on 
the Policies Map.These comprise five key heritage themes which relate to the 
majority of the heritage assets within both Old Oak and Park 
Royal:
 »Grand Union Canal heritage
 »Rail heritage
 »Industrial heritage
 »Historic residential enclaves
 »Historic scrubland and open spaces (including cemeteries)
These themes provide opportunities for proposals to conserve 
and enhance the historic environment where heritage assets 
are not present. Table 5.2: OPDC Heritage Strategy (2018) Recommendations set out in the policy, and detailed further in table 
5.3, should be undertaken to manage the impact of 
proposals on an asset’s significance.
5.68. Although Old Oak and Park Royal does not 
have any known archaeological designations, to ensure 
the historic environment is conserved and enhanced, 
proposals which are identified to have or have the 
potential to include heritage assets with archaeological 
interest should be supported by an appropriate desk-
based assessment proportionate to the significance 
of the archaeological asset. Where the significance is 
considered to be of a sufficient status, a field evaluation 
should be carried out. Should Archaeological Priority 
Areas or Sites of Archaeological Importance be 
identified, an Archaeology Impact Statement will be 
required to be submitted.
5.69. OPDC is not responsible for the adjacent St. 
Mary’s Conservation Area and Kensal Green Cemetery 
Grade 1 Listed Registered Park and Garden. However, 
they contain a number of heritage assets which are 
identified by Historic England to be at risk. OPDC 
will work with Historic England, London Borough of 
Hammersmith and Fulham and Royal Borough of 
Kensington and Chelsea and other stakeholders to 
remove these from the Heritage at Risk Register. 
Where appropriate, contributions to support the 
conservation and enhancement of heritage assets 
will be secured in accordance with OPDC’s Planning 
Obligations Supplementary Planning Document.
5.70. In addition to built heritage, social and cultural 
heritage should be recognised in new development. 
OPDC’s Heritage Strategy provides an in depth 
analysis to help inform elements such as place and 
street naming.1. Positively respond to non-designated 
assets in their design; orAs a priority, development should seek to respond positively to the 
significance of the asset in its design. This may include elements such 
as massing, building lines, land use, detailing and materials. If this is not 
proposed, development should demonstrate how the significance of the 
asset will not be harmed.
2. Avoid unjustifiable harm to non-designated 
heritage assets; orUnjustifiable harm should be avoided to ensure consistency with the NPPF.
3. Demonstrate the rationale for any 
justifiable harm to non-designated heritage 
assets; orShould justifiable harm to the non-designated heritage asset be identified, 
a clear justification should be provided that sets out how the proposal 
delivers public benefits, including securing its optimum viable use. 
4. For proposed demolition of all or part of 
a non-designated heritage asset, provide 
a justification that all reasonable attempts 
have been made to retain all or part of 
the non-designated heritage assets and 
demonstrating how the asset has been used 
to inform the character of new development.Proposals seeking to demolish part or all of a non-designated heritage 
asset should provide a clear justification for how it has sought to retain all 
or part of the asset and why demolition is required. Where a proposal has 
successfully justified demolition of all or part of a non-designated heritage 
asset, it should demonstrate in its design how it exhibits the significance 
of the asset. This could include the re-use of the demolished asset’s 
materials and/or responding to the asset’s form or details in the design of 
replacement development.Table 5.3: Sequential approach to protecting non-designated heritage assets137
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Framework Modelling Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Precedents StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP8
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policy EU1
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC5POLICY D8: Play Space
Where relevant and appropriate, proposals should:
a) contribute positively to maximising opportunities 
for high quality multifunctional play and informal 
recreation for all ages; and
b) deliver and / or contribute to a range of dedicated 
child play space in accordance with the latest 
OPDC and GLA guidance and ensure:
i) dedicated child play space for 0-5 years is 
publicly accessible and provided within Small 
Open Spaces or Pocket Parks as a priority;
ii) dedicated child play space for 5 years and 
above is provided within larger publicly 
accessible open space as a priority;
iii) all dedicated child play space receives a 
minimum amount of 4 hours of solar exposure 
on 50% of its area supported by appropriate 
levels of shading in the summer months; 
iv) all dedicated child play space is located away 
from areas of wind turbulence and pollution 
hot spots; and
v) all dedicated child play space benefits from 
natural surveillance.SUPPORTING TEXT
5.71. Providing opportunities for play for all ages 
and encouraging activity in everyday lives provides 
life-long benefits for people’s physical, mental and 
emotional health and wellbeing as well as facilitating 
social interaction. Specifically for children, play helps 
in their development to learn about social interaction. 
Proposals should demonstrate the delivery of high 
quality design for stimulating multifunctional play 
spaces and informal recreation. Play space should 
provide access to nature and opportunities for exercise 
for both children and adults. Where appropriate, play 
spaces should be integrated with social infrastructure 
and delivered with associated spaces for parents and 
guardians.
5.72. Proposals should contribute to the delivery of 
the network of dedicated play space and informal play 
space in accordance with the OPDC’s and Mayor’s 
latest guidance. 
5.73. As well as dedicated child play space there is an 
opportunity to deliver informal play space and elements 
of play for all ages across the public realm of Old Oak 
and Park Royal with opportunities to embed this into 
a range of Local Parks, Small Open Spaces, Pocket 
Parks and the street network. 
5.74. Maximising access to a range of dedicated 
child play space will be critical in the high density 
environment of parts of Old Oak and Park Royal. To 
help achieve this, as a priority, play spaces should be 
provided in publicly accessible open spaces. For 0-5 
years play this should be within Local Parks, Small 
Open Spaces and Pocket Parks that provides doorstep 
play and for 5 years and above this should be within 
spaces equivalent to Local Parks or larger as set out 
in the London Plan open space hierarchy. By locating 
play spaces in these locations, it is more likely that 
they will meet the requirements set out in OPDC’s Environmental Modelling Framework Study to deliver 
a high standard of amenity. This study identifies that 
to ensure a high quality environment, dedicated play 
space should receive good levels of solar exposure 
through direct sunlight with a minimum of 4 hours of 
sunlight on the 21st March on 50% of the area. OPDC 
recognises this approach is challenging within a high 
density context, but every effort should be made to 
deliver this requirement. This is based on a review of 
standards across Europe. It also recommends that 
play space is located in sheltered locations away 
from wind and areas of air pollution to support health 
and wellbeing. Dedicated playspace should also be 
protected from areas that are exposed to wind and to 
air and noise pollution hotspots in accordance with 
Policies EU4 and EU5.
5.75. In contributing to the delivery of the range of 
dedicated play spaces, proposals for off-site delivery 
should clearly set out details of the intended provision 
and its delivery. This should include information for the 
location, design and management and maintenance 
arrangements. Where on-site or off-site provision is not 
proposed, contributions will be sought in accordance 
with the latest OPDC guidance. 
5.76. To support use of dedicated play space and 
prevent anti-social behaviour, play space should have 
natural surveillance, including from homes or social 
infrastructure and be located outside at ground level as 
a priority.138
Chapter 6
ENVIRONMENT AND UTILITIES139
6.1. Climate change is a major threat to both 
humans’ and nature’s life on earth. Development and 
growth is often viewed as a key risk to climate change, 
but if well designed, delivered and operated, it can also 
be a key part of the response. 
6.2. The OPDC area is set to undergo rapid 
transformation over the coming decades. The 
new transport super-hub at Old Oak Common and 
other associated infrastructure improvements will 
fundamentally change the area into one of London’s 
most well connected places. In line with the Mayor’s 
aspirations to make London a zero carbon city, it 
will be important that that new development sets 
new standards in low carbon, resource efficient 
development. In addition, development should seek to 
create a thriving natural and physical environment that 
supports high quality living and wellbeing and a healthy 
and biodiverse natural environment. 6.3. In accordance with Policy SP10, development 
on the scale envisaged provides opportunities for 
coordinated and integrated approaches to provision 
of water, energy, waste management and smart 
utilities and physical infrastructure. Delivering secure, 
affordable and low carbon utilities will be the focus for 
an integrated approach. 
6.4. The success of the development will also 
require investment in natural capital. To accompany 
the density of development envisaged, there is a 
need to secure a high quality and robust network of 
parks, green, civic and other open spaces delivered 
as an integrated network.  From an environmental 
perspective, the open space network can help address 
flood risk, the urban heat island effect and other 
impacts related to high density development and 
climate change. The network of open spaces can also 
provide a focus for the community to meet and play, exercise, relax and provide space for biodiversity. 
These spaces will be a vital part of the health, 
educational and civic infrastructure that underpins all 
successful places. 
6.5. This Environment and Utilities Chapter has 
been developed alongside the Design (chapter 5) and 
Transport (chapter 7) Chapters. Design, transport and 
environment share a common objective of creating high 
quality places that will stand the test of time and create 
a place in which human and natural communities can 
thrive.
6.6. This chapter expands on the Spatial Vision and 
Strategic Policies, especially policies SP2, SP3, SP8, 
SP9 and SP10. This chapter does not deal with the 
spatial locations for environmental infrastructure, so 
should be read in conjunction with the Place Policies in 
Chapter 4.Introduction
Environment and Utilities Policies:
• EU1: Open Space
• EU2: Urban Greening and Biodiversity
• EU3: Water
• EU4: Air Quality
• EU5: Noise and Vibration
• EU6: Waste
• EU7: Circular and Sharing Economy
• EU8: Sustainable Materials
• EU9: Minimising Carbon Emissions and 
Overheating
• EU10: Energy Systems
• EU11: Smart Technology
• EU12: Extraction of Materials
• EU13: Land ContaminationFigure 6.1: Hammarby Sjöstad, Sweden140
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Precedents Study
• Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation StatementPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3, SP8 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1, D5 and D8
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU2, EU3 and EU4
• Transport Policies T1, T2 and T3
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC5
• Delivery and Implementation Policies DI1 and DI3POLICY EU1: Open Space
OPDC will secure the delivery of a high quality green 
infrastructure and open space network that enhances 
the overall quality of the environment, as set out in 
Policy SP8 by supporting developments which:  
a) give Metropolitan Open Land (MOL), including 
Wormwood Scrubs the strongest protection. 
Proposals that result in loss or harm (including 
the erosion in the quality) of MOL will only be 
permitted in very special circumstances set out 
in the NPPF, and where at least an equivalent 
quantum, quality, access and function of MOL is 
provided;
b) protect other existing open spaces. Proposals that 
result in loss or erosion in the quality of existing 
open space will only be permitted where at least 
an equivalent quantum, quality, access and 
function of open space is provided;
c) support the delivery of a minimum of 30% of the 
developable area outside of Strategic Industrial 
Location (SIL), as publicly accessible open space, 
including spaces identified in the Places Chapter 
by: 
i) contributing towards and/or delivering 2 new 
local parks that are each at least 2ha in size, in 
the locations identified in the Places Chapter;
ii) contributing towards and/or delivering a range 
of smaller publicly accessible open spaces and 
pocket parks;
iii) contributing towards and/or delivering local 
Green Streets that are fully accessible, 
designed predominantly for high pedestrian 
and cycle flows, have embedded green 
infrastructure, have very restricted access for 
motorised vehicles and form part of a wider 
grid of connected green routes; and
iv) where it is not feasible or desirable for 
individual developments to make on-site 
contributions to achieving 30% publicly 
accessible open space, a financial contribution 
will be sought towards delivering the overall 
publicly accessible open space provision, equivalent to 4.1sqm of open space per 
resident and 1sqm of open space per worker 
generated by the development;
d) ensures all open space (including public, private 
and communal areas) is high quality and provides 
for a range of functions, by including a number of 
the following:
i) incorporating play space provision in 
accordance with Policy D8;
ii) incorporating biodiversity and urban greening 
provision, in accordance with Policy EU2;
iii) providing opportunities for local food growing;
iv) providing recreation and sports space, 
including playing fields in accordance with 
Policy TCC5; 
v) ensuring appropriate standards are met, 
including in respect of air and noise quality and 
micro-climate; 
vi) incorporating climate change mitigation 
measures, including SuDS and urban heat 
island mitigation; and
vii) providing appropriate arrangements for the 
long-term management and maintenance of 
open space.SUPPORTING TEXT
6.7. Provision of open space is an integral 
component of a successful neighbourhood and the 
wider place making agenda. It contributes to social 
cohesion, health and wellbeing as well as the economic 
and environmental strands of sustainable development.
6.8. Adequate provision of open space is particularly 
important in high density development, where demand 
for different types of public space is high.  OPDC is 
seeking to ensure that a sufficient quantity of space is 
provided to meet the needs of the whole community, 
that is of a high quality and has secure long-term 
funding to support on-going management and 
maintenance.
6.9. The priority is to protect Metropolitan Open Land 
(MOL). Its loss or erosion in its quality will be strongly 
resisted except for in very special circumstances, as 
set out in the NPPF. Wormwood Scrubs is designated 
as MOL and as well as being protected, there will 
be opportunities for sensitive enhancements to this 
space, to help it fulfil a role as a metropolitan park. See 
the Wormwood Scrubs Place Policy (P12) for further 
details. 
6.10. Other open space provision contributes to local 
character. OPDC will also resist the loss of this open 
space.  Only where necessary will development in 
other open spaces be allowed and on the condition that 
an equivalent quantum, quality and access is provided 
and that the range of functions (e.g. play space, sports 
provision) provided within the lost open space are 
reprovided to an equal or better quality.
6.11. For new publicly accessible open space 
provision, there are no overall government standards, 
but local authorities are encouraged to develop their 
own standards based on context and need. OPDC has 
produced an Environmental Standards Study, which 
identifies that a minimum of 30% of the developable 
area outside of Strategic Industrial Location (SIL) 141
EU1
should be allocated to provision of high quality publicly 
accessible open space as part of a strategic approach 
to green infrastructure. 
6.12. An important element of the publicly accessible 
open space network is Local Parks. Two Local 
Parks of at least 2ha should be incorporated into the 
development area. One Local Park is proposed in 
Old Oak South near to the Old Oak Common station. 
Another is proposed in Channel Gate adjacent to the 
Grand Union Canal. Further details on these Local 
Parks can be found in the Old Oak South (P1), Grand 
Union Canal (P3) and Channel Gate (P9) place 
policies. These parks would provide much needed on-
site open space, that would act as a focal point for the 
new community, provide important ecological assets 
and will be a major component of a climate resilience 
strategy. In addition to Local Parks, development 
proposals will be expected to demonstrate that sites 
are supported by existing or proposed smaller open 
spaces and contribute to the delivery of other publicly 
accessible open spaces as set out in the Places 
Chapter and any further detail in the IDP. 
6.13. Applicants will also be required to contribute to 
and/or deliver a green grid of streets. These will link 
the network of new and existing open spaces together, 
by providing safe and accessible pedestrian and cycle 
routes between open spaces. These local streets will 
form an integrated network that should be tree lined, 
incorporate urban greening in accordance with Policy 
EU2, to support the delivery of nature corridors and 
vegetated SuDS in accordance with Policy EU3.  They 
will connect the open spaces into the All London Green 
Grid. 
6.14. Where developments are not able to contribute 
to the on-site open space requirements or it is not 
suitable or desirable for them to do so, applicants will 
be required to make a financial contribution equivalent 
to 4.1 sqm per resident and 1 sqm per worker 
generated by the development. These figures have 
been calculated using the projected total population yield and developable area and equate to the amount 
of space allocated to each resident and worker in 
order to deliver the 30% open space target across the 
developable area. 
6.15. The contribution will be acceptable where the 
proposal demonstrates a clear and robust rationale 
for why on-site delivery cannot be achieved or is not 
desirable. This rationale should be provided within 
submission material and for major applications within 
the Green Infrastructure and Open Space Strategy and 
Management Plan (GIOSSMP).
6.16. In addition to publicly accessible open spaces, 
communal open space and private open space for 
residents and employees within new development, 
are integral components of the green infrastructure 
network set out in Policy SP8. OPDC’s Environmental 
Standards Study identifies that communal courtyards 
and terraces should be of a sufficient size to be 
useable and inviting and should be integral to the 
character of the development. Private open space 
will include a mix of balconies, winter gardens, roof 
terraces and gardens. The size of these spaces will 
need to accord with London Plan policy.
6.17. Open space should perform a range of social 
and environmental functions including providing quiet 
spaces, active spaces, play spaces and playing fields 
in accordance with Policies D8 and TCC5, space for 
ecology and biodiversity in accordance with Policy 
EU2, space for water management in accordance 
with Policy EU3 and space to help cool the city and 
help reduce air and noise pollution. Space for food 
growing should also be provided, which can support 
community cohesion and the sharing economy, health 
and wellbeing and minimise carbon emissions through 
the reduction of food miles. 
6.18. Buildings surrounding open spaces need to be 
designed to provide appropriate levels of direct sunlight 
into open spaces. The high densities of development 
are likely to result in elevated levels of use of these spaces. These spaces therefore need to be of a high 
quality, robust and need to receive good levels of solar 
exposure particularly in play spaces, which should 
exceed national standards to benefit the large numbers 
of people using the spaces (see Policies D5 and D8).
6.19. Where open space is poorly managed and 
maintained it can become an eyesore or a crime hot 
spot. Developers should demonstrate appropriate 
long-term management arrangements for open 
spaces. Developers should also encourage community 
management of open spaces, in accordance with 
Policy DI3. The relevant local authority should be 
consulted about all management and maintenance 
arrangements for publicly accessible open space that 
they may adopt in future.142
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Precedents Study 
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation StatementPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP8 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1, D3, D5 and D8
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU3 and EU4
• Transport Policies T1POLICY EU2: Urban Greening and Biodiversity
OPDC will ensure that development in the OPDC 
area secures an overall increase in green cover and 
a net gain in biodiversity by supporting development 
proposals where they:  
a) would not result in a loss of existing biodiversity 
unless either an equivalent type and equal or 
greater amount of biodiversity is provided on-
site, or where this is not feasible, OPDC will 
secure a financial contribution to facilitate off-site 
enhancements in lieu of on-site provision;
b) avoid environmental disturbance to biodiversity 
during and post construction. Where proposals 
demonstrably cannot avoid disturbance, ensure 
that appropriate and necessary mitigation 
measures are utilised; 
c) measurably conserve and enhance Sites of 
Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC) (see 
figure 6.3) and other identified priority habitats or 
species; 
d)  deliver new urban greening and ecological 
improvement by:
i) maximising the provision of green roofs and 
walls; 
ii) wherever possible, delivering planting of 
mature or semi-mature trees along all streets;
iii) integrating planting as part of SuDS systems; 
iv) integrating biodiversity into the built 
environment by provision of nest sites, roosts 
and shelters;
v) ensuring that planting is ecologically 
appropriate and provides benefits for wildlife; 
and 
vi) delivering a range of habitats that are resilient 
to climate change;
e)  demonstrate that major development proposals 
have optimised urban greening in their schemes 
with reference to the Urban Greening Factor and 
Green points system score. Developments should 
seek to achieve the most recent target scores 
within Mayoral policy / guidance or OPDC policy 
guidance; f) accord with and support the delivery of guidance 
in the OPDC area’s most up-to-date Biodiversity 
Action Plan(s); and
g) put in place appropriate arrangements to monitor 
and safeguard the long-term management of new 
and/or enhanced biodiversity and urban greening.
SUPPORTING TEXT
6.20. Green space and biodiversity in the UK has 
decreased dramatically during the last century. 
However, OPDC’s Environmental Standards Study 
shows that urban areas have potential to provide 
new habitat and space for biodiversity, which if well 
designed, can be a refuge for species that are in 
decline. Biodiversity can also increase the functional 
performance and productivity of green infrastructure.
6.21. Biodiversity in urban areas can enhance a 
sense of wellbeing. People’s health is positively 
affected when they come into contact with nature, and 
urban greening can make a significant contribution to 
improvements in local air quality.
6.22. The best developments embed green 
infrastructure in a way that enhances its value and 
enriches its biodiversity. This can be achieved through 
careful design of open space, tree planting and through 
inclusion of biodiverse rich green roofs, walls, bat and bird boxes and other features that provide habitat for 
species.
6.23. Every opportunity should be made to 
incorporate green infrastructure that contributes to 
the overall quantity and quality of biodiversity and 
green space in public, semi-public and private areas 
from the outset. The approach and benefits that the 
development will make to biodiversity should be set out 
by the applicant as part of their GIOSSMP required in 
Policy SP8. 
6.24. Biodiversity is often impacted or lost during 
demolition, enabling works, construction or during 
occupation following redevelopment. Where 
biodiversity or vegetation is lost, OPDC will expect 
developers to replace all losses with an equivalent 
type and quality of vegetation on site, or where this 
is not possible make a financial contribution so that 
compensatory planting can be provided as close to 
the development as possible. Where mature trees or 
shrubs are lost for example, they should be replaced 
with planting of an equal value. Development proposals 
should provide details on how they will protect or 
mitigate any impacts on biodiversity during site works 
and once occupied including from changes to air, 
noise, light and other potential pollution impacts as well 
as changes to soil, water and other habitats within their 
GIOSSMP.
6.25. Where possible, preference should be given 
to use of native species whilst also ensuring that 
species are chosen which are resilient to climate 
change and the physical impacts of development. 
Species should also be selected that can contribute to 
different functions including reducing the urban heat 
island effects of development, enhancing air quality, 
filtering excessive noise pollution, providing shade 
to buildings, enhancing resilience to flooding, food 
production, promoting a sense of health and wellbeing 
and enhancing the biodiversity and health of the 
overall ecosystem.  The design of habitat and choice of 
species should support cost effective management and 143
Figure 6.2: Portlands Lake, East Village, StratfordEU2
maintenance over the long term. 
6.26. Figure 6.3 shows the Sites of Importance for 
Nature Conservation (SINCs) within and surrounding 
the OPDC area. The area is surrounded by a number 
of sites of metropolitan and borough importance. If 
not carefully designed, delivered and operated, the 
density of new development proposed could impact on 
the hydrology, microclimate and solar access of these 
sites. Studies to understand the impact of development 
on these sites must be carried out during the design 
stage, to demonstrate how potential impacts have been 
mitigated and/or minimised.
6.27. In accordance with the London Plan, strong 
protection will be given to sites of metropolitan 
importance for nature conservation, while sites of 
borough and local importance for nature conservation 
will be given a level of protection commensurate with 
their importance. 
6.28. Where it is not possible to protect a SINC, 
applicants will be expected to deliver alternative biodiversity habitats of an equivalent or greater 
quantum and quality or provide financial contributions 
to offset for its loss, which would be used to protect 
and enrich existing sites of biodiversity, provide better 
access to areas that are biodiverse and support 
development of educational materials.
6.29. Green roofs and walls will play an important 
role in assisting OPDC in delivering its aspirations for 
environmental sustainability. In accordance with Policy 
D3, green roofs should be used to provide a variety 
of services including rainwater attenuation, renewable 
energy generation, play space and food growing 
facilities. Proposals should be supported by submission 
material clearly setting out how the delivery of green 
roofs has sought to be maximised, including, where 
feasible, not locating mechanical plant facilities on roof 
space.
6.30. Trees should be incorporated into streets and 
public spaces to enhance the quality of each place. 
Attention should be given to planting the right tree in 
the right place, to maximise the social, environmental and economic benefits associated with tree planting. 
Special attention should be given to choice of species 
and where and how trees are planted to ensure they 
support and don’t unduly undermine other demands 
placed on the public realm. Trees should be planted in 
accordance with the Trees in Hard Landscapes guide, 
which is supported by the GLA and has been produced 
by the Tree and Design Action Group.
6.31. To measure the quantity and quality of green 
space, applicants should demonstrate how their 
scheme compares to the Urban Greening Factor 
and the accompanying Green Points system. This 
approach aims to secure a minimum amount of 
green cover in every building lot, and to minimise the 
degree of sealed or paved surfaces in development. 
This tool has been tested and adopted by a number 
of UK local authorities including the London Borough 
of Sutton and the City of Southampton and has been 
adopted by the Mayor of London. In order to optimise 
green infrastructure provision, developers should, as 
part of their GIOSSMPs score their proposed green 
infrastructure against the Urban Greening Factor and 
Green Points System criteria. Developments should 
seek to achieve the targets set out in the most up-to-
date mayoral policy or guidance, which at the time 
of this Local Plan’s publication are a score of 0.4 for 
residential-led developments or 0.3 for commercial-
led developments. The 0.3 score will not be applied 
to proposals within Park Royal SIL as it is recognised 
that it would be challenging to achieve this score where 
schemes have significant requirements for servicing, 
but OPDC will start to work with developers to seek to 
optimise proposals’ Urban Greening Factor Score in 
this location. OPDC is also planning to develop more 
locally set standards, which would be contained within 
a future Supplementary Planning Document (SPD). 
6.32. GIOSSMPs should also explain how habitats 
and biodiversity will be managed, maintained and 
funded in perpetuity once the site is occupied. 
Management arrangements will be appropriately 
secured through conditions by OPDC.144
Figure 6.3: Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation
145
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Integrated Water Management Strategy
• Utilities StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP8 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1 and D3
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU2 and EU7
• Transport Policy T1
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI1POLICY EU3: Water
Development proposals will be supported where they:
a) work positively with OPDC and its development 
partners to deliver an integrated strategy for 
managing foul and surface water and for supplying 
potable and non-potable water;
b) Provide sufficient attenuation storage capacity 
to ensure the peak rate of surface water runoff 
generated during rainfall events up to the 1 in 100 
years plus a 40% climate change allowance, does 
not exceed greenfield run-off rates by applying the 
following hierarchy:
i) providing on-site source control to attenuate 
on-site. The priority for on-site attenuation 
should be the provision of vegetated 
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), 
with other solutions, including below ground 
attenuation, only deemed acceptable where all 
vegetated options have been fully explored;
ii) Where source control SuDS features cannot 
achieve sufficient attenuation, delivering and/
or contributing to strategic SuDS, which should 
be incorporated into streets, open spaces and 
other public realm areas;
iii) delivering where appropriate and through 
agreement with the Canal and River Trust, 
outfalls to the Grand Union Canal, where the 
water is of an adequate quality, in accordance 
with the Water Framework Directive or any 
subsequent standards, and would not have 
a detrimental effect on the ecological and 
chemical status of waterbodies; and
iv) controlled release of water into the combined 
sewer, through agreement with the borough 
and Thames Water.
c) enable capacity to be released within the existing 
combined sewer network to accommodate 
additional foul water flows, without compromising 
the ability of other developers to meet future 
development needs;
d) comply with any relevant requirements of 
local authority Surface Water Management 
Plans (SWMPs) and the Thames River Basin Management Plan; 
e) alleviate localised surface water drainage 
problems, identified within the Integrated Water 
Management Strategy (IWMS), SWMPs and/or in 
the Site Specific FRA; 
f) demonstrate that development within the area at 
risk of fluvial flooding from the River Brent (see 
figure 6.4), reduces flood risk and improves flood 
storage in the area;
g) address potential flood risk associated with any 
changes to topography or hydrology; and
h) maximise the efficient use of water by:
i) delivering on-site water recycling technologies, 
including rainwater harvesting and/or greywater 
recycling, where these are shown to be viable; 
ii) for all non-residential developments, seeking 
to achieve the maximum score for water use 
in the BREEAM ratings (or an equivalent in 
any future nationally recognised assessment 
scheme); and
iii) designing residential development to minimise 
the use of mains water to better the Mayor’s 
per capita water consumption targets, where 
viable.SUPPORTING TEXT
6.33. In accordance with Policy SP2, OPDC is 
seeking to ensure that the development achieves 
the highest standards of sustainable development. 
The approach adopted to the management of water 
supply, surface water and foul drainage and sewerage 
treatment plays an important role in meeting this 
objective.
6.34. OPDC recognises the environmental and cost 
benefits realised from an integrated approach to water 
management, in accordance with Policy SP10. An 
Integrated Water Management Strategy (IWMS) has 
been produced that identifies options for sustainably 
managing water to meet the changing needs of 
occupiers of the development. The approach set out in 
the IWMS seeks to reduce the risks of flooding across 
the development area and wider drainage network 
whilst minimising the demand on stressed water 
resources, taking into account the effects of climate 
change.  The recommendations from the IWMS have 
been embedded into this policy, the relevant Place 
policies and the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
6.35. OPDC will seek appropriate contributions 
from development towards required area-wide and 
cross-site infrastructure. Within larger development 
proposals, there may be a need for direct delivery 
of water infrastructure. To support the development 
of appropriate area-wide and cross-site solutions, 
OPDC will require applicants to work collaboratively 
with OPDC, service providers, developers and local 
authorities as the Lead Local Flood Authorities.
6.36. Thames Water has indicated that the Counters 
Creek catchment area currently has no capacity to 
accept increased flows. As a result it will be necessary 
to deliver water attenuation technologies to enable 
the peak surface water discharge rate generated 
during rainfall events with a return period of up to 1 in 
100 years plus 40% climate change to be reduced to 
greenfield runoff rates.146
Figure 6.4: Local Flood Risk
147Figure 6.4: Local Flood Risk
EU3
6.37. To achieve this, the policy takes a sequential 
approach. For developments north of the Grand Union 
Canal, opportunities should be sought to redirect 
surface water from the combined sewer into the Grand 
Union Canal via gravity fed systems, providing that 
consent is granted from the Canal and River Trust. 
All water flowing into the canal will have to meet an 
adequate water standard meeting the requirements 
of the Water Framework Directive or subsequent 
standards (see para 5.10.1.3 of the IWMS for further 
details on potential measures) and not impact on the 
ecological and chemical status of waterbodies. 
6.38. Where development cannot divert surface 
water into the Grand Union Canal, or can only meet 
part of it’s requirement via this route, applicants will 
be required to provide on-site attenuation to achieve 
the greenfield runoff rate. OPDC’s Integrated Water 
Management Strategy identifies that a greenfield run 
off rate for a central location in the OPDC area is 
12.5 litres per second per hectare (L/s/ha). However, 
it recognises that this may vary significantly across 
the OPDC area and runoff rates should be confirmed 
at a site specific scale. Where on-site attenuation is 
provided, priority should be given to the provision of 
above ground vegetated space including green space, 
raingardens and green roofs. In accordance with the 
Mayor’s drainage hierarchy, below ground attenuation 
will only deemed acceptable where all above ground 
options have been appropriately explored. Where on-
site attenuation cannot achieve run-off rates, applicants 
should consider off-site strategic attenuation measures, 
integrated within public open spaces and highway 
networks. 
6.39. As Lead Local Flood Authorities (LLFA), the 
London Boroughs of Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith 
and Fulham have Surface Water Management Plans 
(SWMPs) in place that will inform the measures 
necessary to mitigate the incidence of localised 
surface water flooding in the OPDC area. Development 
proposals will be expected to alleviate localised surface 
water drainage problems where these have been identified within the IWMS. Major developments should, 
as part of their Sustainability Statements submit a 
Water Efficiency, SuDS and Drainage Statement, 
demonstrating compliance with the requirements set 
out in this Local Plan and any relevant local authority 
requirements/standards for drainage, in their role as 
LLFA. Proposals should also support and enable the 
implementation of measures identified in the Thames 
River Basin Management Plan.
6.40. All developments that are located in flood risk 
areas which meet the thresholds set out in DEFRA and 
EA guidance and/or are within the CDAs identified in 
figure 6.4 should undertake a Site Specific Flood Risk 
Assessment (FRA) to ensure that the development will 
remain safe and will not increase flood risk to others. 
Locally, smaller-scale projects that help to separate 
foul and surface water drainage will also be important 
to help mitigate the ‘poor water quality’ status of the 
River Brent, and the Grand Union Canal, helping to 
meet the requirements of the EU Water Framework 
Directive (2000/60/EC) (or any future UK legislative 
requirements) and the objectives and actions of the 
Thames River Basin Management Plan. 
6.41. The area’s demand for water will increase as 
the population grows. Expectations of higher seasonal 
rainfall and hotter summers will mean that water 
availability will decrease when it is needed most. 
Development should therefore maximise reduction 
Figure 6.5: Stoke Newington Reservoir, Woodberry Down (credit: Eleanor Bentall)in potable water demand. To support this, measures 
such as smart metering, water saving and particularly 
in non-residential developments, rainwater harvesting 
and greywater recycling should be provided. 
6.42. OPDC will expect applicants and water suppliers 
to help future residents identify how they can reduce 
consumption and discharge and provide training 
where appropriate. The performance of technologies, 
on-going management and maintenance and user 
behaviour will be assessed by OPDC through collecting 
data from post occupancy surveys (see Policy DI3) to 
understand how systems can be improved. 
6.43. Non-residential developments should aim 
to improve water efficiency above the London Plan 
standards as the opportunities to incorporate features 
like waterless urinals and greywater or rainwater 
flushing of toilets is well established. Evidence from 
the Building Research Establishment (BRE) suggests 
that a 25% reduction is generally being achieved 
by good quality non-residential development using 
water efficient appliances and water metering. A more 
challenging target of 40% reduction is being achieved 
in the most sustainable buildings where rainwater 
harvesting and greywater recycling systems are 
provided. For residential developments, developers 
will be encouraged to design water systems to enable 
residents to meet or exceed the Mayor’s targets for 
domestic water use.148
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Air Quality Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Utilities StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2 and SP8
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D3 and D5
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Transport Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI3POLICY EU4: Air Quality
Air Quality Assessments should accord with the 
requirements of the above policy and any other 
requirements in Mayoral policy and/or guidance. 
6.46. The London Boroughs of Ealing, Brent and 
Hammersmith and Fulham experience significant air 
pollution, directly attributable to emissions from road 
traffic. The Old Oak and Park Royal area is affected 
for example where it is bounded by the A40 (Western 
Avenue) and the A406 (North Circular). The nature 
of industrial uses in the area also gives rise to air 
pollution, particularly from HGVs and also from some of 
the facilities themselves, some of which are classified 
as heavy industry and waste transfer and management 
sites. A number of areas in Old Oak and Park Royal 
have been designated as Air Quality Management 
Areas for Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) and particulate 
matter (PM10). OPDC has produced an Air Quality 
Study (AQS) which provides the evidence and sets out 
comprehensive strategies to support improvement in 
the area’s air quality. 
6.47. TfL encourages the establishment of Low 
Emission Neighbourhoods (LENs), an area-based 
scheme that includes a package of measures focused 
on reducing emissions (and promoting sustainable 
living more generally). The OPDC area meets 
all of these requirements and OPDC will work in 
collaboration with TfL, to consider the designation of 
appropriate parts of the area as a LEN. The Air Quality 
Study (AQS) sets out all the policies that will contribute 
to achieving the LEN. 
6.48. TfL have introduced an ultra-low emission zone 
(ULEZ) that covers the OPDC area. This is an area 
within which all cars, motorcycles, vans, minibuses, 
buses, coaches and heavy goods vehicles (HGVs) 
need to meet exhaust specific emission standards 
(ULEZ standards) or pay a daily charge to travel. In 
order to combat the risks associated with air quality, 
OPDC strongly supports this initiative. In addition, to 
promote better air quality associated with transport, SUPPORTING TEXT
6.44. Air quality has a significant role to play in health 
and wellbeing during the demolition, construction and 
operational phases of development. Poor air quality 
can reduce life expectancy and contribute to a number 
of illnesses like asthma.
6.45. The ‘agent of change’ principle will be applied 
to the assessment and treatment of poor air quality 
(see Policy D5). Air Quality Assessments should be 
undertaken to identify the potential for air quality 
to impact on or be caused by new development 
and to demonstrate how these impacts are being 
appropriately mitigated. Air Quality Assessments 
should be submitted: 
a) for all major planning applications; and/or 
b) where the proposed development includes 
new uses or buildings that have the potential to 
generate air pollution; and/or 
c)  where a sensitive use is proposed in close 
proximity to an existing source of air pollution.Development proposals will be supported where 
they appropriately minimise air pollution during the 
demolition, construction and operational phases 
of development on the site and on neighbouring 
sites and make a positive contribution to overall 
improvement in air quality by: 
a) reducing:
i) emissions, particularly of nitrogen oxide and 
particulate matter, including PM10 and PM2, to 
meet the Air Quality Positive objective; and
ii) exposure to acceptable levels;
b) implementing the recommendations of the Old 
Oak and Park Royal Air Quality Study (AQS) 
summarised in table 6.1;
c) helping to reduce pollution in air quality focus 
areas, identified in figure 6.6, to comply with the 
most up to date national air quality standards;
d) delivering and/or contributing to the provision of 
new automatic monitors and diffusion tubes, with 
equipment to monitor NO2 and PM10 at locations 
identified in figure 6.6;
e) complying with the relevant borough’s Air 
Quality Action Plans (AQAPs) and the mitigation 
measures identified therein;
f) meeting EU or subsequent nationally established 
health-based standards and objectives for NO2 
and PM10 and other particulates;
g) designing and positioning buildings, civic and 
open spaces to minimise exposure to elevated 
levels of pollution by avoiding creating street 
canyons, or building configurations that inhibit 
effective pollution dispersion. In particular, bus 
and taxi facilities should be designed to avoid the 
build-up of pollution;
h) minimising emissions from any combustion based 
sources of energy that are deployed by ensuring 
low emission plant is used and where appropriate 
suitable after treatment technologies are adopted; 
andi) designing and positioning any energy facilities 
within the development area to minimise harmful 
emissions and maximise the rapid dispersion of 
any residual pollutants to minimise impact.149
Policy Area Policy Action / Mitigation Measure
Transport • Minimise demand for travel by private motor vehicles and encourage transport by shared, low and zero emission modes. 
• Provide a maximum of 1 car parking space per 5 residential units. 
• Provide dedicated cycle lanes and attractive pedestrian routes.
• Design local roads to restrict vehicle speeds to 20mph.
• Enhance integrated rail, London Underground, London Overground and bus provision and prioritise sustainable transport through careful management 
of traffic.  
Energy • Promote the use of low and zero emission energy provision.
• Ensure energy from Combined Heat and Power (CHP) / biomass meets the highest emissions standards, in line with London Plan guidance.
• Design provision of energy facilities to maximise rapid dispersion of emissions from discharging stacks and vents. 
Waste • All new waste treatment and handling facilities should be fully enclosed.
• Work with existing businesses to reduce emissions including through enclosure of sites, reduction in emissions from transport and non-road based 
plant, and suppression of dust.
Overall Emissions • Support introduction of an Ultra-Low Emissions Zone (ULEZ).
• Work with TFL to designate a Low Emissions Neighbourhood for the OPDC area.
• Establish a Class C Clean Air Zone to encourage the use of low emissions vehicles.
• Work with TfL to promote use of zero emission buses and taxis in the OPDC area.
• Minimise air pollution making new developments ‘air quality neutral’ or ‘positive’ in accordance with the Mayor SPG on Sustainable Design and 
Construction. 
• Proposals should not increase the area of exceedance of EU established health-based standards and objectives for NO2 and PM10. Where new 
developments are introduced into an area where the standards and objectives are exceeded, developments should be designed to minimise and 
mitigate against increased exposure to poor air quality. 
• Developers should produce an Air Quality Assessment with the planning application. The AQS provides further recommendations on matters for 
inclusion within the air quality assessment.
Monitoring • Support the installation of new automatic monitors for NO2 and PM10 on main A-roads (see figure 6.6) and around stations in the area and in adjacent 
areas of high concentrations of pollution.
• Support establishment of new NO2 diffusion tube sites.
• Integrate pollution monitoring with public information systems and smart city initiatives.
Design / Public Realm • Development and building design should not inhibit the effective dispersion of pollution. In particular , bus and taxi facilities should be designed to avoid 
the build-up of pollution or increase public exposure to elevated levels of pollution.
• Developments should provide adequate, appropriate and well located green space and urban greening to help reduce pollutant concentrations across 
the area. 
Construction and Logistics • Minimise emissions from freight, delivery and servicing during the demolition and construction phase by adopting comprehensive air quality control 
measures.  
• Follow the guidance set out in the Mayor’s SPG on ’The Control of Dust and Emissions during Construction and Demolition’ to assess the impact on 
air quality during construction and to inform mitigation.
• Localised AQ measures to tackle known issues in the OPDC area, particularly those associated with high NO2 within the GLA’s Air Quality ‘Focus 
Areas’ (see figure 6.6).
• Renewable, mains or battery powered plant items should be used for Non-Road Mobile Machinery (NRMM) on construction sites.
• All demolition and construction sites should be monitored for the generation of air pollution. PM10 monitoring should be carried out at medium and high 
risk sites.Table 6.1: Air Quality RecommendationsEU4150
Figure 6.6: Air Quality Monitoring
151
OPDC will also work with applicants to ensure all 
parking provision can be upgraded to accept charging 
points, and the electricity grid is designed to enable this 
(see Policy T4). 
6.49. Air quality issues are impacted by a number 
of policy areas in the Local Plan, including design, 
waste, transport, energy, spatial strategy, construction, 
logistics, green infrastructure and urban greening. 
The AQS sets out a very comprehensive set of policy 
recommendations and supporting evidence that 
touches on all of these policy areas. Developments 
will be required to familiarise themselves with 
the recommendations and demonstrate how they 
have implemented these through their planning 
applications. Table 6.1 provides a summary of these 
recommendations.
6.50. The AQS identifies that there is a good network 
of NO2 diffusion tubes inside and surrounding the 
Old Oak and Park Royal area together with a number 
of focus areas where air quality is particularly poor. 
These are shown in figure 6.6. There is a need for 
additional monitoring in some areas not covered by 
the network to enable applicants to prepare Air Quality 
Assessments in support of planning applications. 
The place policies within this Local Plan support the 
improvement of air quality by requiring development to 
contribute to and/or deliver measures. Data from these 
monitors will be connected to DEFRA’s Automatic 
Urban and Rural Network (AURN) quality control 
standards and made publicly available. Data from 
monitoring stations will also be reported as part of 
OPDC’s Authority Monitoring Report (AMR). 
6.51. Development should demonstrate that it is 
adopting the recommendations set out in the Air Quality 
Action Plans (AQAPs) of the relevant local authorities, 
which take a comprehensive approach to addressing 
air quality. The host local authorities remain the 
responsible authorities for the production of AQAPs, 
but OPDC will work closely with the local authorities to 
ensure that future iterations of AQAPs are aligned for the OPDC area and support the aspiration to achieve 
air quality positive development. The host authorities 
continue to be the responsible body for air quality 
within their boundaries under the 1995 Environment 
Act, and the impacts of any development should 
therefore be subject to review by the host authority.
6.52. High density development can have a significant 
impact on air flow and areas of pollution accumulation. 
The Institute of Air Quality Management (IAQM) and 
Environmental Protection UK (EPUK) have produced 
guidance on managing air quality in cities that states 
that “wherever possible, new developments should not 
create a new “street canyon” or a building configuration 
that inhibits effective pollution dispersion”. The 
design and layout of the new development including 
the orientation, massing and height of buildings and 
location of social infrastructure, green infrastructure 
and open space influence exposure to poor air quality. 
Where possible, development should be designed to 
minimise exposure to pollution especially for vulnerable 
communities like young children, older people and 
people suffering from respiratory and other related 
illnesses.
6.53. Previous Local Air Quality Management 
Technical Guidance (LAQM.TG(09)) identifies wind 
tunnels and Computational Fluid Dynamic (CFD) 
modelling as useful tools with which to investigate the 
air quality impacts for certain meteorological scenarios 
and these should be used in addition to Gaussian 
plume models. 
6.54. OPDC will adopt EU established health-
based standards and objectives for a number of 
air quality indicators (NOX, PM10 and PM2.5) until 
these are superseded by UK standards. In addition, 
the London Environment Strategy has committed to 
establishing new targets for air quality with the aim 
of meeting World Health Organization guidelines by 
2030. Developments should not increase the area of 
exceedance. Some development will inevitably occur in 
areas where standards are exceeded. In these areas, developments should be designed to reduce exposure 
to pollution concentrations to protect the health of 
future residents and receptors.
6.55. Where combustion based sources of energy 
are used they must comply with the Mayor of London’s 
Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) on 
Sustainable Design and Construction. Monitoring and 
modelling of pollutant concentrations has shown that 
NO2 concentrations in the area are between 5% below 
or above the annual mean Air Quality Objective (AQO) 
(above 38µg/ m-3) across wide areas of Old Oak and 
Park Royal. As a result, Band B emission standards for 
CHP plant and solid biomass boilers in the Mayor of 
London’s Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) on 
Sustainable Design and Construction will apply.  
6.56. In addition, energy and waste facilities should 
be carefully positioned and designed to ensure 
that emissions do not impact on local residential 
development or civic amenities including schools, 
community, sport and health centres.  
6.57. Control of harmful emissions from all waste 
processing and transfer sites should be addressed 
using the mitigation measures set out in the AQS, 
including enclosing sites where feasible. This follows 
the principles of ‘good growth’ (see Policy SP2), and 
will help ensure onerous restrictions are not imposed 
on waste management operations.EU4152
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP3, SP7 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D5
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU6, EU10 and EU12
• Transport Policy T8
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies TCC4, TCC5  
 and TCC10Development proposals will be supported where they: 
a) avoid significant adverse impacts of noise and 
vibration on health and quality of life as a result of 
both the construction and operational phases of 
new development;
b) comply with the most relevant and current building 
standards (BS);
c) deliver mitigation measures to address 
unacceptable impacts;  
d) appropriately reduce exposure to existing noise 
generators such as waste sites, cultural facilities, 
strategic roads, rail or industrial uses, whilst 
ensuring the continued effective operation of those 
uses; 
e) ensure plant and/or machinery can be operated 
without causing harm to amenity; 
f) ensure noise and vibration is minimised 
from demolition and construction phases of 
development and from delivering and servicing of 
development once occupied; and
g) include features of positive soundscape interest 
and deliver high quality soundscapes.POLICY EU5: Noise and Vibration
appropriate attenuation measures are taken. This could 
include provision of measures such as:
a) noise and vibration insulation; 
b)  buffering between residential and commercial uses 
in the same building; 
c)  provision of winter gardens and balconies; 
d)  use of greenery to buffer streets; 
e)  varying of building elevations;
f) increased insulation around stations and limiting 
direct openings between building uses and 
stations;
g)  buffering rail corridors through planting or use of 
screens; and
h)  locating internal uses in buildings adjacent to rail 
and industrial sites that are less affected by noise. 
6.64. Attention should be paid to the use of 
machinery, plant and vehicles both during construction 
and in operation. Care should be taken in terms of 
citing and choice of machinery and plant, control over 
time and length of use, and provision of sound barriers 
and other facilities to attenuate the impacts.
6.65. Whilst sound in the environment, especially 
that made by other people, has overwhelmingly been 
considered in negative terms, as both intrusive and 
undesirable, noise can if managed properly also have 
positive aspects. Acousticians are now beginning to 
acknowledge the relevance of positive soundscapes, 
moving away from a focus on negative noise to identify 
a means whereby the concept of positive soundscapes 
can influence behavioural characteristics of people 
living within it.  The Mayor’s Ambient Noise Strategy 
‘Sounder City’ (Para 4F.29) states the importance of 
considering features of positive soundscape interest, 
which may constitute ‘soundmarks’. City soundscapes 
can be part of their distinctive historic character and the 
sounds surrounding water features, such as the canal, 
can be valued positively.SUPPORTING TEXT
6.58. Noise and vibration pollution has a major effect 
on amenity and health and therefore quality of life. It 
is a particularly significant issue in high density and 
mixed use areas and where residential buildings are located in close proximity to industrial and heavily 
trafficked areas and large construction sites. 
6.59. In accordance with Policy D5, OPDC will apply 
‘agent of change’ principle when considering the 
impact of noise and vibration; i.e. if there is an existing 
use that generates noise, the onus will be on the 
new development to adequately mitigate against the 
impacts of this noise.
6.60. OPDC will require all major development or 
developments that are particularly sensitive to noise 
and/or vibration to undertake a Noise and Vibration 
Assessment (NVA). 
6.61. The NVA should demonstrate that development 
proposals will comply with the most up-to-date British 
Standards Institution’s (BSI’s) Building Standards 
(BS), demonstrate how significant adverse impacts of 
noise and vibration on health and quality of life as a 
result of new development will be avoided and include 
predictive modelling to identify appropriate mitigation 
measures both at the construction and occupation 
phases of the development. 
6.62. The operational noise and vibration impacts 
likely to arise from the development should be 
assessed in accordance with appropriate recognised 
methodologies, such as BS 4142, Calculation of Road 
Traffic Noise (1988) and Calculation of Railway Noise 
(1995) or any subsequent standards. The effect of 
noise and vibration during the operational phase can 
be minimised by separating uses sensitive to noise 
from development that generates higher levels of noise 
and vibration. Noise sensitive development includes 
housing, schools and hospitals as well as offices, 
workshops and open spaces, while higher levels of 
noise is generated by rail, road and air traffic, industry, 
entertainment (e.g. nightclubs, restaurants and bars) 
and other uses.
6.63. OPDC will only grant planning permission 
for development sensitive to noise and vibration in 
locations that experience noise and vibration pollution if 153
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Waste Apportionment Study
• Waste in Tall Buildings Study
• Waste Management Strategy
• Waste Technical PaperPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D3
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU4, EU5, EU7,  
 EU8, EU10, EU11, EU12 and EU13
• Transport Policies T7 and T8
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI1a) OPDC will ensure that proposals contribute 
towards meeting apportionment targets by 
supporting development proposals where they 
safeguard;
i) the Old Oak Sidings site in Old Oak North and 
make efficient use of the site in line with Policy 
P2; and
ii) allocated sites and other existing waste 
management sites within the OPDC area 
identified in the most up to date West London 
Waste Plan.
b) Any allocated or existing waste management 
site(s) lost to a non-waste use will be required to 
provide equivalent or enhanced compensatory 
site provision which normally meets the maximum 
throughput that the lost site could achieve. Site 
provision should be made in the most appropriate 
location, according to the following sequential 
manner:
i) within the OPDC area; or
ii) within the relevant waste authority area based 
on where the lost site is located; or
iii) within Greater London;
c) Applications for new waste facilities or 
enhancements to existing waste facilities will be 
supported where they:
i) comply, where applicable, with the policies in 
the most up-to-date West London Waste Plan;
ii) prioritise locating any new waste facilities within 
sites safeguarded under part a);
iii) help to move waste up the waste hierarchy (see 
figure 6.8) with a focus on reuse, repair and 
remanufacture;
iv) deliver and/or demonstrate how energy 
generation opportunities are future proofed to 
deliver carbon dioxide reductions and enabled 
to connect into area-wide district heating 
networks;
v) if relevant and appropriate, deliver anaerobic 
digestion and/or other bio-waste treatment 
and additional recycling facilities particularly to support greater levels of recovery in 
accordance with the waste hierarchy;
vi) minimise CO2 emissions and where relevant, 
increase operational capacity and waste 
recovery rates;
vii) fully enclose operational facilities; and
viii) adequately mitigate their impact on amenity, 
including air quality, noise, vibration, dust, litter, 
vermin and odours, the transport network and 
other environmental considerations.
d) Major development proposals will be supported 
where they demonstrate;
i) that their waste will be managed, both during 
construction and operation, as high up the 
waste hierarchy as possible;
ii) a collaborative approach with the Waste 
Authorities and OPDC is being positively 
adopted to help deliver strategic waste 
management systems in order to meet national 
and London waste recycling targets;
iii) adequate provision for waste storage and 
collection within developments, in accordance 
with the London Waste Recycling Board’s 
(LWARB) guidance on recycling and storage, 
ensuring: 
A) source segregation of bio-waste and other 
recyclables; 
B) control of odour, nuisance and air and noise 
pollution from waste storage and collection; 
and 
C) working with relevant local waste authorities 
to ensure waste collection approaches align 
with current and future waste collection 
arrangements; 
iv) arrangements have been made to support an 
optimised approach to the reuse of domestic, 
commercial and construction waste. Where 
feasible, proposals should reuse and/or recycle 
a minimum of 95% of construction, demolition 
and excavation waste; and v)  provision of appropriate details and training 
to be provided to occupants, to support waste 
management and engage residents in waste 
recycling, to support the attainment of Mayoral 
municipal and commercial waste recycling 
targets.POLICY EU6: Waste 
SUPPORTING TEXT
6.66. Waste is a major issue for London. London is 
seeking to reduce waste and in particular waste sent 
to landfill by promoting the waste hierarchy, as set out 
in the London Plan (see figure 6.8). It gives top priority 
to preventing waste in the first place. When waste is 
created, it gives priority to preparing it for re-use, then 
recycling, then recovery, and last of all disposal (e.g. 
landfill). Developments should demonstrate how they 
have considered managing waste in accordance with 
the waste hierarchy through design, construction and 
operation within a Site Waste Management Plan as 
part of their submitted Sustainability Statement.
6.67. The London Plan apportions household and 
commercial waste arisings to each London Borough 
and requires them to allocate sufficient land to deal 
with their apportioned waste per year. A key objective 154
Figure 6.7: Existing Waste Sites
155
of London Plan policy is to work towards 100% net 
self-sufficiency of waste management across London 
by 2026.
6.68. Mayoral Development Corporations (MDCs) 
do not have their own apportionment targets but the 
London Plan requires, that where an MDC exists or is 
established within a borough, the MDC will co-operate 
with the borough to ensure that their apportionment 
requirements are met. Also, the boroughs are still 
responsible for the collection of household waste 
and for making arrangements, through their statutory 
waste disposal authority (WDA), to dispose of this 
waste. The WDAs covering OPDC area are the West 
London Waste Authority and Western Riverside Waste 
Authority. OPDC is therefore working with the host 
boroughs to deliver a comprehensive and integrated 
approach to waste management.
6.69. For the part of the OPDC area covered by the 
London Boroughs of Brent and Ealing, OPDC has been 
working jointly with these boroughs, as well as Harrow, 
Hillingdon, Hounslow and Richmond upon Thames, 
to prepare the West London Waste Plan (WLWP). 
The WLWP was adopted by OPDC in July 2015 as a 
Development Plan Document and is part of OPDC’s 
Local Plan. The WLWP provides more information 
on a number of existing waste management sites 
and allocated waste sites within the OPDC area (see 
figure 6.9). The WLWP and the safeguarding of these 
sites provide sufficient capacity to meet the London 
Plan (2016) apportionment targets for Brent and 
Ealing. However, the London Plan (2021) has revised 
apportionment targets for Brent and Ealing and OPDC 
will work with the London Boroughs of Brent, Ealing 
and other waste planning authorities covered by the 
WLWP to adopt a new WLWP.
6.70. The London Borough of Hammersmith and 
Fulham is part of the Western Riverside Waste 
Authority (WRWA) area. There are existing waste sites 
within Hammersmith and Fulham, also within OPDC’s 
boundary (see figure 6.7).6.71. The existing waste sites in Hammersmith and 
Fulham may be subject to transformational change and 
redevelopment in order to realise the planned growth 
of homes and jobs. OPDC has produced a Waste 
Apportionment Study and worked in partnership with 
the other Waste Planning Authorities (WPAs) in the 
WRWA area to prepare a joint Waste Technical Paper 
to demonstrate how OPDC is co-operating to ensure 
that the host boroughs’ apportionment requirements 
are met. 
6.72. This Waste Apportionment Study demonstrates 
that the Old Oak Sidings (Powerday) site has 
sufficient capacity and land to meet LBHF’s London 
Plan apportionment targets, with some potential 
surplus capacity available. The Powerday site is 
therefore safeguarded and protected alongside other 
sites identified in the WLWP.   The Waste Technical 
Paper also shows the capacity available to manage 
Construction, Demolition and Excavation waste and 
that there is no requirement for additional waste 
capacity related to the other waste streams. 
6.73. The London Plan (2021) sets out higher 
apportionment targets for Brent and Ealing and a 
reduced overall target for Hammersmith and Fulham 
by 2041. OPDC is obligated to ensure that the 
apportionment targets of host boroughs can be met as 
a priority and, therefore, OPDC will continue to work 
positively with the host boroughs to help demonstrate 
how any new London Plan apportionment targets 
would be met, and if necessary, this may trigger a 
review of this policy and relevant policies in the WLWP.
6.74. Waste sites not required to meet the boroughs’ 
apportionment targets can still help drive improvements 
and flexibility in achieving self-sufficiency across 
London. Therefore, in line with London Plan Policy, 
any existing waste management sites which are 
proposed for redevelopment will need to be replaced 
by equivalent or enhanced compensatory provision 
which can meet the maximum throughput that the lost 
site could have achieved. Data should be assessed over a three year timeframe to derive the maximum 
throughput the site could achieve, in accordance with 
the new draft London Plan.  In line with Policy EU6, 
a sequential approach will also be applied to account 
for the proximity principle, which requires waste to be 
managed as close to source as possible. This policy 
requirement should be discussed with OPDC and 
the relevant local authority at the earliest opportunity 
during pre-application discussions. 
6.75. To support decentralised energy provision 
and bio-waste treatment, OPDC will support the 
development of proposals that bring forward innovative 
solutions for energy generation where they meet 
the London Plan carbon intensity floor emissions 
performance standards (400g/kWh electricity produced 
at the time of the publication of this Local Plan). 
6.76. OPDC’s Utilities Study identifies that the 
Old Oak Sidings site could potentially form part of 
a strategic heat and energy network. It could also 
provide for bio-waste recovery. OPDC will work with 
the operators of the waste sites and other relevant 
stakeholders such as the Environment Agency, the 
waste authorities, local authorities, businesses and 
residents to find ways to introduce energy generation 
in a way that delivers benefits and addresses adverse 
impacts to the area.
6.77. Anaerobic digestion could help treat bio-waste 
and provide low carbon energy. These facilities could 
be planned in association with proposals for urban food 
growing and processing, and for green infrastructure, 
realising further social, economic and environmental 
benefits, and supporting other local plan objectives.
6.78. Where applications propose new or enhanced 
facilities these will only be supported where the 
development can demonstrate that it will not adversely 
impact on the surrounding environment. In addition, 
proposals will need to demonstrate that they are 
compatible with the overall strategy for growth and 
intensification of the area, and improve the existing 
performance of the facility, in particular by enhancing EU6156
DisposalOther RecoveryRecyclingPreparing for Re-UsePreventionefficiency and reducing emissions. In line with 
Environment Agency guidance facilities should be fully 
enclosed in order to minimise noise and air emissions 
in line with Policies EU4 (Air Quality) and EU5 (Noise 
and Vibration).
6.79. Movement of waste out of the area can have a 
major impact on congestion, carbon emissions and air 
quality. OPDC will require developers to look at ways to 
minimise these impacts through, for example:
a) the adoption of consolidation areas to collect, 
compact, process and hold waste within 
development sites; 
b) the use of reverse logistics; 
c) close working with local waste sites; and
d) use of rail and water transport options in line with 
Policy T8. 
6.80. The biggest impact in the initial phases of the 
development will be from Construction, Demolition and 
Excavation (CD&E) waste. The construction industry 
produces about 24% of total UK waste each year or 
more than 100 million tonnes. It is estimated by the UK 
Green Building Council that 13% of materials delivered 
to site are never used. As one of the biggest future 
construction sites in London the development is likely 
to create a very significant amount of waste if it is not 
carefully managed. 
6.81. Existing CD&E recycling targets in the London 
Plan are ambitious. OPDC’s Environmental Standards 
Study identifies that to make the OPDC area best 
practice in terms of recycling, development in Old Oak 
and Park Royal should seek as a minimum to meet, 
and preferably to exceed these. These targets build 
on best practice in construction from projects like the 
London Olympics, Kings Cross and Crossrail.
6.82. OPDC will therefore support major development 
proposals that include a detailed Site Waste 
Management Plan (SWMP) that follows the waste 
hierarchy.  Construction sites will be expected to divert 
over 95% of the waste generated from landfill, a figure similar to what is being achieved on the Olympic 
Park, Crossrail, Elephant Park and other major 
developments. 
6.83. To support the elimination of waste, to promote 
reuse of construction waste and to encourage the 
development of a secondary materials market, 
developers should work with their contractors to 
incorporate these targets into their SWMPs.
6.84. Some of the most advanced construction 
waste processing plants in the UK are based in the 
OPDC area. National guidance on the waste hierarchy 
promotes the treatment of waste facilities as close 
as possible to sources of waste arising. The co-
location of Old Oak and Park Royal and the existing 
waste treatment and processing facilities provides an 
excellent opportunity to develop exemplar approaches 
to resource efficient waste management that can 
support the circular and sharing economy policy (see 
Policy EU7).
6.85. Achieving high rates of municipal and 
commercial resource recovery and recycling in dense 
urban areas is very challenging. Average recycling 
rates in inner city areas, particularly in areas with 
tall buildings, in London are less than 30%1. To meet 
national and London Plan targets, effective waste 
segregation and storage facilities in apartments will 
be required. Developments will also have to ensure 
there is sufficient space for on-site waste collection, 
storage and compaction and transfer facilities. It will be 
important to agree the design and sizing of facilities to 
be provided as well as the transfer arrangements with 
the Waste Authority responsible for collection.  
6.86. Provision of waste storage and collection 
within development should adopt the London Waste 
and Recycling Board’s (LWARB’s) guidance on 
recycling, and in particular ensure bio-waste can be 
separated out and systems put in place to manage 
odour, nuisance and noise associated with waste 
management. The infrastructure and management of 
waste should enable developments to contribute to Figure 6.8: Waste HierarchyEU6
the London Plan target to recycle 65% of all municipal 
waste. 
6.87.  Innovation in communal waste collection 
facilities may be required to minimise the space 
required within plots and to encourage waste 
recycling. Residents will need to be actively engaged 
to encourage recycling and developers will need to 
provide residents with appropriate details on how to 
make best use of their waste collection and storage 
infrastructure, to support the attainment of Mayoral 
recycling targets.
REFERENCES
1.  Waste in Tall Buildings Study157
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Waste Management StrategyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (EU3, EU6,  
 EU8, EU10 and EU11)
• Transport Policies T4, T7 and T8
• Housing Policy H7
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC3
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI3Major development proposals will be supported 
where: 
a) the design and construction of the development 
enables buildings and their constituent materials, 
components and products to be disassembled and 
reused at the end of their useful life;
b) so far as is possible, the circular and sharing 
economy has been promoted through leasing or 
rental arrangements for building systems, products 
and materials;
c) sharing economy principles have been adopted in 
the design, construction and on-going operation of 
the development; and
d) circular economy principles have informed 
the design and implementation of energy 
(including heating and cooling), water and waste 
infrastructure.POLICY EU7: Circular and Sharing Economy
These problems are exacerbated by population 
growth, urbanisation and an increase in global per 
capita consumption, which is putting pressure on the 
environment and scarce resources.
6.89. The circular and sharing economy sets out an 
alternative approach to urban development, industrial 
production, utility provision, consumption and waste 
disposal based on a take, make, use and remake 
model. This approach requires whole life thinking in 
which products and services are designed in such 
a way that they are non-polluting, use renewable 
resources sustainably and enable materials and 
resources to be reused at the end of their life. To 
deliver a circular and sharing economy will require new 
business models in which products, components and 
materials are designed to:
a) minimise their environmental footprint throughout 
their life; 
b)  last as long as appropriate; 
c)  be dismantled and reused or repurposed at the end 
of their useful life. This should facilitate more waste 
products and materials to be reused, repaired, 
refurbished, or remanufactured before they are 
recycled; 
d)  where appropriate, be leased or rented rather than 
sold so that the manufacturer retains ownership 
and responsibility for end of life disposal and reuse 
(and is therefore incentivised to ensure the costs 
of disposal are minimised and the value of reuse 
optimised); and
e)  be shared, through co-use and exchange systems 
to make better use of products over their life.   
6.90. Major development proposals will be expected 
to demonstrate through submission of a circular and 
sharing economy statement within Sustainability 
Statements, how the principles of the circular and 
sharing economy have been incorporated into the 
design, construction, operational use of and end life 
disassembly of new development. At Old Oak and SUPPORTING TEXT
6.88. The circular and sharing economy is an 
alternative to the traditional linear economy which 
is characterised by a take, make, use and dispose 
approach to the use of resources and materials. The 
linear economy has delivered rapid economic growth, 
but it has also contributed to climate change, waste, 
pollution and degradation of the natural environment. Park Royal there are many opportunities to adopt 
circular and sharing economy principles and practice. 
The following list includes some examples of these 
opportunities:
a) Food: Park Royal is one of the biggest centres for 
food processing in the UK. Industrial and domestic 
food waste could be collected and treated to create 
nutrient, energy, CO2, water and other products 
that could be reused locally to produce energy, 
food and resources for the pharmaceutical and 
other industries thereby turning a product that is 
expensive to dispose of and is polluting into a high 
value resource. The process can be applied to the 
whole supply chain so that waste is reduced at the 
point of supply (see Policies P4 and P5) x
b)  Water: Water can be harvested, stored, treated and 
reused on site thereby relieving pressure on the 
sewers, reducing demand for potable water, and 
contributing to the quality of green infrastructure 
(see Policy EU3). 
c) Energy: Renewable and low carbon energy 
including free sources of heat from the sewers, 
canal, data centres, Energy from Waste (EfW) 
and other sources can be harvested and used to 
provide heat and cooling to homes. Renewable 
electricity can be generated and supplied to homes 
and commercial space. Storage can be used 
to balance supply and demand and community 
interest companies could be formed to take part 
in supply and demand management (see Policy 
EU10). 
d) Materials: Low impact, renewable materials can be 
specified in development. Materials that can easily 
be recovered at the end of their life can be used 
and assembly of materials and products (whether 
in buildings or white goods etc.) can also be 
designed for disassembly (see Policy EU8).
e) Fabrication: use of off-site and modular 
construction can reduce waste and enhance 
efficiency of construction. There is an opportunity 
for light weighting of buildings and buildings that 158
can be disassembled and reused to be embedded 
in the design process. Building facades and other 
elements that will be replaced or repaired over 
their life have the potential to be designed so they 
enable repair, reuse or refurbishment at low cost. 
Leasing of short and medium life products can also 
be considered (see Policies SP2 and EU8).  
f) Mobility: Promotion of walking and cycling as the 
preferred choice where possible and practical; 
promotion of low carbon and zero emission 
vehicles that provide energy storage when not 
in use to the power network (see Policy T4); and 
design of new mobility services to maximise asset 
utilisation. These can be supported by sensor 
networks, predictive analytics and user-facing 
digital services to help optimise use of system and 
deliver a high quality user experience.
g) Transport: Promotion of measures such as car 
clubs (See Policy T4) that are accompanied by 
suitable electric vehicle charging infrastructure.
h) Communal space: Providing space in communal 
areas for facilities that people need, but do not 
often use. Examples could be laundry facilities, 
communal kitchen space, spare rooms for visitors 
and hardware and tools (see Policy D3). 
i) Maker and mender centres: Locations in the 
neighbourhood where communities can take, 
make and repair products. These centres could be 
designed to take all sorts of products from bulky 
furniture to electrical items as long as they can be 
reused, repaired or repurposed. The centres could 
be kitted out with machinery and facilities to help 
repair from 3D printers to routers and laser cutters. 
They would help reduce waste and provide new 
jobs. These facilities would be part of the social 
infrastructure (see Policy TCC3).
j) Skills sharing: providing space or an online 
platform for the community to share their skills and 
resources (see Policies D3 and EU11). 
k) Logistics: Consolidation of movement of goods, 
smart technology used to optimise use of vehicles; 
last mile deliveries by clean vehicles at times when they cause least disruption; reverse logistics 
should be adopted to support waste reuse where 
possible; new technologies like drones can be 
used to enhance optimisation and reduce impacts 
on roads. Non-road based transport including rail 
and water should be fully integrated and used 
to support movement of goods and waste (see 
Policies T7, T8 and EU11).  
l) Flexible design: Designing buildings and spaces 
to be highly adaptable to economic, demographic/
social, technical and commercial and environmental 
change. Sharing and leasing of space over different 
timescales to optimise use. Maker space, for 
example, could be rented out for different periods 
of time and by the desk, room or whole facility. 
m) Digital platforms: Provided to help communities 
connect and share space, resources, time, 
experience and skills and enable community 
ownership of assets (energy, mobility, shared 
space, social and cultural infrastructure, goods and 
services) (see Policies EU11 and DI3). n) Waste: There are opportunities for the separation 
and collection of recyclables and minimising waste 
during the life of the building through innovative 
use of collection methodologies/technologies, and 
a coordinated campaign of communications and 
engagement on waste minimisation and recycling 
(see Policy EU6).  
o) Smart monitoring: Exploring the use of smart 
technology to measure, monitor and track waste 
collection, processing and resource utilisation to 
enable better waste management practices and to 
enhance resource recovery (see Policy EU11).
Figure 6.9: Coleshill food waste anaerobic digestion plant (credit: Severn T rent)EU7159
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Environmental Standards StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP9 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU3, EU4, EU5,  
 EU6, EU7, EU9, EU12 and EU13POLICY EU8: Sustainable Materials
they put income and jobs into the local economy and 
reduce emission associated with bringing materials to 
site from longer distances.
6.95. Examples of innovation that are making 
significant contributions to the use of sustainable 
materials and overall environmental performance 
include: 
a) New smart glass with coatings that can help 
increase the thermal performance of buildings 
and reduce demand for heat and at the same 
time reduce incoming solar gain and potential for 
overheating;
b)  Roofing and cladding materials that integrate solar 
photo voltaic technology, and can therefore act both 
as protection and a source of energy generation;
c)  Innovation in smart and low embodied concrete 
that can for example absorb carbon dioxide, reduce 
embodied carbon, uses high levels of recycled 
material or is self-healing and therefore requires 
less maintenance. Whilst some of this innovation is 
cutting edge, low carbon concrete has been used 
on many projects including the London Olympics. 
On the London Olympics, Crossrail and other major 
projects, between 20% and 80% of the material 
in the concrete was procured from secondary 
sources including pulverised fuel ash (PFA) and 
granulated blast furnace slag (GGBS) and recycled 
aggregate and cement substitutes. These projects 
demonstrated that over 20% of the total monetary 
value of materials on major construction sites 
could be sourced from secondary sources without 
impacting on cost. Major contractors like BAM and 
Skanska are regularly achieving these standards 
as evidenced in OPDC’s Environmental Standards 
Study;
d)  Projects are also increasingly using materials like 
cold asphalt and recycled concrete kerbs that 
make use of recycled materials and have a lower 
embodied carbon content than more traditional 
materials; 
e)  Innovation in healthy materials has made significant SUPPORTING TEXT
6.91. The high density and industrial environment 
of Old Oak and Park Royal will require the use of 
materials that are hard-wearing and adaptable, and 
that will last and weather well. Access to building 
elements in tall buildings is difficult and replacing 
elements like facades can be very costly. Procuring 
materials that are able to withstand the test of time 
and will retain their aesthetic qualities and define the 
character of an area over several generations, in the 
same way brick has lasted and defined the character 
of London, will be essential to deliver long term value, 
quality and sense of place.
6.92. The choice of materials can also impact 
on the environmental quality of the area. Whilst 
the contribution that individual developments can 
make might seem minor, the overall impact of many 
developments can be very significant. Key issues to 
consider include the porosity of paving materials and 
the contribution these can make to achieving green 
field run-off rates (see Policy EU3); the impact different 
materials have on the soundscape and their ability 
to absorb or reflect noise; and the reflectivity and 
conductivity of materials and their impact on the urban 
heat island and sunlight intensity in public areas. 
6.93. Considerable investment and progress has 
been made by the construction product industry to 
develop materials that have a low embodied carbon, 
are healthy, use sustainably sourced materials, use 
secondary/recycled products, can be disassembled 
and reused at the end of their useful life and enhance 
the overall performance of buildings. OPDC will 
encourage the use of these materials where possible 
to reduce the lifetime impact of the development on the 
environment. 
6.94. One of the most positive contributions a major 
construction project can make to an area is to source 
materials locally. This is often difficult but contractors 
should seek out local sources wherever possible as Proposals will be supported where they use high-
quality durable and adaptable materials, finishes and 
details that are, where appropriate: 
a)  permeable and porous to support Policy EU3;
b) noise absorbing to support Policy EU5; and
c) non-reflective and low heat absorbing to reduce 
the urban heat island impacts of development.
Proposals will be supported where they use 
sustainable materials that: 
d)  where feasible are sourced locally;
e)  reduce embodied carbon in the development; 
f) where feasible use rapidly renewable and healthy 
materials;
g)  are designed to last and wear well over the life of 
the development; 
h)  are sourced from reused and recycled content. A 
minimum of 20% of the total material value of new 
buildings and infrastructure and landscape works 
should derive from reused or recycled content; 
and
i) use 100% of timber from sustainably certified 
sources.160
Figure 6.10: Recycled Shipping Containers, Roundhouse, Camden (credit: Furness Partnership / Tom Carter) progress in response to concerns about indoor air 
quality resulting from off-gassing, poor ventilation 
and other design and construction related issues. 
Paints which used to contain lead are now free of 
this metal and volatile organic compounds (VOC) 
have been reduced and are often now eliminated. 
Other products have also reduced the use of 
chemicals which can cause harm to health and 
impact on indoor air quality including carpets and 
textiles etc;
f) The Waste Resource Action Plan (WRAP) carried 
out research into the use of recycled products in 
construction and identified that waste could be 
significantly reduced in construction and over 20% 
by value of the materials used on development 
could be sourced from recycled or secondary 
sources without impacting on cost. Their work was 
successfully adopted on the Olympic Park and 
has subsequently been used on other projects as 
evidenced in the Environmental Standards Study;
g) The use of wood in construction is becoming 
much more common. Cross laminated timber and 
other timber systems are regularly being used to 
make multi story buildings including the structural 
components. Where these materials are sourced 
from sustainable forests they can make a positive 
contribution to biodiversity and land management 
and can help reduce the life time carbon emissions 
of the building and provide a healthy indoor 
environment. They are also often constructed using 
innovations in off-site manufacturing and can be 
erected quickly and potentially dismantled with 
parts reused at the end of their life;
h) The use of rapidly renewable material: These 
are materials that are defined as natural, non-
petroleum-based building materials that have 
harvest cycles under 10 years. Such materials 
include bamboo, straw, cork, natural linoleum 
products (such as Marmoleum), wool, wheatboard 
and strawboard. The USA based Leadership 
in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) 
assessment process, which is the biggest green building certification system in the world, is 
promoting the use of these materials as they 
can contribute to better land management and 
biodiversity and generate income for farmers; and
i) Responsible sourcing of materials is encouraged 
by the London Plan and required by BREEAM.  
Developments are increasingly using materials from 
suppliers who participate in responsible sourcing 
schemes that are accredited and recognised 
across industry. Such schemes include but are not 
limited to the BRE BES 6001 Framework Standard 
for Responsible Sourcing and FSC and PEFC 
certified timber.  The UK government established 
Central Point of Expertise on Timber (CPET) has 
carried out work demonstrating that sustainable 
timber can be procured at little or no extra cost. OPDC’s Environmental Standards Study has also 
demonstrated that the use of suppliers that operate 
Environmental Management Systems certified 
against ISO 14001 or EU Eco-Management and 
Audit Scheme (EMAS) standards can be delivered 
at no additional cost.
6.96. OPDC will support development that adopts the 
above measures as part of the overarching approach 
to sustainable place making.EU8161
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Energy, Overheating and Daylight in Tall Buildings Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Utilities StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP3 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1 and D3
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Transport Policies (All)a) Major development proposals will be supported 
where they: 
i) meet or exceed the on-site carbon emissions 
targets set out in the London Plan energy 
hierarchy;
ii) where they cannot deliver the London Plan 
CO2 reduction targets on-site, they make a 
sufficient financial contribution towards carbon 
reduction in line with the OPDC’s carbon off-
set policy;
iii) design buildings to use low carbon heat 
sources and when connecting into heat 
networks, design building services to achieve 
low flow return temperatures to optimise 
network efficiency;
iv) demonstrate that the risks of overheating 
have been addressed through the design of 
the development and accord with the Mayor’s 
cooling hierarchy; and
v) provide appropriate smart technologies and 
guidance to enable occupiers to monitor and 
manage their energy use. POLICY EU9: Minimising Carbon Emissions and Overheating 
6.100. OPDC will prepare a supplementary planning 
document, setting out the rate per tonne of carbon 
dioxide and the scheme for applying the funds raised. 
OPDC will work with neighbouring boroughs to 
establish a ring-fenced offset fund to support delivery 
of carbon saving projects off-site and put in place 
appropriate measures to recruit a pipeline of suitable 
projects. OPDC will develop guidelines on the projects 
that can be supported (consistent with future London-
wide guidance produced by the GLA). Appropriate 
monitoring procedures will be put in place to ensure 
that projects supported by the fund are delivered 
as planned and carbon savings realised.  Offsetting 
payments will be secured through Section 106 
agreements.
6.101. As set out in the supporting text to Policy EU10, 
low temperature district heating systems are expected 
to offer greater efficiency as decarbonisation of the 
electricity grid begins to favour the use of heat pumps 
utilising low carbon heat sources.  To enable the use 
of low temperature heat networks, systems within 
buildings will need to be designed and commissioned 
for low temperature operation. Please see OPDC’s 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan for OPDC’s requirements 
relating to this.
6.102. Studies have shown that buildings do not 
perform as well in operation as anticipated when 
they were being designed. Post-construction audits 
and testing will help identify and rectify causes of 
the performance gap resulting from the planning, 
construction and commissioning of the building. Where 
possible the OPDC would expect this information to be 
used by developers and management companies to 
address any issues. 
6.103. Residents’ behaviour can significantly impact 
on energy demand. It is therefore important to explain 
and provide details on how to operate their home in an 
energy efficient manner. Where they have agreed for 
their energy use data to be made available, residents 
should be offered easy to read assessments outlining SUPPORTING TEXT
6.97. The London Plan requires all new residential 
development to be zero carbon, with non-residential 
development meeting this target from 2019. In line 
with the London energy hierarchy, buildings should be designed to reduce energy demand. This will allow 
occupants to both minimise their fuel bills and reduce 
their carbon emissions. This positively supports the 
governments affordable warmth agenda, designed 
to take people out of fuel poverty. The Mayor’s 
vision is that London becomes a zero carbon city 
by 2050. The London Plan (2021) and the London 
Environmental Strategy encourage Opportunity Areas 
and in particular, Mayoral Development Corporations 
to set high standards in environmental sustainability. 
The London Plan (2021) requires the regulated CO2 
emissions for new homes to be reduced by a minimum 
of 10% against Part L of Building Regulations Target 
Emission Rates, through energy efficiency alone. 
Non-domestic development is encouraged to reduce 
regulated CO2 emissions by 15% or more through 
energy efficiency measures alone. OPDC expects 
developments to meet and where feasible improve on 
these targets. To demonstrate how proposals accord 
with this policy, an Energy Statement should be in 
included in submitted Sustainability Statements. 
6.98. As part of the overall strategy to deliver zero 
carbon development, the London Plan also promotes 
supply of low carbon energy and provision of on-site 
renewable technologies. At the scale of development 
proposed in the OPDC area, adopting decentralised 
energy systems is likely to be the most cost effective 
way to deliver and future proof carbon reductions. 
Policy EU10 (Energy Systems) sets out policy for low 
carbon energy networks. 
6.99. Previous work by Government as part of 
exploring zero carbon policy identified that for many 
schemes, achieving zero carbon homes purely through 
on-site measures would not be cost effective or 
technically feasible.  It was recognised that in many 
cases carbon savings would be delivered more cost 
effectively off-site. The Mayor’s SPG on Sustainable 
Design and Construction  notes that London Boroughs 
should establish a planning related carbon dioxide 
reduction fund and set a price at which the carbon 
dioxide short fall will be calculated.  162
Figure 6.11: High Performance Facade, More Londonactual energy use and offering advice on how this 
could be reduced.  These should where possible 
provide appropriate benchmark comparators, for 
example, against the average for homes of a similar 
type in the area.  OPDC will work with developers, 
energy suppliers and residents to determine how this 
can be accomplished, while ensuring appropriate data 
protection.
6.104. The risks now and into the future of overheating 
are significant particularly on dense and tall 
development, in south and west facing apartments 
and in single aspect units. In preparing an energy 
statement, developers should set out the design 
measures that have been introduced to mitigate 
the risk of overheating and minimise the demand 
for cooling. Developers should undertake dynamic 
overheating modelling in line with CIBSE guidance 
TM52, TM59 and using TM49 guidance in relation to 
weather data for London, or where these approaches 
are superseded the most up to date modelling 
standards and guidance should be followed. Modelling 
should take account of predicted risks of climate 
change. 
6.105. Accurate, real-time information on energy 
demand will inform demand side response strategies, 
enabling demand and supply to be better managed, 
overall costs reduced and to support more effective 
energy investment planning. Smart meters (and in-
home displays) are necessary to achieve this. The 
Government is requiring energy suppliers to install 
a smart electricity and/or gas meter (with displays) 
in every home. There is no similar requirement for 
heat meters for district energy systems but similar 
smart heat meters and displays do exist and will be 
encouraged to be installed and used. EU9
6.106. As regulated loads are progressively reduced, 
the importance of reducing unregulated loads 
increases. Evidence from the Energy Systems Catapult suggests growing use of ICT and other ‘small power’ 
electronic equipment is increasing unregulated loads. 
Use of smart technologies to monitor and manage 
unregulated loads will help reduce demand.163
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Utilities StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU4, EU5, EU6, EU7,  
 EU9 and EU11
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI2To promote the delivery of low carbon, energy 
efficient and integrated electricity, heat and cooling 
networks, major development proposals should: 
a) support the delivery of local smart energy grids 
including generation and storage of power from 
multiple sources;
b) support and contribute to/and or deliver low 
carbon heat networks. Development should 
prioritise connecting to strategic area wide low 
temperature district heating networks when and 
where available and where not available, provide 
on-site heating solutions and future proof the 
development so that it can connect into a low 
carbon low temperature district heat network if and 
when it becomes available;
c)  support and contribute to/and deliver low carbon 
cooling networks where feasible and appropriate. 
Development should prioritise connecting to 
strategic area wide district cooling networks when 
and where cooling is required and where these 
networks are available and contribute to reducing 
energy and CO2 emissions. Where a network is 
not available, provide on-site cooling solutions 
and future proof the development so that it can 
connect into a low carbon district cooling network 
if it becomes available; 
d) provide evidence that appropriate management 
mechanisms will be put in place to ensure that 
the end customers are protected in respect of 
the price of energy provided and the level of 
service and ensure heat loss from the network is 
minimised;
e) demonstrate that there is capacity in the network 
to facilitate delivery of their development at the 
time of the application and the expected delivery 
period; and
f) contribute to and/or deliver new heat, cooling and 
electricity networks and infrastructure to accord 
with the specification requirements set out in the 
policies of this plan.POLICY EU10: Energy Systems
water, power and cooling. The Government’s Energy 
Systems Catapult predicts that peak energy demand 
by residents aand businesses will increase very 
significantly as a result of increasing electrification 
of heating, greater uptake of electric vehicles and 
increasing use of computers and other devices. 
Local smart energy grids can play an important 
role in mitigating the impacts of this and supporting 
a low carbon and resilient energy network. The 
roll out of smart meters in homes, improvements 
in communications technology, reducing costs for 
renewable energy generation and battery storage, 
provide greater opportunities to use demand 
management to shift flexible demands, store energy 
and reduce peaks in electrical demand.  Energy 
pricing structures and system balancing mechanisms 
are expected to increasingly favour local demand 
management.  Dynamic balancing of demand and 
supply on local distribution networks will play an 
increasing role in ensuring a resilient low carbon and 
cost effective electricity supply system.  New smart 
infrastructure must be designed to enable this through 
connection of local generation sources and appropriate 
provision of storage, metering and control and 
communication technology.
6.110. In respect of heat, OPDC’s preferred approach 
is to develop a strategically planned decentralised 
heat network. In accordance with the London Plan 
(2021), secondary heat sources for decentralised 
networks should be prioritised. OPDC’s Utilities Study 
demonstrates that the OPDC area has access to a 
number of low carbon heat sources including heat from 
the Grand Union Canal, sewage networks, aquifers 
and potentially heat from Energy from Waste (EfW). 
The work has also demonstrated that the available low 
carbon heat sources could meet much of the baseload 
heat demand for the development. Any heat network 
would need to accord with the specific requirements 
set out in OPDC’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP).  SUPPORTING TEXT
6.107. The Mayor is committed to reducing London’s 
carbon emissions significantly over the next few 
decades. Development on the scale envisaged in the 
OPDC area has the opportunity to deliver low and, 
over time, zero carbon development in line with the 
Mayor’s aspirations. As the Old Oak and Park Royal 
area represents one of the biggest development 
projects in London, setting new standards across this 
development can be a catalyst for better development 
across all of London’s Opportunity Areas. However, 
there is a cost associated with delivering low carbon 
development and careful decisions therefore need to 
be made when choosing the best way to achieve this 
aspiration.
6.108. Measures supporting energy efficiency (see 
Policy EU9) are an important step towards ensuring 
a zero carbon future in Old Oak and Park Royal. 
Avoidance over the long run is the most cost effective 
way to achieve carbon reduction and it reduces running 
costs for occupants, which in affordable homes can be 
particularly beneficial. 
6.109. In conjunction with an emphasis on energy 
efficiency, the achievement of the Mayor’s zero 
carbon targets will require the adoption of innovative 
approaches to the generation and supply of heat, hot 164
6.111. In non-residential buildings, it is likely that 
cooling may also be required. In some locations, low 
carbon cooling networks may be a more efficient way 
to deliver cooling to buildings particularly where there is 
a cluster of non-residential developments or buildings 
with high cooling loads. Cooling networks could enable 
improved heat rejection efficiencies or rejected heat to 
be recovered.
6.112. OPDC is seeking to promote the most cost 
effective and resilient way possible to achieve a 
strategic approach to low carbon energy provision. A 
strategic heat network is likely to consist of a series of 
energy centre clusters and district heat networks. Over 
time these energy centres would ideally be connected 
to provide additional resilience and flexibility to support 
the use of the most cost effective and low carbon 
energy sources at any time of the day.  
6.113. Whilst promoting a strategic site-wide approach, 
it is important to recognise that this would likely require 
a more interventionist approach and investment ahead 
of need. In recognition of the timescales and the costs 
involved in delivering a strategic area-wide or clustered 
approach, all new development must continue to 
comply with London Plan policy and be designed so 
that it can plug into the low carbon district networks/
clusters and deliver on-site heating solutions.
6.114. New technologies and renewable technologies 
are evolving rapidly including solar hot water, 
Photovoltaic (PV), and fuel cell technologies. They 
are also becoming more commercially viable. As 
these systems evolve it is likely that they will be able 
to provide low carbon heat and power cost effectively 
allowing development to move away from fossil fuel 
based systems.     
6.115. Evidence suggests that where heat networks 
have been installed, heat is often being lost through 
poor installation resulting in leakage and heat loss 
and poor commissioning1. The loss can be as high as EU10
40%. This can contribute to overheating of buildings. 
Systems should be installed in line with industry best 
practice in order to prevent overheating, keep user 
costs to a minimum and minimise carbon emissions.  
The Association of Decentralised Energy and CIBSE 
have developed the Heat Networks Code of Practice 
for the UK1 and the GLA have developed the District 
Heating Manual for London2. The Code of Practice and 
Heating Manual should be adopted or where this has 
been superseded, the most up to date guidance should 
be used. 
6.116. Heat and cooling networks in the UK are 
currently unregulated, unlike power and water 
utilities. This has led to concerns regarding the 
protection customers receive in terms of levels 
of service, the price they pay for energy and how 
vulnerable customers are treated. In the absence of 
a regulated industry the Heat Trust3 has established 
a set of customer service standards and customer 
protection requirements comparable to the quality and 
performance standards for regulated utilities and which 
draw on legislation and industry best practice. OPDC 
will support proposals that protect customers in respect 
of price of energy provided and the level of service. 
6.117. OPDC’s Utilities Study shows there is sufficient 
transmission capacity within the National Grid network. 
However, the electricity infrastructure within the area 
is close to capacity and insufficient to cater for the 
full demand of the development envisaged over the 
lifetime of the Local Plan. Electrical power provision 
is a regulated industry and Distribution Network 
Operators (DNOs) can only respond to requests 
for additional capacity as and when they are made. 
In situations where a large new development is 
planned the regulated approach can cause issues. 
Development can be delayed as the costs of increasing 
step changes in infrastructure can be excessive to 
a smaller developer who may be put off and wait 
for another larger developer to come along and 
fund the infrastructure upgrades. To support timely REFERENCES
1. CP1: Heat Network Code of Practice for the UK. CIBSE.  July 2015
2. District Heating Manual for London, Arup, GLA, February 2013
3. http://www.heattrust.org/index.php/the-schemedelivery, applicants for major developments should 
demonstrate active engagement with OPDC who 
are seeking to secure investment ahead of need to 
enable development to proceed. In addition or where 
a network has not been installed, developers should 
work with the appointed DNOs and IDNOs to identify 
spare capacity in the area and where none exists, 
developers will be expected to demonstrate to OPDC 
their proposed approach to secure an increase in 
capacity to support the timely delivery of development.165
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Air Quality Study
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Integrated Water Management Strategy
• Smart Strategy
• Utilities StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP7 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Transport Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policies DI1 and DI3a) OPDC will work with partners and stakeholders 
to position Old Oak and Park Royal as a world 
leading location for the adoption of smart city 
technologies, systems and approaches.
b) Development proposals will be supported where 
they directly provide and demonstrate in their 
design the flexibility and adaptability to:
i) incorporate smart city technologies and 
approaches that enable resources, space, 
systems and materials to be monitored and 
managed efficiently; 
ii) integrate smart city management systems 
or where available adopt OPDC’s smart city 
management system to provide interoperable, 
open and usable data;
iii) ensure that any smart city technologies and 
approaches can be updated over time to 
respond to innovation; 
iv) adopt protocols and systems that are 
compatible with others used in OPDC in order 
to allow for the safe sharing of information and 
data without compromising data protection; 
v) ensure open access provision of wired and 
wireless broadband technologies delivering 
the highest speeds to provide a wide 
range of services. Development should 
prioritise connecting to strategic area wide 
telecommunications networks when and where 
they are available; and
vi) support and enable effective and efficient 
provision of smart services by OPDC, local 
authorities, statutory undertakers, Independent 
Distribution Network Operators (IDNOs), social 
infrastructure providers including health and 
education services and other organisations 
that are responsible for managing the public 
realm and supplying vital services to the area.POLICY EU11: Smart Technology
e)  give access to place makers and service providers 
to provide joined up and efficient services that 
respond to customer needs. 
6.120. OPDC will work closely with the Smart London 
Board and other stakeholders, including the GLA, 
British Standards Institute, HyperCat, Catapult Centres, 
Imperial College and University College London to 
ensure that the approach adopted is cutting edge and 
adaptable, accessible and open. 
6.121. Open and interoperable data can support the 
management of space and resources and reduce the 
carbon footprint of people living and working in the 
area and enhance the quality of life for all. In providing 
open and interoperable data, including appropriate 
digital Building Information Management (BIM) models, 
proposals will help OPDC achieve its aspirations in 
delivering an open and secure digital environment. 
Specifically, this will aid OPDC to plan, deliver 
and manage development while creating business 
opportunities, including application development for a 
range of technologies.
6.122. Smart technology will be used to help provide 
insights into the area as it evolves and to support 
the evolving development, iterations of the Local 
Plan, better decision making, public engagement, 
governance and resource utilisation.
6.123. Smart City technology, tools and practices are 
rapidly evolving. OPDC wishes to ensure that smart 
technology can be easily and economically upgraded 
to respond to future innovation. It will be important that 
new development proposals adequately demonstrate 
how their proposals are sufficiently flexible and 
adaptable to accommodate future innovation in their 
design and operation over time to enable the built 
environment to respond to future environmental and 
social requirements. Whilst OPDC wishes to provide 
fast high quality access to smart data and systems, it is 
also mindful of the need to protect users and their data. SUPPORTING TEXT
6.118. The transformative change proposed across 
Old Oak and Park Royal and the timescales involved 
requires OPDC to consider how the area will function 
over the coming decades and what role smart city 
technology will have. In accordance with Policy SP2, 
OPDC wishes for the OPDC area to be a place where 
smart city innovation and technology will be fully 
embraced and harnessed to create opportunities and 
address challenges to development. OPDC will expect 
developers to also contribute to the delivery of this 
vision.
6.119. OPDC will work with partners and stakeholders 
to position Old Oak and Park Royal as a global leading 
location for the exploration and implementation of 
smart city technology, concepts and systems to:
a) plan, deliver and manage development;
b)  improve the quality of life of local people and 
Londoners;
c)  create and capture economic, social and 
environmental opportunities; 
d) address challenges and barriers; and166
Figure 6.12: InLinkUK Street KioskProtocols, systems and standards will therefore be 
established to protect data and vulnerability to misuse. 
Data will be kept in a secure environment.  
6.124. There are existing broadband issues in the 
OPDC area, in particular, in Park Royal. OPDC is 
working with broadband and telecommunications 
companies to overcome these. New development 
proposals should deliver the highest speeds of wired 
and wireless broadband, to enable businesses in the 
Old Oak and Park Royal area to appropriately compete 
with other businesses on the global stage. Developers 
should engage early within OPDC to identify existing 
provision and to design their telecommunications 
infrastructure to appropriately connect into any area-
wide open access network. Specification requirements, 
where known, are included within OPDC’s 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan.EU11167
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Transport Policies T7 and T8Applications for mineral extraction development will 
be supported where they: 
a)  do not undermine the timely delivery of OPDC’s 
homes and jobs targets or capacity identified in 
the Places Chapter and/or Site Allocations;
b) adequately protect the amenity of nearby residents 
and businesses from the effects of the operations, 
particularly in regard to air quality, odour and noise 
and vibration;
c) are sensitive to and conserve and enhance 
the character of the urban landscape, green 
infrastructure and designated and non-designated 
heritage assets;
d)  do not have an unacceptable impact on the 
transport network and provide appropriate site 
access and routing for heavy vehicles; 
e)  demonstrate that the proposal would not give rise 
to unacceptable pollution to land and/or the water 
environment; 
f) adequately control and mitigate greenhouse 
gas emissions and dust during construction and 
operation;
g) support the efficient use of resources;
h)  contribute to the development of heat and energy 
recovery or low carbon technologies; and
i) adequately make provision for restoration of the 
site after development.POLICY EU12: Extraction of Minerals
SUPPORTING TEXT
6.125. The OPDC area is not currently covered 
by Department of Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy (BEIS) licences allowing companies to search 
for minerals, including unconventional oil and gas 
and to the best of OPDC’s knowledge, the geology 
of the area is unlikely to be suitable for shale gas 
production. There is a minor possibility of ballast and 
other materials being discovered during investigation 
or construction works which could become a useful 
resource over the duration of the project.
6.126. OPDC has ambitious homes and jobs targets 
to achieve within the Plan period. If mineral extraction 
is to be appropriate, it would need to demonstrate 
that it will not prevent OPDC from achieving these 
targets. As part of this, regard will need to be had to 
OPDC’s indicative site phasing, shown in Figure 3.16. 
Applications for mineral extraction that result in delays 
to the delivery of OPDC’s indicative phasing and 
associated housing and jobs targets, are unlikely to be 
supported. 
6.127. The acceptability of any mineral extraction 
operations will also be judged in terms of the proposals 
impacts on amenity, on the environment and on 
the transport network. Pollution to local land and 
perched waterways would need to be given special 
consideration as it would create an offence under the 
Environmental Damage Regulations 2009.
6.128. OPDC will consult with the relevant boroughs 
regarding any proposals for minerals extraction. 
Outside the planning system, licences for exploration 
are dealt with by the Oil and Gas Authority as an 
executive agency of the BEIS.168
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Decontamination Study
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI2Development proposals will be supported where they 
effectively treat, contain or control any contamination 
so as not to: 
a) expose the occupiers of the development and 
neighbouring land uses including, in the case of 
housing, the users of open spaces and gardens to 
an unacceptable risk;
b) threaten the structural integrity of any building 
built, or to be built, on or adjoining the site; 
c)  lead to the contamination of any watercourse, 
water body or aquifer; or 
d)  cause the contamination of adjoining land or allow 
such contamination to continue;
When development is proposed on or near a site that 
is known to be, or there is good reason to believe 
may be, contaminated, or where a sensitive use is 
proposed, development proposals will be required: 
e) following planning permission being granted, 
to effectively treat, contain or control any 
contamination, in the following sequential manner:
i) undertake necessary site investigations;
ii) refine the conceptual model;
iii) undertake an options appraisal and evaluate 
options to define a remediation strategy;
iv) produce a remediation strategy;
v) implement the remediation strategy;
vi) submit a verification study; and
vii) monitor how well remediation has worked;
f) work collaboratively with OPDC and with other 
developers to consider the feasibility of a strategic 
approach to the remediation of land; and
g) treat any contaminated materials on-site and re-
use or recycle debris and/or treated materials.POLICY EU13: Land Contamination
and land contamination. The Environment Agency 
documents ‘Model Procedures for the Management of 
Contaminated Land’ and ‘Managing and reducing land 
contamination: guiding principles’ are particularly useful 
as they highlight the main stages in the process, best 
practice and refer to further guidance.
6.133. Where land is suspected, known or found to be 
contaminated, or where a sensitive use is proposed 
or exists, developers will be expected to assess their 
proposals using the eight stage process outlined in 
Table 6.2 including submitting a Preliminary Risk 
Assessment and Site Investigation Scheme as part of 
planning applications.
6.134. Brownfield land within a master planned area 
may have a combination of problems, including 
contamination that can be addressed more 
economically and sustainably where developers work 
with one another to treat, contain and control any 
contamination. Developers should work with OPDC 
and other developers to consider the potential for a 
strategic approach to be taken to the remediation of 
land, in accordance with Policy SP10. This approach 
could lead to efficiencies in costs and reduced 
environmental impacts. 
6.135. Sending contaminated soils to landfill is no 
longer considered to be sustainable, or economic. 
Sustainable, economic and local alternatives are 
required. At OPDC the opportunity exists to promote 
strategic and sustainable risk based approaches to 
land assessment and remediation based upon current 
best practice and guidance. In some cases, the 
polluted layers in a site may contain rubble, rubbish 
and coarse waste materials. Often, on-site recycling 
and re-use of debris and treated material is possible 
and can reduce demand for primary aggregate 
resources, the need to transport material off-site and 
reduce the potential risks from pollution. This will be 
encouraged wherever possible.SUPPORTING TEXT
6.129. The OPDC area contains a significant amount 
of brownfield land with a long industrial history. Much 
of this land is expected to be contaminated and 
require remediation or clean up. Given the scale of 
regeneration planned, OPDC wants to ensure the 
impacts of these past and future land uses do not affect 
the health of people and the environment.
6.130. Land contamination and remediation is the 
subject of planning and other regulatory regimes. A 
key to the successful redevelopment of brownfield land 
is therefore early and continual engagement between 
developers, planners and regulators. OPDC will expect 
developers to work with OPDC, the relevant London 
Boroughs and the Environment Agency in assessing 
the risks and the management of contamination, in 
assessing the suitability of the proposed use for the 
conditions on that site, and in agreeing any necessary 
steps for remediation. 
6.131. The local authorities hold the specific 
responsibility for the management of land 
contamination within their boundary under Part 2A of 
the Environmental Protection Act 1990 and will have to 
agree in writing any proposed submissions or actions 
with regard to the assessment or remediation of land 
contamination. After remediation under planning, 
as a minimum, land should not be capable of being 
determined as contaminated land as defined by Part 
2A of the Environmental Protection Act 1990 by the 
relevant local authority.
6.132. Regulatory advice and guidance is available to 
identify the principal matters which OPDC, the local 
authorities and the environmental regulator will look 
to have undertaken when approaching redevelopment 169
Table 6.2: Land Contamination Assessment ProcessEU13
1.  Preliminary Risk Assessment
Comprising a desktop study including details 
of past and present uses at the site and the 
surrounding area, to identify any potential sources of 
contamination, potential risks and sensitive receptors. 
A conceptual site model should be produced 
to demonstrate where any pathway connects 
any potential sources to the sensitive receptors. 
Information collected by the relevant local authority 
as part of their preliminary review of historical land 
uses must be incorporated into the Preliminary Risk 
Assessment and any risk assessment without this 
information will not be accepted as complete.
2.  Site Investigation Scheme
Based upon stage one, setting out how the site 
investigation will be carried out, how the sources of 
pollution identified in the conceptual site model will 
be targeted and to determine the existence of the 
pathway to the identified receptors. 3.  Site Investigation
To be undertaken as defined in stage 2 using current 
guidance and methods.
4.  Risk Assessment
A quantitative risk assessment based upon site 
investigation, which updates the conceptual site 
model produced in stage one  to determine the 
degree and nature of any contamination on the site 
and the risks posed by any contamination to human 
health, controlled waters and the wider environment. 
5.  Remediation Strategy
A detailed method statement for required remediation 
works identified through stage four, with the aim of 
breaking any pollutant linkages. The Strategy should 
support waste minimisation and maximising resource 
use by promoting the sustainable remediation and re-
use of contaminated soils. 6. Unexpected contamination
If during development, contamination not previously 
identified is found to be present at the site, the 
conceptual site model should be updated and if any 
remediation is necessary, the strategy detailed in 
stage 5 should be updated.
7.  Verification
A report which validates and verifies that all of the 
works outlined in stage five and six have been 
undertaken as agreed. 
8.  On-going monitoring
An ongoing monitoring report should be produced 
where monitoring past the completion of development 
works is necessary to verify the success of the 
remediation undertaken as part of stage 5 as well as 
a verification report upon completion of these works. 
If monitoring identifies that further remediation is 
required, the developer will be required to undertake 
this.170
Chapter 7
TRANSPORT171
7.1. Transport is the catalyst for the regeneration of 
the OPDC area. The transport network at Old Oak and 
Park Royal must be planned and delivered to support 
the needs of existing and future communities living, 
working and visiting the area.
7.2. Transport provision across all modes in Old 
Oak and Park Royal should be exceptional, creating 
high quality, safe and accessible movement networks 
that reduce the need to travel, prioritise sustainable 
transport modes as set out in the sustainable transport 
hierarchy in Policy SP7 in Chapter 3 and enable 
people to live healthy and active lifestyles. Delivering 
this high quality transport network will enable the 
attainment of the Mayor’s target for 80% of journeys to 
be made by walking, cycling or public transport. There is also a need to appropriately manage construction 
traffic, given the scale of delivery of development and 
infrastructure envisaged, and to support effective and 
sustainable freight and servicing, particularly within 
Park Royal, London’s largest industrial estate. The 
policies in this chapter set out how OPDC expects this 
to be achieved. 
7.3. This chapter does not deal with the spatial 
aspects of the transport requirements across Old Oak 
and Park Royal. It should be read in conjunction with 
the strategic policies and places contained within 
Chapters 3 and 4 and specifically with Policy SP7 
(Connecting People and Places). Introduction
Transport Policies:
• T1: Roads and Streets
• T2: Walking
• T3: Cycling
• T4: Parking
• T5: Rail
• T6: Buses
• T7: Freight, Servicing and Deliveries
• T8: Construction
• T9: Transport Assessments and Travel Plans
Figure 7.1: London Bridge Station172
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costs StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP3, SP7, SP8, SP9 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1, D2 and D5
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU2 and EU3
• Transport Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI1POLICY T1: Roads and Streets
Development proposals will be supported where they:  
a)  support and deliver a street network across 
Old Oak and Park Royal that encourages and 
enables behaviour and forms of travel in line with 
the “Healthy Streets for London” vision;
b)  support the delivery of a range of new and 
improved streets that help overcome severance, 
alleviate congestion and optimise connectivity 
both within the development area and to 
surrounding areas;
c) ensure all new streets are built and designed to 
adoptable standards;
d)  ensure all new streets are built and designed 
in accordance with TfL and Local Highways 
Authority guidance/standards, appropriate to local 
characteristics and demands;
e)  mitigate the impact of development on the 
surrounding local and strategic road network;
f) implement maximum speeds of 20mph on all new 
roads and existing roads where appropriate; and
g) promote effective and integrated management 
of streets to future-proof for changes in the 
surrounding context, life-style and technological 
changes.SUPPORTING TEXT
7.4. In accordance with Policy SP7, Old Oak and 
Park Royal’s streets should be the exemplar for 
delivering the Healthy Streets Approach contained 
in ‘Healthy Streets for London’ (published February 
2017). The Healthy Streets Approach aims to reduce 
traffic, pollution and noise, create more attractive, 
accessible and people-friendly streets, and improve 
health and wellbeing. The Healthy Streets Approach 
is the framework within which all transport proposals 
should be set, including freight, accessibility and 
connectivity.
7.5. There are 10 Healthy Streets Indicators which 
cover the factors essential for health-promoting, 
inclusive street environments. These ensure that 
streets are designed with all potential users in 
mind, including more vulnerable users with specific 
requirements such as disabled and elderly users. 
Designs should also consider people who will want to 
stop and enjoy the street as a place.
7.6. The Healthy Streets Approach looks at the 
street as a whole, considering its multiple functions 
from building line to building line and ensuring the 
needs of different people are considered. This is 
different to the usual transport approach of focusing on 
individual transport modes.
7.7. Applicants will be required to use the Healthy 
Streets guidance to guide street design for both 
vehicular and non-vehicular routes. They will be 
expected to use this as a checklist and propose 
improvements if required. The Healthy Street Check 
for Designers spreadsheet tool and TfL Streets Toolkit 
should be used to score specific design proposals. This 
should be evidenced within the transport assessment 
of a submitted planning application (see Policy T9). 
This will enable developments to deliver positive 
outcomes for accessible, inclusive streets which are 
healthy, safe, welcoming to walk and cycle in, and 
which promote active travel. Figure 7.2: Healthy Streets Indicators
7.8. Measures to prioritise bus movement, 
provide segregated facilities for cyclists and create 
pedestrianised areas will be supported. This will 
enable the achievement of the sustainable transport 
hierarchy, as set out in Policy SP7. In SIL, the road 
network will need to support the movement of freight to 
facilitate business growth by implementing measures 
to address existing congestion issues. This will need to 
be carefully planned alongside the need to improve bus 
movements, improve the environment for pedestrians 
and cyclists and deliver a healthy street environment. 
There are also routes within Old Oak and Park Royal 
which are for pedestrians and cyclists only, such as the 
canal towpaths and various other key links which are 
unsuitable for vehicular use. The street network must 
be coherent and legible which can be achieved by 
ensuring the layout for vehicles, cycles and pedestrians 
is continuous along the length of the street.173
7.9. 20 mile per hour speeds will be expected to be 
implemented in consultation with the local highways 
authorities through both design features and signage 
on all new and existing roads, except the A40 and 
A406 which are part of the Transport for London Road 
Network (TLRN). Managing vehicle movement and 
speed will also be achieved through good design 
and signage. All new and improved roads must be 
built to adoptable standards. As part of development 
management discussions, OPDC will consult with the 
local highways authorities to identify any streets sought for adoption. If streets are identified, OPDC will secure 
through section 106 agreements that these new streets 
are offered for adoption to the relevant Local Highway 
Authority. Any agreement between the developer 
and the relevant local highway authorities to adopt 
a road will need to be secured in accordance with 
section 38 of the Highways Act 1980. Any agreement 
between the developer and the relevant local highway 
authorities. A design assurance process will be in place 
– with proposals reviewed by relevant user groups 
and stakeholders. The designs will be subjected to a 
Figure 7.3: New Road, Brighton (credit: Gehl)T1
robust Road Safety Audit process and compatibility 
with relevant design guidance. Traffic modelling will 
be required to demonstrate that the proposed street 
designs cater appropriately for demand from different 
modes to ensure an appropriate balance in demands 
on the network is achieved.
7.10.  To achieve a connected place and reduce 
existing severance across Old Oak and Park Royal 
new and improved bridges and underpasses will 
be required. In accordance with Policy SP7, it will 
be important that the bridges and underpasses are 
integrated into the proposed street network and serve 
key desire lines. The Healthy Streets for London vision 
requires the delivery of adequate seating within streets 
that are also well-lit and safe environments.
7.11. A successful street network at Old Oak and 
Park Royal will enable the integration of pedestrian, 
cycle and public transport links into surrounding areas. 
Links to the existing street network will provide the 
potential to unlock additional regeneration in the wider 
area. This includes links to Harlesden, East Acton, 
Wembley, Kensal Rise, Kensal Canalside, White City 
and Alperton.
7.12. The delivery of the sustainable transport 
hierarchy outlined in SP7 will reduce traffic congestion 
on roads in Old Oak and Park Royal, reducing peoples’ 
need to travel and ensuring that when they do, people 
walk, cycle or use public transport.
7.13. A new legible street network at Old Oak and 
Park Royal must be able to evolve over time and be 
resilient to future technological development, such as 
new forms of vehicle technology, ownership models 
and changing lifestyles (see Policy EU7 and EU11).174
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy 
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costs StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP3, SP7 and SP8
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1, D2 and D5
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU2 and EU3
• Transport Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI1POLICY T2: Walking
Development proposals will be supported where 
they:
a) deliver or contribute to new and enhanced 
walking infrastructure, in line with Policy SP7 on 
connections shown on figure 7.5;
b) support the delivery of a high quality, safe, 
accessible and inclusive walking environment 
across Old Oak and Park Royal;
c) support the delivery of a high quality pedestrian 
walking environment to and through new and 
existing rail stations;
d)  connect to existing and planned pedestrian links 
in the wider area; and
e) make appropriate contributions to the network of 
Legible London wayfinding signage to improve 
legibility across Old Oak and Park Royal.
SUPPORTING TEXT
7.14. The regeneration of Old Oak and Park Royal 
presents an opportunity to enhance the existing and 
provide new environments for pedestrians across and 
into the wider surrounding area. Figure 7.5 shows 
the indicative future key walking routes in Old Oak 
and Park Royal. In addition to the key walking routes 
identified, other local streets would also contribute New connections and wayfinding to both existing and 
proposed strategic walking routes to surrounding areas 
such as Harlesden Town Centre, Kensal Rise, Kensal 
Canalside, East Acton and White City should also be 
provided.
7.19. The design of new pedestrian infrastructure 
should be aligned with best practice principles and 
standards. Examples include pedestrian countdown 
technology at crossings, appropriate space allocation 
for street furniture and conformance of all routes to 
accessibility requirements.
Figure 7.4: Legible London Wayfindingtowards the walking network. OPDC’s IDP identifies 
further details of the key interventions in walking 
infrastructure required to maximise the number of 
walking trips through the delivery of a high quality 
walking environment.  These interventions must 
also be supported by a high quality on-site walking 
environment.
7.15. Walking provision should be safe, well lit, 
comfortable, coherent and attractive, in line with 
Healthy Streets Indicators. It should integrate well 
with the street environment and desire lines and 
minimise conflict between different users. Reducing 
existing issues of severance and enhancing permeable 
movement will be key to developing a cohesive walking 
network. It will be important to provide a number 
of new links under or over barriers created by the 
existing infrastructure and topography. Where possible, 
OPDC will look to secure the early delivery of these 
connections to help support a shift towards sustainable 
transport modes, in accordance with OPDC’s 
sustainable transport hierarchy. 
7.16. By providing a street network that is safe, 
attractive and easy to navigate, people will be 
encouraged to walk more. This will have social, 
economic, environmental and health and wellbeing 
benefits for people living, working and visiting the area 
and will also support the viability of the development 
area. 
7.17. High quality pedestrian walking routes to, 
and where possible through, new and existing rail 
stations will be vital to ensure residents, workers and 
businesses can benefit from the excellent connectivity 
provided by improved public transport across Old Oak 
and Park Royal. 
7.18. Legible London wayfinding measures including 
signage should be implemented throughout the area 
to provide clear, comprehensive and consistent 
information to key destinations. This will also help 
enable pedestrians to complete more journeys on foot. 175
Figure 7.5: Indicative Future Walking Network
176
Figure 7.6: Cycle Tunnel, Amsterdam
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling StrategyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3, SP7 and SP8
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D2, D3 and D6
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU2 and EU3
• Transport Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI1POLICY T3: Cycling
Development proposals will be supported where they: 
a) deliver and/ or contribute to new and existing 
cycle networks shown on figure 7.7;
b) ensure new or enhanced cycle networks, 
infrastructure and parking accords with the 
London Cycling Design Standards;
c) ensure that new cycle networks connect into and 
support the wider, existing cycle network, National 
Cycle route 6 and the future cycle superhighway 
route to Wood Lane; 
d) deliver a comprehensive, safe, attractive and 
inclusive cycle network across Old Oak and Park 
Royal;
e) deliver and/ or contribute to new and improved 
cycling connections to rail stations ensuring 
sufficient cycle infrastructure allows seamless 
interchange between public transport and cycling; 
f) deliver and/ or contribute towards signage to 
improve cycle wayfinding and legibility;
g) provide high quality, secure, well located, 
convenient and accessible cycle parking facilities 
that meet and where possible exceed the 
standards set out in the London Plan; and
h) deliver and/ or contribute towards the provision of 
cycle hire across Old Oak and Park Royal, which 
may include complementary independent local 
cycle hire operators.SUPPORTING TEXT
7.20. A significant improvement to cycling 
infrastructure has been achieved in recent years 
across London’s street network with innovative 
solutions supporting the growth in cycling. Underpinned 
by the London Cycling Design Standards, this has 
encouraged a bold approach to making better, more 
attractive streets and spaces for cyclists. Higher levels 
of cycling can be achieved through the delivery of 
infrastructure to create a cycle network that is safe, 
comfortable, coherent, attractive and adaptable, whilst 
ensuring consideration is given to the impact of cycling 
infrastructure on pedestrians.
7.21. OPDC will support the delivery of a 
comprehensive cycle network that improves cycle 
permeability throughout the OPDC area. OPDC 
will seek to enhance access to rail stations where there should be significant provision for high quality 
cycling infrastructure. Figure 7.7 shows the indicative 
future cycle network in Old Oak and Park Royal and 
further details are provided in OPDC’s Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP). In addition to the key cycle routes 
identified, other local streets would also contribute 
towards the cycle network. 
7.22. Redevelopment presents an opportunity 
to provide state of the art and innovative cycling 
infrastructure and parking facilities that can benefit 
everyone who lives and works in the area. In particular, 
rail stations should have sufficient cycling infrastructure 
that allows seamless interchange.
7.23. For Park Royal, the vast majority of the area’s 
current employees live within 8km of Park Royal and 
a significant concentration live within 5km or less. 
This distance is well within cycling distance for those T3177
Figure 7.7: Indicative Future Cycle Network
178
employees; however, only 3% of employees choose 
to cycle1. It is important to realise a shift towards 
cycle usage through good design of cycle routes, 
connections to existing and proposed cycle networks 
and better cycle infrastructure. This will need to be 
balanced against the needs of existing and future 
businesses in Park Royal and their need for securing 
freight movement. The Healthy Streets Approach 
provides a framework within which to draw this 
balance.
7.24. New and enhanced bridges and underpasses 
are depicted in the Place Policies and are identified 
within OPDC’s IDP. These are needed where there are currently barriers to movement, such as across 
the A40, the A406, the various rail lines and the 
Grand Union Canal.  Cycle wayfinding signage will 
be required to improve the legibility and navigation to, 
from and through the area and to create legible cycling 
links to nearby local centres such as Harlesden, White 
City, Queens Park and Ladbroke Grove, Alperton, 
East Acton, Kensal Rise and Kensal Canalside and to 
central London.
7.25. The importance of delivering “end-of-journey” 
cycle facilities in the form of secure cycle parking, 
lockers and showers for places of work is recognised 
in the London Cycle Design Standards2. OPDC will work to develop training and guidance and improve 
awareness of the benefits of cycling to employees, 
to encourage more cycling. This will be secured in 
accordance with Travel Plan conditions (see Policy T9).
7.26. Cycle parking should cater for future demand, in 
line with the quantitative and qualitative requirements 
set out in the London Cycling Design Standards 
(2014). Given the proposed density of new homes and 
jobs and the excellent future accessibility, encouraging 
increased cycling will be important to ensure a high 
quality and sustainable transport network. Therefore, 
OPDC will seek to exceed these cycle parking 
standards and where possible providing numbers 
in excess of London Plan minimum standards. This 
should include private cycle parking for residents and 
employees as well as generous provision of public 
parking for visitors and high quality facilities at public 
transport interchanges. All cycle parking stands 
must be secure, sheltered and adequately lit, with 
convenient access to the street. The necessary spatial 
and design requirements will need to be factored in 
from the outset and should not impede pedestrian 
movement. 
7.27. A future extension of Cycle Hire into Old Oak 
and Park Royal would represent a logical expansion 
westwards. Subject to further analysis, a network 
of docking stations should be designed for the area 
from the outset and built at the appropriate timings. 
Docking stations must be appropriately embedded 
into the public realm in accordance with Policy D1. 
Funding for the docking stations will be sought from 
contributions from development. Developers may also 
need to provide land for docking stations. OPDC will 
also support proposals for infrastructure which will 
enable other complementary cycle hire schemes to 
be developed and implemented across the area. Any 
proposals will need to be delivered in consultation with 
the local highways authorities.Figure 7.8: Bow Riverside Cycle Trail
REFERENCES
1. Park Royal Transport Strategy
2. https://tfl.gov.uk/corporate/publications-and-reports/streets-toolkitT3179
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Car Parking Study
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport StrategyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP3 and SP7
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1, D2 and D5
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU2 and EU7
• Transport Policies (All)POLICY T4: Parking
a) OPDC will ensure that Old Oak and Park 
Royal will promote a modal shift towards more 
sustainable modes and becomes an exemplar of 
low carbon development, by:
i) limiting car parking for residential development 
to a maximum of 0.2 spaces per residential 
unit;
ii) requiring car-free development for residential 
developments located in existing or planned 
areas with PTAL between 4 and 6B;
iii) requiring car-free development for non-
residential developments, unless in certain 
cases limited car parking can be justified when 
operational or business needs and access to 
public transport are taken into account; and 
iv) securing appropriate blue badge provision for 
both residential and non-residential uses, in 
accordance with Mayoral policy.
b) New residents will be prevented from applying for 
parking permits for CPZs;
c) When providing car parking, proposals should:
i) incorporate 20% active and 80% passive 
electric charging points for electric vehicles 
at all new residential parking spaces and 
infrastructure for electric vehicles in all new 
operational non-residential car parking 
spaces, including active charging points for all 
taxi spaces;
ii) include appropriate provision for car club 
vehicles;
iii) be sensitively designed and not take 
precedence over other street users, or the 
design and quality of open space, public realm 
and building frontages; and
iv) be adaptable and demonstrate how they can 
be replaced by other uses in the future;
d) Proposals should provide suitable facilities 
to cater for anticipated demand for taxis and 
coaches; andSUPPORTING TEXT
7.28. Old Oak and Park Royal will become one of 
the most accessible locations in the UK when the 
proposed public transport investments are delivered. 
Providing high quality connections through the 
delivery and effective integration of state of the art 
transport infrastructure will be a key aspect of the 
area’s success. It provides the rationale for the phased 
implementation of car-free development.
7.29. OPDC will require development to be car free 
on sites where the highest existing or planned PTALs 
fall within 4-6b. This approach is justified by the very 
high level of public transport accessibility resulting 
from planned and proposed transport investment which 
supports transit oriented development and encourages 
and enables travel behaviours in line with the Healthy 
Streets Approach. However, it is recognised that until 
new public transport infrastructure is delivered, some 
parts of Old Oak and Park Royal will have inadequate 
access to public transport and therefore may not be able to support car-free development. Figure 7.10 
shows the current PTAL levels for the area, whilst 
figure 7.11 shows potential future PTAL levels in the 
OPDC area when all of the transport infrastructure 
detailed within the Local Plan has been delivered. This 
policy will be kept under review. 
7.30. It is recognised that some businesses may 
require an allowance for a limited number of private 
vehicles to accommodate out of hours shift working 
or to support trade and other business requirements 
and this will be supported. However, this will need 
to be carefully planned so as to mitigate potential 
negative impacts from increased traffic. Any car parking 
provision should be clearly set out within the applicant’s 
Car Parking Management Plans, required by Mayoral 
policy. 
7.31. OPDC will work with the local highway 
authorities, businesses and local groups to achieve a 
coordinated approach to the potential implementation 
of Controlled Parking Zones (CPZs) across the area.  
It will be important to protect residents living close 
to stations and high streets and this approach will 
also discourage journeys made by car, which could 
be made by more sustainable transport modes. New 
residents will be prevented from applying for parking 
permits for CPZs.
7.32. A network of car club bays spread across 
the site will provide a convenient, cost-effective and 
attractive alternative to owning a private car and will 
support the optimal use of space (see Policy EU7). 
Car club bays will need to be designed into the new 
development areas from the outset. Car club bays 
should be designed in such a way that they can be 
adapted for different uses in the future. 
7.33. Providing sufficient charging points is essential 
in encouraging the uptake of electric vehicles. To this 
end, OPDC requires that 20% of all new residential 
parking spaces have active provision for electric e) Proposals should adequately address the needs 
of other street users and minimise the impact 
on the quality of open space, public realm and 
building frontages.180
vehicles and the remaining 80% of all new residential 
parking spaces have passive provision for electric 
vehicles. 100% of the car parking spaces used 
operationally for non-residential developments should 
have electric vehicle charging infrastructure and 
proposals should provide active charging points for 
all taxi spaces. Charging infrastructure should look to 
incorporate systems that can be integrated into the 
local distribution network to help regulate demand 
and supply and provide energy storage capacity. In 
applying this policy, developers will need to respond 
to future technological advances for electric vehicle 
charging points.
7.34. To encourage the uptake of low emission 
vehicles and ensure that the Old Oak and Park Royal 
area is an exemplar of low carbon development, 
OPDC will work with TfL and their preferred suppliers 
to deliver the local component of the electric vehicle 
network.  OPDC will also work with TfL Taxi and Private 
Hire and other commercial operators such as car clubs 
to understand their needs for charging infrastructure 
and ensure that their requirements are included in 
development proposals. OPDC will also work with 
highway authorities and local businesses to explore 
opportunities for the provision of rapid electric charging 
points for freight vehicles, to reduce emissions from 
freight. 
7.35. It will be important to carefully manage onward 
journeys from stations to encourage walking, cycling 
or use of the bus network. There is still likely to be a 
demand for coaches, taxis and private hire vehicles 
(PHVs) generated at stations and other land uses 
such as cultural or leisure uses which needs to be 
effectively managed. The coach, taxi and PHV market 
is deregulated and operators will alight and board 
customers in any location where there is passenger 
demand, subject to meeting highway regulations. 
Therefore, it is important appropriate facilities are Figure 7.9: Car Club Vehicle and BayT4
provided to avoid the adverse impacts of unplanned 
coach, taxi and PHV activity. OPDC will work with 
TfL, HS2 Ltd and other stakeholders to deliver coach 
facilities to support managing potential demand 
where required. In particular, it is likely that facilities 
for scheduled coach services in Old Oak South (in 
particular at Old Oak Common Station) will need to 
be provided.  Any coach and taxis facilities should be designed to have a minimal impact on the public realm 
and open space and should not adversely impact on 
the movement of pedestrians and cyclists. They should 
be designed in such a way that they can be adapted for 
different uses in the future.181
Figure 7.10: Current PTAL
182
Figure 7.11: Future PTAL
183Figure 7.11: Future PTAL
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• North Acton Station Feasability Study
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Willesden Junction Station Feasibility Study
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costs StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP1, SP2, SP7 and SP10
• Place Policies P1, P7, P8 and P11
• Design Policies D1 and D2
• Transport Policies (All)
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC7POLICY T5: Rail
around the station entrances within the public realm, 
creating vibrant, busy and inviting station squares and 
a public realm which is safe and welcoming 24 hours of 
the day.
7.39. Entrances and exits to all new stations should 
be designed to seamlessly connect into surrounding 
areas. They should be clear and legible and enable 
comfortable movement, including step-free access. 
They should have a positive street presence to ensure 
the station has a prominent impact on the surrounding 
area and generates activity, informed by the TfL Design 
Idiom.
7.40. Good rail access at Old Oak and Park Royal 
should be supported with high quality intermodal 
interchange facilities. This should include provision of 
direct and legible step-free access from the station to 
appropriately sized and well located walking, cycling, 
bus, taxi and drop off infrastructure. This, combined 
with active frontages and security enhancements 
such as CCTV, lighting and ensuring public realm is 
overlooked will ensure all station entrances have a 
viable street presence.
7.41. New rail stations and rail lines should support 
the OPDC area becoming a major new commercial 
and high- density residential centre by optimising 
development opportunities on and/ or adjacent 
to stations and tracks. Development close to rail 
infrastructure must be carefully planned to ensure it 
does not impact on the ability of TfL or Network Rail to 
run services. Any changes to rail infrastructure required 
to support development should be discussed in detail 
with Network Rail, TfL and OPDC.SUPPORTING TEXT
7.36. Within the Old Oak and Park Royal area there 
are four existing rail stations (see figure A1.6 in the 
Local Plan Appendix showing area context): North 
Acton (Central Line), Willesden Junction (Bakerloo Line 
and London Overground), Stonebridge Park (Bakerloo 
Line and London Overground) and Harlesden 
(Bakerloo Line and London Overground). Willesden 
Junction station, North Acton station, the North London 
Line and West London Line have been identified as 
requiring upgrades to increase capacity and enhance 
the passenger experience. 
7.37. Two new rail stations are proposed (see figure 
7.12): Old Oak Common (High Speed, Elizabeth Line 
and Great Western Mainline), and the potential London 
Overground Station at Old Oak Common Lane.
7.38. The OPDC area will become one of the most 
connected places in the UK once Old Oak Common 
Station opens. The design, layout and landscaping of 
new station spaces must be world class, incorporating 
soft and hard landscaping, a mix of permanent and 
temporary commercial activities, places to spend 
time waiting for trains or meeting people, and a range 
of different modes of transport, whilst retaining the 
character of a civic urban public space rather than 
solely as a transport interchange. Interchange facilities 
with buses and cycling facilities should all be located Development proposals will be supported where they: 
a) deliver/ contribute towards rail infrastructure and 
capacity;
b) design new rail stations to deliver outstanding 
design quality and future proof station designs 
to facilitate future technological advances, rail 
connections and service changes;
c) ensure stations contribute to the creation of a 
destination where people want to spend time by 
including retail, culture, leisure, town centre and 
meanwhile uses; 
d) appropriately manage the demands of competing 
transport modes and interchange requirements 
for walking, cycling, buses and taxis, ensuring 
adequate space is provided and embedded into 
the public realm;
e)  ensure all station entrances have a prominent and 
positive street presence;
f) ensure routes and spaces within stations are 
integral parts of the local street and movement 
network, and incorporate active frontages, where 
feasible and appropriate;
g) provide step free access from all entrances to 
platforms to ensure any route to, from or through 
the station is accessible to all;
h) optimise development opportunities on and/or 
adjacent to the stations and tracks, where feasible 
and appropriate;
i) ensure the impact of new development adjacent 
to rail infrastructure appropriately mitigates its 
impacts on rail services;
j) ensure new rail infrastructure is sensitively 
designed to integrate with surrounding 
development and existing communities; and
k) support the design operation of stations in Old 
Oak and Park Royal by ensuring they pioneer and 
respond to technology, innovation and behavioural 
change.184
Figure 7.12: Potential Future Rail Network
185Figure 7.12: Potential Future Rail Network
7.42.   New stations should be designed to be of an 
outstanding quality, integrating with the surrounding 
area and with a level of flexibility that will allow 
changes in the surrounding area and in technology, 
to be integrated in a practical and efficient manner 
over time. Designing to retain a level of flexibility may 
involve incorporating elements of passive provision or 
‘interim measures’ today, but will ensure that the station 
Figure 7.13: Artists Impression of Old Oak Common Stationis able to be modified at a later date. Interventions 
aimed at enhancing rail capacity within Old Oak and 
Park Royal are identified in place policies and further 
details are set out in OPDC’s Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP).T5186
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Bus Strategy Update
• Environmental Standards Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling StrategyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP5
• Place Policies (All)
• Transport Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI1POLICY T6: Buses
7.47. All new roads to be used by buses must allow 
appropriate highway clearance for the largest double 
deck vehicles and be built to an adoptable standard 
with sufficient widths. 
7.48. Any disruption to the bus network affecting 
operations or passengers should be avoided as the 
infrastructure and development projects are built out. 
Mitigation must be provided for any adverse impacts. 
This will require close liaison with TfL London Buses.
7.49. London’s green bus fleet is the largest in the 
world, combining the roll-out of new hybrid buses, 
the early introduction of new Euro VI buses and the 
retrofit programme, leading to significant improvements 
in emissions throughout London. OPDC will work 
with TfL and bus operators to promote the roll-out 
of greener buses and ensure that the design of 
transport infrastructure in the OPDC area facilitates 
environmental improvements to the bus fleet. SUPPORTING TEXT
7.43. Development in Old Oak and Park Royal 
provides a clear opportunity to provide a coordinated 
and coherent bus network that promotes sustainable 
and active mobility, in line with OPDC’s Bus Strategy. 
The bus network must ensure easy, interchange 
with good walking, cycling and rail connections and 
ensure that there is great connectivity with surrounding 
communities.
7.44. Bus infrastructure provides a local, flexible and 
cost effective public transport offer and will play an 
important role in improving the area’s Public Transport 
Accessibility Level (PTAL), in particular in the early 
years in advance of large scale rail infrastructure 
delivery. Specific temporary infrastructure, such as 
turning or standing facilities, as well as alternative 
routes may be required during early phases of 
development until through routes are available.
7.45. Additional infrastructure is required for buses 
to effectively serve development in Old Oak and Park 
Royal and link to the wider area (for further details, see 
the bus infrastructure interventions identified within 
the IDP). Bus infrastructure will include bus priority 
measures such as bus lanes, priority at junctions, bus 
gates and bus only links as well as suitably located 
bus stops with countdown facilities, stands and 
welfare provision for drivers. This bus infrastructure 
will improve bus reliability, capacity and connectivity 
and reduce the likelihood of people using their private 
vehicles. Bus infrastructure will also unlock sites, 
providing an effective public transport mode that can 
provide the capacity to move thousands of people per 
day.
7.46. Figure A1.6 in the Appendix to the Local Plan 
shows the existing bus routes that serve the OPDC 
area and figure 7.15 shows the potential additional 
future new or enhanced bus routes that could serve the 
OPDC area, based on OPDC’s Bus Strategy.Development proposals will be supported where they: 
a) facilitate, deliver and contribute to the existing 
and future bus network and infrastructure, 
including the range of interventions identified 
within the place policies and the IDP to provide a 
comprehensive and coherent bus network across 
Old Oak and Park Royal that is connected into 
the surrounding area, including priority measures 
where appropriate;
b) ensure that all residents in Old Oak and Park 
Royal live within 400m of high quality, convenient, 
safe, sheltered and personally secure passenger 
waiting and information countdown facilities; 
c) ensure that, where appropriate, streets are 
designed flexibly to enable them to be served by 
buses; 
d)  ensure that impacts to bus operations resulting 
from construction activity are mitigated;
e)  provide temporary provision for buses, during the 
phased development of the OPDC area; and
f) support the roll out of low and zero emission 
buses.Figure 7.14: TfL London Buses at Atlas Junction187
Figure 7.15: Potential Future Bus Network
188
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport StrategyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP7 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Transport Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policy EU7POLICY T7: Freight, Servicing and Deliveries
delivery reliability and efficiency and therefore benefit 
users. Developers must utilise consolidation centres to 
minimise their impact on the road network. Evidence 
should be provided within the DSP to demonstrate 
usage of consolidation centres. Justification should 
be provided if developers indicate they cannot use a 
consolidation centre. 
7.54. Delivery collection centres will be required at 
appropriate public transport interchanges in order 
to minimise the number of vehicular deliveries to 
residential units.
7.55. In new developments, off street solutions for 
servicing should be adopted, where possible, utilising 
different ground levels including basement and 
void areas within multi storey structures. In existing 
developments, opportunities for off-street servicing 
should also be explored, particularly in Park Royal 
to ensure the street environment is improved. Street 
frontage servicing should be minimised and restricted 
to small individual units located on lightly trafficked 
streets which can be serviced by small delivery 
vehicles.
7.56. A number of sites within the OPDC area have 
good access to the canal and rail lines. Opportunities 
to use rail and water transport for freight should be 
explored, where appropriate, and evidenced within the 
DSP. 
7.57. The Fleet Operator Recognition Scheme 
(FORS) is an overarching scheme that encompasses 
all aspects of safety, fuel efficiency, economical 
operations and vehicle emissions. FORS accreditation 
encourages freight operators to become safer, greener 
and more efficient and has been achieved by operators 
across London.SUPPORTING TEXT
7.50. Servicing and delivery requirements in Old Oak 
and Park Royal should have a minimal impact on the 
surrounding road network.
7.51. A Delivery and Servicing Plan (DSP) must be 
provided by applicants. This needs to demonstrate how 
deliveries and servicing requirements will be managed, 
including:
a) providing a forecast of delivery activity associated 
with the development and relevant movement data 
that OPDC and TfL can use for dynamic modelling 
purposes;
b) how delivery and servicing trips associated with the 
development will be reduced;
c) identification of safe and legal loading locations;
d) the use of delivery companies who can 
demonstrate their commitment to best practice 
such as FORS members;
e) delivery booking systems, which could be 
implemented to ensure that deliveries are managed 
according to the capacity of the loading facilities 
available; 
f) moving deliveries outside of peak or normal 
working hours;
g) investigating alternative routings to avoid 
congestion;
h) encouraging the adoption of low emission vehicle 
options (buying or leasing); and
i) encouraging collaboration amongst companies.
7.52. To help in the development of servicing and 
delivery plans, OPDC will create a Freight Quality 
Partnership (FQP) that will be compulsory for any 
organisation operating HGVs in the area. 
7.53. There are currently two consolidation centres 
in west London and additional consolidation centres 
are being proposed. The use of a consolidation centre 
would help to minimise vehicle journeys and improve Development proposals will be supported where they: 
a) provide measures to coordinate and reduce 
freight, servicing and delivery trips by 
implementing a Delivery and Servicing Plan 
including utilising freight consolidation centres 
where feasible and appropriate;
b) where possible, provide off-street servicing 
facilities within all existing and new developments;
c) deliver and/ or contribute towards the provision of 
click and collect space;
d)  maximise the use of more efficient and 
sustainable ways of delivering goods including 
consolidation, the use of rail, water, electric 
vehicles, cargo bikes and last mile deliveries by 
sustainable modes; 
e)  ensure that the operators of all freight vehicles 
operating in the area have attained the Silver 
Fleet Operator Recognition Scheme (FORS) 
accreditation; and
f) implement and safeguard for future innovative and 
smart technologies in relation to freight, servicing 
and delivery that maximise the efficiency and 
interoperability of the transport network, including 
measures such as holding bays optimisation and 
demand responsive deliveries.189
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Construction and Logistics Strategy
• Environmental Standards Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Utilities Study
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP3, SP7 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU6, EU7 and EU8
• Transport Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI2POLICY T8: Construction
and/or waste to be transported by rail and canal and 
this should be explored. Developers will need to 
work with OPDC and the Canal and River Trust to 
ensure the correct process is followed. Issues of local 
environmental impact and commercial viability will 
need to be addressed. This should be evidenced within 
the CLP.
7.63. Disturbance from development can occur during 
the construction phase. Measures required to reduce 
the impact of demolition, excavation and construction 
works must be outlined in the CMP, including plans to 
minimise impacts on surrounding land uses. 
7.64. Utilities works should be carefully managed and 
coordinated with other construction activity so that the 
impact on the street environment is minimised. 
7.65. The edge of construction sites should be 
designed to ensure the public’s view of the construction 
sites are as positive as possible. This could include 
planting, design work and meanwhile uses to create 
successful connections and temporary uses amongst 
and adjacent to construction sites which can help to 
develop community and identity in the OPDC area. 
7.66. To mitigate the potential road danger that the 
vehicles and increased congestion poses to other road 
users, consideration in CMPs/CLPs must be given to:SUPPORTING TEXT
7.58. Redevelopment in the OPDC area alongside 
major infrastructure projects like HS2, will generate 
a large amount of construction vehicle movements, 
exporting waste and importing materials over a number 
of decades.
7.59. The amount of construction activity planned 
for the area provides an opportunity for sustainable 
construction traffic and transport solutions to be 
adopted. To coordinate construction activity across 
the development area, OPDC will require forecast 
construction vehicle trips associated with the 
development, in a data format OPDC specifies. 
Proposals should also be supported by a Construction 
Management Plan (CMP), that includes a Construction 
Logistics Plan (CLP) and Construction Code of Practice 
(CCoP), which should be consistent with TfL guidance. 
Construction sites will also be expected to register with 
the Considerate Constructors Scheme and ensure 
operators of all construction vehicles have attained 
silver FORS accreditation.
7.60. Construction consolidation centres should 
be used, where appropriate, to reduce the number 
of construction vehicles required and the number 
of construction vehicle movements on the road 
network. This should be evidenced within the CLP 
and justification should be provided in cases where a 
consolidation centre will not be used. 
7.61. Maximum re-use and recycling of waste and 
construction materials within the area will reduce 
transport demands (see Policies EU6, EU7 and EU8). 
This should be evidenced within the CLP.
7.62. There is potential for construction materials Development proposals will be supported where they: 
a) provide measures to reduce construction trips by:
i) implementing a Construction Logistics Plan 
and Construction Code of Practice, consistent 
with TfL guidance;
ii) utilising construction consolidation centres and 
lorry holding areas, where appropriate; and
iii) managing construction traffic by making use 
of larger construction vehicles, re-timing 
deliveries, route planning, and reducing trip 
generation by using centralised batching 
plants where feasible;
b) coordinate and phase construction projects to 
enable the transport and environmental impacts to 
be effectively mitigated;
c)  ensure new utilities are planned in such a way as 
to avoid or minimise the impacts of future utility 
works on the road network;
d) make maximum use of rail and water transport for 
construction deliveries and removal of construction 
waste;
e) activate the space adjacent and around the 
edges of construction sites to mitigate impacts 
on surrounding land uses to create successful 
connections and meanwhile uses;
f) ensure that the operators of all construction 
vehicles operating in the area have attained the 
Silver Fleet Operator Recognition Scheme (FORS) 
accreditation; 
g) ensure that construction sites register with the 
Considerate Constructors Scheme; and
h) implement appropriate measures to ensure 
the safety of pedestrians and cyclists while 
construction is happening.a)  rerouting and retiming of deliveries to mitigate 
congestion and road danger along the most 
congested routes and where a danger is created by 
the type and volume of traffic;
b)  vehicles should be fitted with Vulnerable Road User 
safety equipment;
c) adoption of the Construction Logistics and 
Community Safety (CLOCS) standards and 
ensuring drivers are highly skilled/trained; 
d) holding areas for vehicles; and
e) managing safe egress to and from sites by 
construction vehicles in a way that ensures the 
safety of other road users in particular pedestrians 
and cyclists, and especially those with lesser 
sensory or cognitive capacity.190
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Public Realm, Walking and Cycling StrategyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP7
• Place Policies (All)
• Transport Policies (All)POLICY T9: Transport Assessments and Travel Plans
measures are delivered in and around the OPDC area, 
OPDC will look to shift away from the car to more 
sustainable modes of transport. Travel Plans should 
demonstrate how this could be achieved over time.
7.70. Proposals for development may come forward 
which fall below the thresholds for referring applications to the Mayor of London, but may have a significant 
effect on highway or public transport capacity. In these 
cases, a Transport Assessment may also be sought. 
Effective and early pre-application discussions will help 
to identify whether such a requirement is likely and will 
be particularly encouraged where a proposal may fall 
just below the relevant thresholds.SUPPORTING TEXT
7.67. The Transport Assessment will need to assess 
the transport impact of the development and ensure 
that measures to reduce and manage a development’s 
transport impacts are identified and planned. The 
Transport Assessment must also include the Healthy 
Streets Check for Designers spreadsheet tool as 
evidence that the Healthy Streets Approach has been 
used (s ee Policy T1). ee Policy T1). 
7.68. The Transport Assessment will need to detail 
how transport proposals associated with developments 
will cater for all users, including disabled and 
vulnerable users.
7.69. The Travel Plan will provide a long-term strategy 
to deliver sustainable transport objectives through 
an action plan that is regularly reviewed. The Travel 
Plan should be prepared in accordance with TfL’s 
Travel Planning guidance and set objectives and 
monitoring requirements along with the measures, 
management plan and funding details required to meet 
those objectives. The Travel Plan should be secured 
appropriately and include ongoing management and 
monitoring to ensure targets are met. The Travel 
Plan will need to recognise that as public transport Transport Assessments and Travel Plans should be 
provided for planning applications exceeding the 
thresholds in, and produced in accordance with, the 
relevant TfL guidance.Figure 7.16: Bicycles and pedestrians, Shoreditch191
This page has been left intentionally blank192
Chapter 8
HOUSING193
8.1. London is experiencing significant population 
growth. Housing supply has not kept pace with 
increased demand, leading to higher house prices and 
market rents. Home ownership has fallen whilst private 
renting has increased as more people have found it 
difficult to afford to buy their own home. There has 
also been a lack of new housing supply at genuinely 
affordable levels and one outcome is increased levels 
of homelessness. 
8.2. The regeneration of Old Oak and Park Royal 
can play an important role in meeting both London 
wide and local housing need. In creating a new part of 
London, a whole range of new homes will be delivered 
to meet a diverse housing need, including private 
sale, affordable, built-to-rent and specialist homes, all 
provided as part of a mixed and balanced community.8.3. A wide range of factors feed into creating high 
quality, high density housing and a sense of place that 
help to improve the health and wellbeing of residents. 
These include: sustainability, inclusive urban design, 
flexible internal layouts as well as access to local 
services and public transport.
8.4. This chapter should be read in conjunction 
with the rest of the Local Plan, and in particular the 
Places policies which deal with the housing delivery in 
the specific places around Old Oak and Park Royal. 
It should also be read alongside  the Policy SP4  the Policy SP4 
(Thriving Communities), which explains how housing 
will be connected with the new social infrastructure 
to create inclusive new communities and lifetime 
neighbourhoods. Introduction
Housing Policies:
• H1: Housing Supply
• H2: Affordable Housing
• H3: Housing Mix
• H4: Family Housing
• H5: Existing Housing
• H6: Build to Rent Housing
• H7: Co-Living and Shared Housing
• H8: Gypsy and Traveller Accomodation
• H9: Specialist Housing
• H10: Student Housing
Figure 8.1: St Johns, Clapham (credit:Jack Hobhouse)194
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Absorption Rate Study
• Development Capacity Study
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP1, SP4, SP9 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Housing Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policies DI2 and DI4POLICY H1: Housing Supply
OPDC will support delivery of a minimum of 19,850 
new homes during the Plan period. This new housing 
will be achieved through:  
a) supporting proposals that contribute to the delivery 
of a minimum annual housing target of 993 
homes, where these accord with other Local Plan 
policies;
b) supporting the delivery of 13,670 homes between 
2019 and 2029 as set out in the most up-to-date 
London Plan; 
c) delivering a minimum of 18,900 homes on Site 
Allocations, supporting the achievement of the 
housing targets identified within the Place policies;
d) supporting planning applications for self-build and 
custom-build, where these accord with other Local 
Plan policies;
e) optimising the use of existing housing, in 
accordance with Policy H5; 
f) monitoring delivery annually and publishing 
information on the rate of housing starts and 
completions and the trajectory of a deliverable and 
developable housing supply; and
g) working with developers to ensure that wherever 
possible homes delivered are marketed to and 
occupied by people who live and work in London.SUPPORTING TEXT
8.5. The London Plan identifies that the Old Oak 
and Park Royal Opportunity Areas have the capacity 
to deliver an indicative 25,500 homes. As a Mayoral 
Development Corporation with a reservoir supply 
of brownfield land, OPDC can make a substantial 
contribution towards increasing London’s housing 
supply.
8.6. London’s need for housing is identified through 
the Greater London Authority’s 2017 Strategic 
Housing Market Assessment (SHMA) which draws on 
government guidance to identify London’s need for 
both market and affordable housing. This has identified 
that London needs an additional 66,000 homes per 
year between 2016 and 2041. Over the 20 year Local 
Plan period. this would equate to a London-wide need 
for 1.32 million homes.
8.7. Based on the area’s current population of 
7,000 people and 2,800 households, OPDC’s SHMA 
(2017) has identified a need for 1,200 homes over the 
Local Plan period. However, given the scale of the 
opportunity at OPDC, an alternative SHMA boundary 
has been identified (see figure 8.2) that covers the 
combined area of the London Boroughs of Brent, 
Ealing and Hammersmith & Fulham.  This identifies 
a need for 99,000 homes over the Local Plan period. 
Development within the OPDC area will contribute 
significantly to meeting this need as well as strategic 
pan-London needs.
8.8. OPDC’s Development Capacity Study (DCS) 
identifies that over the next 20 years of this Local 
Plan, 19,850 homes can be delivered. This constitutes 
an annual housing target of 993. OPDC’s Absorption 
Rate Study shows from experience elsewhere that 
year by year figures are likely to fluctuate based on 
site-specific phasing, market and political fluctuations. 
OPDC will support proposals that help to optimise 
housing provision and contribute to the achievement of 
this annual average housing target. Table 8.1 provides 
further details on OPDC’s indicative housing supply.
 1,320,000 new homes needed across London 2018 - 203899,000 new homes needed in Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith & 
Fulham 2018 - 20381,200 new homes needed within OPDC boundary 2018 - 2038Figure 8.2: Areas of need over the next 20 years 195
homes in London and the challenges in bringing high 
density schemes forward on large plots of brownfield 
land, it is unlikely that self-build or custom-build at Old 
Oak and Park Royal will make a significant contribution 
to meeting housing need. However, self-build and 
custom-build will be supported where it accords with 
the policies in this Local Plan.
8.12. Prescribed authorities should plan to meet the 
needs of people who want to build their own homes; 
however, responsibility under the Self-build and 
Custom Housebuilding Act for keeping a register does 
not fall to Mayoral Development Corporations. Through 
the Duty to Cooperate, OPDC will work with the 
London Boroughs of Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith & 
Fulham to ensure that the area is meeting the needs of 
people wishing to build their own home. 
8.13. Increasing housing supply is not just about 
building new homes on brownfield land. Converting 
existing residential dwellings and bringing long-term 
empty properties back into habitable use can also 
increase the overall supply of dwellings that can 
be used to more effectively meet the housing need 
identified in OPDC’s SHMA. Policy H5 provides the policy criteria for assessing conversions and bringing 
vacant properties back into use.  
8.14. Long-term vacant property underuses London’s 
valuable housing stock and does not help to meet the 
housing need identified in this Local Plan. OPDC will 
work with the Mayor, the Homes for Londoners Board 
and the host local authorities to discourage vacancy. 
OPDC will work with developers and other relevant 
stakeholders to ensure that homes built for sale are 
first marketed to and occupied by Londoners. 
8.15. Monitoring new housing delivery will be vital to 
achieving the broader Local Plan spatial vision and 
policies.  OPDC produces an Authority Monitoring 
Report (AMR) each year that separately monitors the 
overall delivery of additional homes and different types 
of homes (e.g. self-contained homes and other non-
self-contained homes). The AMR will also contain a 
housing trajectory which will show annually updated 
information on OPDC’s 0-5 year, 6-10 year and 11-
20 year housing supply. This will measure OPDC’s 
anticipated performance against targets set out in the 
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) which can found 
supporting this Local Plan on OPDC’s website.H1
Figure 8.3: St Andrews, Bromley by Bow, LondonTable 8.1: Indicative Housing Supply
8.9. Additional windfall housing may also increase 
the overall supply through a variety of sources, 
including through changes of use of non-residential 
buildings and conversions of existing residential 
buildings. Such development proposals will be 
supported where they are in accordance with the other 
Local Plan policies.
8.10. In addition to delivering the housing targets 
in this Local Plan, OPDC will work to achieve the 
planning authority’s net housing targets in the most 
up-to-date London Plan. The current (2021) London 
Plan sets a target for 1,367 homes per annum to be 
delivered in Old Oak and Park Royal between 2019 
and 2029. OPDC’s Development Capacity Study 
shows that the OPDC area can deliver 1,380 homes 
per annum over this period. OPDC will undertake the 
following strategies to seek to support the attainment of 
this Mayoral target, including:
a) working positively with developers and other key 
stakeholders to support the timely delivery of 
development, in accordance with Policy DI3;
b) supporting advanced construction methods such as 
precision-manufacturing, in accordance with Policy 
SP2; and
c) bringing forward development in accordance with, 
and where possible in advance of, the phasing 
identified in figure 3.16, in accordance with Policy 
SP10 and Policy DI2.
8.11. Self-build generally refers to people who 
bring their own building skills to bear as part of the 
construction process, whereas custom-build more often 
involves people who can provide professional services 
such as architecture or project management. Given 
the historic low supply of self-build and custom-build 0 to 5 years 6 to 10 years 11 to 20 years 21+ years
4,600 6,950 8,300 6,150196
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Affordable Housing Viability Assessment
• Development Capacity Study
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP4, SP9 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Housing Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy D1POLICY H2: Affordable Housing
All residential developments, with the capacity to 
provide more than 10 self-contained units (or have 
a gross internal residential floorspace of more than 
1,000 sqm) will be required to provide affordable 
housing, subject to viability, in accordance with the 
overarching 50% target set out in Policy SP4, by:
a) applying the threshold and viability approach as 
set out in the most up-to-date Mayoral policy and/
or guidance;
b)  including early, mid and advanced stage review 
mechanisms in line with Mayoral guidance, to 
maximise the delivery of affordable housing and 
in particular, social rent or London Affordable Rent 
where development viability improves; 
c) providing a minimum of 30% of affordable housing 
as either social rent or London Affordable Rent 
and the remainder as a range of social rent or 
London Affordable Rent, Intermediate housing, 
including London Living Rent and London 
Shared Ownership (except for Build to Rent, see 
Policy H6) and ensuring intermediate homes are 
affordable to households on median incomes in 
the host local authorities;
d)  providing affordable housing in perpetuity; 
e)  appropriately distributing the affordable homes 
throughout a new development and ensuring 
that they are designed to a high quality, with the 
same quality of external appearance as for market 
housing;
f) demonstrably considering at an early stage of pre-
application process how the design of proposals 
supports the delivery of a range of housing 
tenures;
g) providing affordable housing on-site. In 
exceptional circumstances and in all proposals 
under Policy H7, a financial contribution towards 
the off-site provision of affordable housing may 
be accepted where it can be demonstrated that 
this would maximise the total amount of affordable 
housing to be delivered;
h) applying Vacant Building Credit only where it is SUPPORTING TEXT
8.16. Housing market evidence demonstrates the 
high cost of providing housing in London and also 
the need for more affordable housing. The high cost 
of renting and buying a home impacts on the range 
of households who can afford to live and work in the 
OPDC area, which can impact on the ability to achieve 
mixed and balanced communities.
8.17. All residential developments with the capacity 
for more than 10 units (or have a gross internal 
residential floorspace of more than 1,000 sqm) will 
be required to provide affordable housing subject to 
viability, in accordance with Policy SP4, with a target 
that 50% is delivered as affordable housing. The 
percentage of affordable housing should be measured 
in habitable rooms to ensure that a range of sizes of 
homes can be delivered, including family housing. 
OPDC will operate this calculation on the assumption that a 1 bed unit constitutes 2 habitable rooms and a 
2 bed unit constitutes 3 habitable rooms. OPDC will 
apply greater flexibility to the calculations of habitable 
rooms for 3 bed+ units. However, OPDC would expect 
these units to be designed in a logical fashion and not 
in a way that attempts to manipulate the calculations 
to try and artificially increase the number of affordable 
habitable rooms. 
8.18. OPDC will apply the threshold approach to 
viability and review in accordance with the most up-to 
date Mayoral policy and/or guidance when assessing 
planning applications and will encourage applicants 
to maximise the amount of affordable homes that can 
be delivered through the planning system. OPDC will 
also encourage applicants to make use of affordable 
housing grant to increase the overall quantum of 
affordable housing that can be delivered.
8.19. The 50% affordable housing target and 
threshold approach has been tested as being 
achievable in certain circumstances and some 
specific sites through OPDC’s Affordable Housing 
Viability Assessment (AHVA). However, this work 
does not take full account of the specific costs of 
unlocking development sites across the area. The full 
infrastructure costs are not known at this stage and 
these costs will need to be identified and considered 
as part of planning applications. The presence of 
abnormal site constraints should impact on land 
values, however the cost should not necessarily be 
borne through a reduction in planning obligations 
(see Policy DI1). However, it is recognised that site 
specific constraints, infrastructure requirements and 
financial viability may affect the amount of affordable 
housing that can be achieved on individual sites and 
will make the 50% strategic affordable housing target 
difficult to achieve without the availability of grant. 
This will particularly be the case on sites that require 
significant infrastructure to unlock development (see 
Chapter 4). The actual affordable housing delivered 
through planning applications will need to be carefully 
balanced between infrastructure requirements, the verified that:
i) a building is not in use at the time the 
application is submitted
ii) a building is not covered by an extant or 
recently expired permission;
iii) the site is not protected for an alternative land 
use; and
iv) the building has not been made vacant for the 
sole purpose of redevelopment and has been 
vacant for at least five years.197
H2
Figure 8.4: Adelaide Wharf, Hackney (credit: Valerie Bennett  / AKT II)overall amount of affordable housing, the affordability 
of different tenure types and any public sector support 
that may be secured (including for example: affordable 
housing grant, capital infrastructure grant and public 
borrowing and financing). 
8.20. Applicants should, where appropriate, undertake 
early discussions with OPDC on financial viability 
appraisals as part of pre-application discussions, to 
ensure that the affordable housing policy objectives 
can be achieved. 
8.21. OPDC’s SHMA has identified that there is an 
86% need for social rent or London Affordable Rent 
as part of affordable housing need in the area as a 
consequence of the high cost of private renting or buying a home in the area. These households would 
additionally need to qualify for social rent level or 
London Affordable Rent housing through their council 
and this is determined under a number of factors under 
the Housing Act 1996 and other relevant homelessness 
legislation.
8.22. The AHVA has assessed the viability of 
delivering different levels and types of affordable 
housing. As recognised above, the scale of 
regeneration on what is a complex brownfield site 
presents significant challenges in terms of viability. 
The AHVA demonstrates that delivering social rent or 
London Affordable Rent has the greatest impact on 
viability given the high cost of delivering housing at this level of discount on the market value. Delivering 
intermediate housing (including London Living Rent 
and London Shared Ownership) helps to improve the 
overall viability of delivering affordable housing.
8.23. Given the viability constraints identified 
above, the threshold level of affordable housing that 
developments must achieve to follow the Fast Track 
Route in OPDC should comprise:
a) A minimum of 30% either social rent level housing 
or London Affordable Rent; and
b) the remainder a range of either social rent or 
London Affordable Rent, intermediate housing 
including London Shared Ownership and London 
Living Rent.
8.24. Given OPDC’s and London’s need for social 
rent level housing, OPDC will seek to maximise the 
level of social rent housing by:
a) prioritising the delivery of either social rent  or 
London Affordable Rent where early, mid and late 
stage review mechanisms secured in Section 106 
agreements identify that there is a surplus;
b) seeking to exceed 30% either social rent  or  
London Affordable Rent on schemes that do not 
meet the Mayor’s threshold approach to viability; 
and
c) prioritising the provision of the social rent or 
London Affordable Rent homes through housing 
grant. 
8.25. OPDC will revisit this policy and its associated 
viability evidence within 5 years of adoption of the 
Local Plan to ensure that any increased development 
value can maximise the delivery of social rent or 
London Affordable Rent homes.
8.26. This policy provides the opportunity to deliver 
homes that can meet the needs of London’s essential 
workers who maintain the function and resilience of 
the city, such as those working in health, fire, police, 
transport and support services. OPDC will work with 198
Table 8.2: Forms of Affordable Housing
Affordable housing according to the National Planning Policy Framework is for households whose needs cannot 
be met by the market, either for rent or sale. Additionally affordable housing should be genuinely affordable for the 
people the unit is intended for and below market prices.
Social Rent or London Affordable  
RentLondon Living Rent London Shared Ownership
Capped Target Rents set in 
accordance with government 
guidanceBenchmark Rents set in accordance 
with GLA guidanceHousehold purchases at least 25% 
stake and pays rent on the retained 
equity
Affordable to most households but 
limited to eligible households who 
have been assessed by the host 
local housing authority, either Brent, 
Ealing or Hammersmith & FulhamAffordable to households on medium 
incomes who are renting privately 
and wish to save for a deposit and 
who can afford to spend one third of 
their gross income on rent. Maximum 
income of £60,000 subject to annual 
review under the London PlanMaximum income cap of £90,000 
applies subject to review in the 
London Planthe host local authorities to identify how this can be 
achieved through their respective housing allocations 
policies.
8.27. As can be seen in table 8.2, and in accordance 
with Mayoral guidance, affordable homes should be 
genuinely affordable for the people they are intended 
for. Applications will be required to include homes that 
are affordable to households on a range of incomes, 
including local average income levels in the host 
Local Authorities. Applicants will also be required 
to demonstrate, through their Affordable Housing 
Statement, how the affordability of the proposed tenure 
mix compares to local average income levels in the 
host local authorities.
8.28. At the start of the design process, applicants 
should work positively with OPDC and other relevant 
stakeholders, including the host borough, to consider 
how the design of proposals can support the delivery 
of a range of tenures on the site and specifically, the 
requirements for the delivery of social rent/London 
Affordable Rent housing. Applicants should engage 
with a Registered Provider partner at the pre-
application stage to determine the most appropriate 
affordable tenure mix on a site. 
8.29. In accordance with the NPPF, affordable 
housing should include provisions to ensure that it 
is secured at an affordable price for future eligible 
households. In the event that an affordable unit is 
lost, OPDC will require, secured through a Section 
106 agreement, the recycling of any subsidy for 
replacement provision. Subsidy includes all forms of 
subsidy that are required to enable the sale or letting of 
the property at sub-market value. This includes, but is 
not exclusive to, subsidy from reduced land costs and 
the developer contribution gained through a Section 
106 agreement and grant funding.
8.30. Affordable housing should be built to a 
high standard of design with a quality of materials 
comparable to the private homes so that it is difficult to spot the difference in the architectural quality of market 
and affordable units within the same development. This 
will help to create a more sustainable and successful 
mixed community and Lifetime Neighbourhoods. 
8.31. Normally, affordable housing would be provided 
on the site of the planning application that it applies 
to, in order to create communities that are mixed 
and balanced by tenure and income. However, in 
exceptional circumstances and where it can be 
demonstrated that it is more appropriate, the affordable 
housing provision may be located elsewhere in the 
OPDC area or through payment in lieu. This will always 
be the case for applications providing purpose-built 
shared housing in accordance with Policy H7.
8.32. In 2014 the Government introduced a Vacant 
Building Credit (VBC) that reduces the requirement 
for affordable housing where a vacant building is 
brought back into any lawful use or is demolished to be 
replaced by a new building. The intention of the VBC is 
to bring forward sites containing vacant buildings that 
would not otherwise come forward for development. However, in London, as sites with vacant buildings 
already typically coming forward for development 
and affordable housing requirements are already 
subject to viability testing, the VBC is unlikely to bring 
forward significantly more development. Given the high 
demand for affordable housing it will not normally be 
appropriate to apply VBC to developments. Where it is 
applied, VBC will only apply to the Gross Internal Area 
of buildings and will only be applicable to buildings 
when the criteria set out in the policy are met.
8.33. To demonstrate that a building has not been 
made vacant for the sole purpose of redevelopment, 
an applicant will need to show that the building has 
been vacant for a continuous period of at least five 
years before the application was submitted and provide 
evidence that the site has been actively marketed 
for at least two of those five years at realistic prices. 
An applicant will not be able to claim Community 
Infrastructure Levy relief in these circumstances.H2199
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Absorption Rate Study
• Affordable Housing Viability Assessment
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2 and SP4
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D3
• Housing Policies (All)POLICY H3: Housing Mix
New residential developments should deliver a 
balanced mix of housing types and sizes, taking into 
account the following considerations: 
a) providing 3 or more bedrooms within 25% of all 
new homes; 
b) providing either social rent or London Affordable 
Rent homes in a mix of sizes that accords with 
OPDC’s most up to date Strategic Housing 
Market Assessment; 
c) optimising the proportion of family housing 
beyond 25% where this is feasible and 
appropriate;
d)  all self-contained housing will be required to meet 
the London Plan and national housing space 
standards;
e)  housing should be appropriately and flexibly 
designed to respond to changing needs over time; 
and 
f) sites should deliver 90% of units as Building 
Regulation M4(2) ‘accessible and adaptable 
dwellings’ and 10% of new housing as Building 
Regulation M4(3) ‘wheelchair user dwellings’ 
across all tenures, except where proposals are 
delivered in accordance with Policies H7 and 
H10.SUPPORTING TEXT
8.34. Providing a range of different dwelling types 
and sizes supports the creation of mixed, balanced 
and sustainable communities and will help to meet the 
housing need of a range of household types.
8.35. The London Plan recognises the importance 
of family housing to meeting London’s needs and 
notes that well-designed homes providing 2 or more 
bedrooms can contribute to this need. However, 
OPDC’s SHMA (2017) identifies a specific need in 
the local area for 51% and 64% of affordable and 
market housing respectively to be homes with at least 
three bedrooms suitable for families. On average in 
London over the last nine years, the housing market 
and existing planning practice has delivered 20% of all 
tenures and 24% of affordable tenures as 3 bedrooms 
or more. 
8.36. To help meet needs, applicants will be expected 
to deliver 25% of all homes as units providing 3 or 
more bedrooms. The overall housing mix should 
include delivering the size mix for social rent or London 
Affordable Rent that is set out in the latest SHMA.  The 
housing mix for market and intermediate homes should 
be informed by the development site characteristics 
and the ability of the site to accommodate a mix of 
housing types and sizes, but should always look to 
optimise the proportion of family sized housing to meet 
the identified need. Policy H4 sets out the specific 
design requirements and appropriate locations within 
residential developments for family housing. OPDC 
will encourage early engagement from developers to 
discuss how family housing need can be met. 
8.37. While developments are expected to reflect the 
identified dwelling mix, rigid application of these may 
not be appropriate in every case and OPDC will take 
into account the housing type, site characteristics, 
viability, location and other constraints. This overall 
approach to 3 bed+ family housing seeks to strike a balance between the need assessed in the SHMA and 
incentivising developers to increase the level of family 
housing delivered.
8.38. All self-contained homes will be required to 
meet the London Plan and national housing space 
standards. This will ensure that new homes will have 
adequately sized rooms and efficient room layouts 
which are functional and fit for purpose.
8.39. London’s population is rapidly changing and 
housing requirements will change, both in the market 
and affordable sectors. Where feasible, all new 
housing units in the OPDC area should be designed 
with in-built flexibility to adapt to residents’ changing 
needs over time. As set out in the Mayor of London’s 
Housing SPG 2016, this includes carefully considering 
the location of doors, windows and built-in furniture, 
making rooms large enough to accommodate furniture 
in a usable way and allowing the potential for spaces 
to be linked or separated, positioning structural support 
to allow new openings in internal walls. Housing 
units should be also be designed to allow for units to 
expand or contract as household size, type and other 
circumstances change. It is recognised however, that 
this will be more feasible on long-term rented units than 
units built for sale.
8.40. To ensure that homes are flexible enough 
for people to grow older in, OPDC will require that 
90% of new homes are designed to be accessible 
and adaptable and that 10% are easily adaptable for 
wheelchair users, in accordance with the Building 
Regulations, except for purpose-built shared housing 
and student housing proposals delivered in accordance 
with Policies H7 and H10. Wheelchair units should be 
marketed as suitable for wheelchair users and should 
be provided across all tenures.200
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Affordable Housing Viability Assessment
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Precedents StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP4, SP8 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D3
• Environment and Utilities Policy EU1
• Housing Policies (All)
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC3
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI2POLICY H4: Design of Family Housing
New housing developments should deliver family 
housing in accordance with Policy H3 taking into 
account the following considerations:
a) Where it is appropriate family housing should be 
located as a priority:
i) at the ground or first floor of developments 
with direct access to a garden or other secure 
private and/or communal open space for 
doorstep play; and
ii) close to usable publicly accessible open space 
and appropriate social infrastructure.
b) Where family housing is located on other levels, 
applicants should provide convenient access to 
secure private and/or communal open space that 
is suitable for children.
SUPPORTING TEXT
8.41. The Old Oak and Park Royal area will be 
characterised by large-scale and high-density 
development. In this context, family sized housing 
(at least 3 bedrooms) in both the market and 
affordable sectors has to be sensitively designed and 
appropriately located to ensure that it is suitable for 
families with children to live in.
8.42. Homes designed for families with children 
should have direct, level access to private and secure external open space. This should be well designed and 
of adequate space for it to be suitable for children of 
all ages to play in. Ideally, this should be in the form 
of a garden at ground floor level.  Larger (3 bed+) 
family units should be prioritised at ground and first 
floor level. OPDC acknowledges that through careful 
design, successful outdoor spaces for family housing 
can also be provided in other ways, such as child-
friendly courtyards and large terraces. Applicants will 
be expected to demonstrate how their developments 
will provide adequate open space for the family units.
8.43. The internal layout of family homes should be 
designed to meet the needs of family life, for example, incorporating generously sized hallways and internal 
circulation spaces, utility rooms and sufficient space 
suitable for family members to undertake study or 
homework in private. There should also be adequate 
storage space. Where family homes are not entered 
directly from the street there should be convenient lift 
access from the ground floor to the front door.
8.44. Family housing should be developed in 
locations with easy access to publicly accessible open 
space that is suitable for sports and games activities 
for children of all age groups and be located in walking 
distance of other social infrastructure such as schools 
and childcare providers.Figure 8.5: Family Housing at East Village, Stratford201
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Character Areas Study
• Heritage Strategy
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP4
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D7
• Transport Policy T4
• Housing Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policies DI4POLICY H5: Existing Housing
OPDC will:
a) resist the loss of existing residential 
accommodation, unless:
i) it is located within Strategic Industrial Location 
(SIL); 
ii) the proposal would result in new housing being 
provided at an equivalent or higher density, 
measured by unit numbers and floorspace; or
iii) its loss is critical to unlock the comprehensive 
regeneration of the area;
b) work with the London Boroughs of Brent, 
Ealing and Hammersmith & Fulham and other 
stakeholders to bring vacant residential properties 
back into use, including where appropriate, the 
use of empty dwelling management orders or 
compulsory purchase powers;
c) permit residential conversions of existing dwellings 
to two or more dwellings where:
i) the conversion of a family sized home would 
retain at least one family sized home which 
has access to secure private and/or communal 
space;
ii) the converted dwellings meet the required 
National and London Plan space standards; 
iii) residential conversions maintain the amenity 
of neighbours, the general character of 
the surrounding area and do not result in 
cumulative stress on services, unless it is 
appropriately mitigated; and
iv) the proposal would not result in adverse 
impacts on parking and/or other local 
amenities.SUPPORTING TEXT
8.45. OPDC is seeking to maximise housing supply 
across all tenures to meet local and London-wide need 
for more homes. Given the high demand for housing in 
the area, the loss of residential units from the current 
housing stock will not normally be acceptable. This 
includes hostels, accommodation providing an element 
of care, or dedicated homes for employees such as 
nurses, police officers or hotel staff.
8.46. Areas identified as Strategic Industrial Location 
(SIL) provide employment opportunities for local 
people. Within SIL, OPDC will permit the loss of 
existing housing stock. Outside of SIL, any proposals 
on sites with existing residential accommodation will be 
required to re-provide residential accommodation to the 
same or higher densities, measured in terms of both 
unit numbers and floorspace. 
8.47. Empty homes can undermine housing supply 
and negatively impact on residents in the surrounding 
area. If occupied, these dwellings can help to 
meet housing need.  OPDC will work with the local 
authorities, landowners and other stakeholders to 
bring vacant residential buildings back into habitable 
use. This could include, where necessary, using empty 
dwelling management orders or compulsory purchase 
powers (see Policy DI4, Delivery and Implementation 
Chapter). 
8.48. OPDC will work with the London Boroughs of 
Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith and Fulham to agree 
a joint protocol to identify empty homes and work to bring them back into habitable use. This will enable 
the more efficient use of the existing housing stock by 
reducing the number of vacant, unfit and unsatisfactory 
dwellings. It will also enable OPDC to set and monitor 
targets for bringing properties back into use.
8.49. The area’s existing housing stock is limited but 
conversions can help meet housing need by delivering 
additional homes. OPDC’s SHMA identifies that there 
is a need for family housing within the area. Therefore, 
any conversions will be required to include provision 
of a 3 bed plus housing unit appropriate for families 
with access to secure open space. Any conversions 
will have to meet National and London Plan space 
standards. Also where it is practicable, conversions 
should aim to meet the Building Regulations to 
increase the supply of accessible and adaptable 
dwellings.
8.50. Conversions can also increase the supply of 
smaller homes. However, the potential cumulative 
stress from conversions of larger dwellings to smaller 
homes on both the supply of family sized homes and 
on on-street parking provision, waste collection and 
other social amenities needs to be weighed against 
the wider economic benefits from such conversions 
and the resultant overall growth in the number of 
new homes. It is also recognised that in appropriate 
locations the general character of an area will change 
over time when conversions and/or redevelopment of 
existing housing will result in net additional housing 
provision.202
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Absorption Rate Study
• Affordable Housing Viability Assessment
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP4 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D3
• Housing Policies (All)POLICY H6: Build to Rent 
to support early place making and OPDC is supportive 
of proposals for high quality Build to Rent schemes, 
subject to the proposals according with the other 
relevant policies in this Local Plan.
8.52. Build to Rent will be required to provide 
affordable housing in the form of intermediate rent, 
preferably London Living Rent housing. In accordance 
with Policy H2, Build to Rent housing will be subject 
to the Mayor’s most up-to-date threshold approach to 
viability. At the time of publication of this Local Plan, the 
Mayor’s threshold approach to Build to Rent requires 
schemes to deliver 35% affordable housing and 30% 
of this affordable housing to be at London Living 
Rent levels.  As it is not necessary to be a Registered 
Provider to deliver or manage intermediate rent units, 
these units can be owned and/or managed by the 
same Build to Rent landlord as the market rent units. 
Where Build to Rent delivers units at London Living 
Rent they will not be expected to be offered to the 
tenants to buy.  
8.53. In accordance with the NPPF, affordable 
housing provided by Build to Rent providers should 
include provisions to remain at an affordable price 
for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be 
recycled for alternative affordable housing. This will be 
secured in a Section 106 agreement.
8.54. All homes within a Build to Rent development 
or block will need to stay under single ownership and 
management under a covenant of at least 15 years, 
meaning that individual units cannot be separately 
sold on and overall ownership of the development or 
block can only change if the scheme stays as Build to 
Rent. This will ensure a commitment to invest in place 
making and will provide better management standards 
and higher quality homes than much of the mainstream 
private rented sector.  
8.55. The covenant will need to include a clawback 
mechanism in the event of units being sold out of the 
Build to Rent sector during the covenanted period.
8.56. Build to Rent will be required to provide high SUPPORTING TEXT
8.51. The Private Rented Sector (PRS) has been the 
fastest growing housing tenure in London in recent 
years. PRS now houses 30% of all households in 
London, up from 14% in 2002/03 according to the 
English Household Survey. The sector has become 
increasingly important in supporting labour market 
mobility, with four in five of those coming to London 
finding their first home in the PRS. Purpose-built Build 
to Rent can play an important role in meeting housing 
need and in supporting employment growth in the 
OPDC area. Build to Rent can deliver homes quickly OPDC will require new self-contained purpose built 
Private Rented Sector (PRS) accommodation to: 
a) accord with Policy H2 with the exception of part 
(c) of that policy, where instead, affordable should 
be delivered as intermediate housing, with a 
preference for London Living Rent housing;
b) be under single ownership and management, 
subject to a covenant for at least 15 years and in 
the event that any units are sold out of the Private 
Rented Sector a clawback mechanism will be 
used to secure appropriate financial contributions 
towards the delivery of affordable housing;
c) provide an appropriate Residential Management 
Plan; and
d) offer longer-term tenancies with rent certainty of at 
least 3 years and no up-front fees.quality and well-designed self-contained units that 
are serviceable for long-term renting. Any communal 
spaces and services also need to be well maintained 
for the benefit of future residents.  It should also be 
designed in a way that is suitable for the units to be 
converted into home ownership housing after the 
covenanted period, subject to future local housing 
market requirements and market conditions. 
8.57. Effective building management enhances 
and protects the long-term value of a development.  
Proposed schemes will therefore be required to provide 
a detailed Residential Management Plan of how the 
housing will be managed and maintained. Standards 
will be controlled and maintained as the proposed 
landlord will be required to register with a recognised 
ombudsman scheme. As part of their Residential 
Management Plan, applicants should provide details 
of how the proposal will be appropriately managed to 
minimise impacts on surrounding properties. This will 
be secured through a Section 106 agreement. As a 
minimum these should include detailed information on:
a) move-in/out arrangements and how units are 
maintained during void periods;
b) how individual units will be managed and serviced 
during a tenancy term;
c) how communal facilities, including landscaping, 
deliveries and collections will be managed;
d) scheme management arrangements, including 
arrangements for on-site staff;
e) security and fire safety procedures; 
f) procedures for community liaison; and
g) complaints procedure.
8.58. Longer tenancies (three years or more) should 
be available to all tenants. These should have break 
clauses, which allow the tenant to end the tenancy with 
a month’s notice, any time after the first six months. 
Within these tenancies there should also be formula 
linked rent increases that are made clear to the tenant 
when the property is let and no up-front fees apart from 
deposits and rent-in advance.203
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Absorption Rate Study
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP4 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D3
• Environment and Utilities Policy EU7
• Housing Policies (All)POLICY H7: Co-Living and Shared Housing
Proposals for new purpose-built shared housing 
schemes will be supported where they:
a) demonstrate that they contribute to the creation 
of mixed and balanced communities by not 
undermining the delivery of conventional self-
contained housing supply;
b) are located within or directly adjacent to a 
designated town centre with a PTAL of 4 or higher, 
that can absorb intensive usage;
c) incorporate a high quality of design and shared 
space for occupants; 
d) provide an appropriate Residential Management 
Plan; and
e)  provide a commuted sum in lieu of the provision of 
on-site affordable housing, in accordance with the 
most up-to-date Mayoral policy and/or guidance.
Proposals for conversions or loss of existing shared 
housing will be supported where they:
f) no longer meet identified local need for shared 
housing; 
g)  do not comply with any relevant design standards 
and that the provision cannot be enhanced to 
meet any relevant standards;
h) are poorly served by public transport and 
facilities and services such as shops and social 
infrastructure; or
i) give rise to unacceptable impacts on amenity.SUPPORTING TEXT
8.59. The overall vision for Old Oak and Park Royal 
is to provide new communities that are balanced 
and sustainable and meet a range of housing needs. 
Purpose-built shared housing schemes can make a 
contribution to this and support the sharing economy. It 
can play a role in meeting the housing needs of young 
professionals requiring employment mobility and others 
who would benefit from shared facilities.
8.60. Applicants will be required to provide evidence 
to demonstrate that there is a specific need for 
purpose-built shared housing. Overprovision of one 
type of housing would have an impact on the ability to 
achieve a mixed and balanced community. In addition, 
overprovision could undermine the overall delivery 
of standard self-contained housing types in the area. 
Large concentrations of shared housing may also have 
an unacceptable impact on the amenity of neighbouring 
residents.  
8.61. Applicants will be required to demonstrate that 
the proposed location is appropriate and can absorb 
intensive occupancy rates. This is likely to be in areas 
of the highest public transport accessibility.
8.62. Homes that have not been designed to comply 
with London Plan space standards or Building 
Regulations M4(2) and M4(3) should be well-designed 
to make the most practical use of the space available. 
Common shared areas should be appropriate for the 
intended occupiers and designed to a high quality. 
Schemes will be required to meet all relevant Housing 
Act and HMO standards and requirements. 
8.63. Applications will be required to provide a 
detailed Residential Management Plan, secured 
through a Section 106 agreement showing how the 
housing will be managed and maintained and that it 
continues to provide useable shared  space for future 
residents and not a cause of nuisance to other people living nearby. Minimum expectations with regards to 
the management and maintenance plans for shared 
accommodation are the same as they are for Policy H6 
at paragraph 8.57. 
8.64. Purpose built shared housing with common 
shared areas is unlikely to be provided at a price 
that is affordable for households identified as having 
an affordable housing need or be suitable for such 
households.  Purpose built shared housing proposals 
will be required to provide a commuted sum for the 
off-site delivery of affordable housing. This will enable 
more appropriately sized and self-contained affordable 
housing units to be developed on another site within 
the OPDC area. The commuted sum should accord 
with the requirements of the most up-to-date Mayoral 
policy and/or guidance, which at the time of the 
publication of this Local Plan requires contributions 
to be equivalent to 35% of the residential units being 
provided at 50% of market rent not to undergo the 
Viability Tested Route.
8.65. Existing HMOs can make a valuable contribution 
to the overall housing stock of the area at rents that are 
affordable to people who cannot access self-contained 
council housing or market level private rented sector 
(PRS) housing. These may include students in full-time 
education, migrant and seasonal workers living away 
from home and refuges run by voluntary organisations 
for people suffering from physical violence or abuse. 
8.66. Where existing HMOs are not carefully 
managed, they can pose a health and safety risk to 
the occupiers and if there is an overconcentration of 
HMOs in a location, they can negatively impact on the 
amenity of that location. Where evidence suggests this 
to be the case, OPDC will consider proposals to either 
improve the accommodation’s standard or accept its 
loss to an alternative housing use.204
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Gypsy and Traveller Accomodation Needs Assessment
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP4 and SP10
• Place Policy P4
• Housing Policies (All)POLICY H8: Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation
SUPPORTING TEXT
8.67. There is currently one authorised site in the 
London Borough of Ealing, which falls within OPDC’s 
boundary. As the local planning authority, OPDC is 
required to allocate sites to meet identified gypsy 
and traveller accommodation needs. OPDC will 
safeguard the site at Bashley Way for this purpose. 
The London Borough of Ealing is responsible for 
maintaining and managing the site to ensure that it is 
providing appropriate facilities to support the health 
and wellbeing of residents. Where possible, OPDC will 
work positively with the London Borough of Ealing to 
improve the existing site so that it continues to provide 
suitable accommodation for the households who live 
there.
8.68. The Planning Policy for Traveller sites (PPTS 
2015) amended the definitions of gypsies and travelling 
showpeople for planning purposes, meaning that 
planning authorities are no longer required to plan and 
provide pitches for the needs of gypsies and travellers 
who do not travel for an economic purpose. OPDC 
has carried out a Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation 
Needs Assessment (GTANA) to consider the current 
and future need for pitches and or plots in the OPDC 
area. This identified that there is no need to provide for 
additional pitches for gypsies and travellers in the area 
for the 20 year Local Plan period.
8.69. OPDC’s GTANA also identified that there will 
be 12 newly forming households over the Local Plan 
period for which there will not be a requirement in 
planning terms to provide a pitch. These households 
are referenced in OPDC’s SHMA which has assessed 
the overall need for all types of housing over the Local 
Plan period. The need from the 12 newly forming 
households form 0.1% of the total objectively assessed 
housing need that is identified for the housing market 
area. a)  OPDC will safeguard the existing Bashley Road 
Gypsy and Travellers Site and work positively with 
London Borough of Ealing to enhance the site 
where required;
b) OPDC will give careful consideration to the 
future needs of gypsies and travellers and work 
with the London Boroughs of Brent, Ealing and 
Hammersmith & Fulham to secure a sufficient 
supply of plots/pitches to meet the needs of 
existing and future gypsy and traveller households 
(including travelling show people);
c)  Any new sites, pitches and/or plots for travellers 
should:
i) be accessible to public transport, services and 
facilities and be capable of support by local 
social infrastructure;
ii) be capable of appropriate connection to 
energy, water and sewage infrastructure;
iii) provide safe access to and from the public 
road network; and
iv) support the health and wellbeing of the 
occupiers of the site by providing appropriate 
facilities, layout and design quality.8.70. The Housing and Planning Act 2016 introduces 
a new duty (under Section 8 of the 1985 Housing Act 
that covers the requirement for a periodical review of 
housing needs) to consider the needs of people with 
respect to the provision of sites on which caravans can 
be stationed, or places on inland waterways where 
houseboats can be moored. 
8.71. The Grand Union Canal Place Policy (P3) 
includes the policy for meeting the need for houseboat 
moorings. OPDC will work with the host boroughs 
through OPDC’s Housing Panel and at its Duty to 
Cooperate meetings to determine any future needs for 
caravan dwellers and houseboat moorings on inland 
waterways as and when they arise.205
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Precedents Study
• Strategic Housing Market Assessment
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP3, SP4 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D2 and D3
• Housing Policies (All)POLICY H9: Specialist Housing
a) OPDC will support the delivery of specialist 
housing that meets identified needs; 
b) Development proposals providing 1,000 or more 
homes will be required to provide 10% of units as 
specialist care and supported needs housing for 
older people and/or vulnerable people;
c) OPDC will require proposals for older persons or 
other specialist housing units to be:
i) appropriate for the intended occupiers in 
terms of the standard of facilities, the level of 
independence and the provision of support or 
care;
ii) of a high design quality, including inclusive 
design and provision of adequate internal and 
external space; 
iii) appropiately accessible to public transport, 
shops, services, community facilities and 
social networks appropriate to the needs of the 
intended occupiers; and
iv) accompanied by an appropriate Residential 
Management Plan.
d) Proposals for conversions or loss of existing 
specialist housing will be supported where they:
i) can demonstrate that there is no longer an 
identified local need for the specialist housing 
provision;
ii) can demonstrate that the provision does do not 
comply with any relevant design standards and 
that the provision cannot be enhanced to meet 
any relevant standards; or
iii) the proposal would result in new specialist 
housing being provided at an equivalent 
or higher quantum, measured by both unit 
numbers and floorspace.8.75. Units provided under this policy will be in 
addition to the requirements for M4(3) units set out in 
Policy H3 on housing mix.
8.76. Specialist housing units under this policy will 
have to be designed to be flexible and achieve a 
high quality and be appropriate and inclusive for the 
intended occupants and provide adequate space 
for living, sleeping and care activities and that takes 
account of potential mobility issues of residents. Where 
on-site care and support will be provided adjacent 
to the residential units, applicants will be required 
to demonstrate arrangements between developers, 
support service providers and the NHS and have 
arrangements in place for the long-term management 
of the scheme.
8.77. The London Plan benchmarks identify the 
need for intermediate and affordable rent units for 
older people, which is expected to form the majority 
of the specialist housing needs. As such, all forms of 
specialist housing will be required to provide affordable 
housing, subject to viability, where they are self-
contained housing units behind a lockable front door 
containing the normal facilities for cooking, eating and 
sleeping associated with use as a dwelling house i.e. 
they afford the facilities required for day to day private 
domestic existence. 
8.78. Specialist housing should normally be located 
in areas that are accessible to public transport and 
other local facilities such as shops, pharmacies and 
community facilities for the benefit of the residents 
themselves but also support staff and visiting family 
members.
8.79. Applications will be required to provide a 
Residential Management Plan, secured through a 
Section 106 agreement. This will need to provide 
details on how the housing and any space provided 
for the care and support services will be managed and 
maintained. Minimum expectations with regards to the 
management plans include:SUPPORTING TEXT
8.72. The UK’s and London’s population is ageing and 
more people are living with long-term health conditions 
requiring additional care and support. This is a cost to 
the NHS and also to councils. Councils already spend 
30 to 35% of their budgets on adult social care. It is 
now widely recognised that the quality of life for older 
people and people of all ages with a physical disability 
can be increased and support costs reduced if they 
can live in homes that can foster their independence 
but easily accommodate any support needs they may 
have.
8.73. OPDC’s SHMA identifies that there is a need 
for 8,100 new specialist older person housing units 
within the SHMA area over the Local Plan period using 
Housing Learning and Improvement Network (Housing 
LIN) methodology. This represents 6.3% of the total 
objectively assessed need in the local housing market 
area covering the three host local authorities.  In 
addition to this need, social care departments in the 
three local authorities are working with other vulnerable 
people who would benefit from moving into a specialist 
housing unit with care attached. 
8.74. Dedicated specialist housing units will not be 
required on every scheme. However, in order to meet 
the need identified in the SHMA, OPDC will expect 
large housing developments of more than 1,000 units 
to provide at least 10% specialist housing units onsite. 
Large housing developments are more likely to be able 
to viably provide specialist housing units at scale and 
provide additional facilities and services that may be 
able to support the needs of residents.206
a) how regular on-site support and care facilities for 
residents will be managed and maintained;
b) how ad-hoc requirements for additional support 
requiring access to the premises will be managed;
c) how communal facilities, including landscaping, 
deliveries and collections will be managed;
d) security and fire safety procedures; and
e) procedures for community liaison. 
8.80. Given the ageing population and need identified 
in the SHMA,  conversions or loss of existing specialist 
housing will only be supported where proposals can 
demonstrate that there is no longer an identified local 
need, where it can be demonstrated that the existing 
provision does not comply with any relevant standards 
and it is not feasible for the provision to be improved 
to meet the relevant standards, or where the proposal 
would provide replacement specialist housing at an 
equivalent or higher density.Figure 8.6: Extra Care Housing in Buccleuch House, Hackney (credit: Levitt Bernstein)H9207
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Absorption Rate Study
• Affordable Housing Viability Assessment
• Housing Evidence Statement
• Strategic Housing Market AssessmentPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP2, SP4, SP9 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D3
• Housing Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policies DI4POLICY H10: Student Accommodation
a) Student housing will be supported where it:
i) meets an identified local or London-wide need 
and contributes to the vibrancy and diversity of 
an area, especially in the early phases of the 
plan period;
ii) is located within or directly adjacent to a 
designated town centre and has a PTAL of 4 or 
higher and is close to local amenities;
iii) does not undermine the delivery of 
conventional self-contained housing supply 
and housing targets; 
iv) provides adequate internal private living space 
and communal space to meet needs; and 
v)  does not result in an overconcentration in any 
one specific location;
b) Proposals must provide an appropriate Residential 
Management Plan; and 
c) Proposals must provide affordable student 
accommodation subject to the thresholds and 
viability tests as defined through Mayoral policy 
and /or guidance and be secured for occupation 
by a specified higher educational institution.8.85. Proposals for student accommodation will be 
required to be of high quality in relation to design and 
size in accordance with Policy D3. Student housing 
schemes, by virtue of providing a number of units 
of the same size, can result in monotonous façade 
treatments which can negatively impact on the public 
realm. Proposals should specifically seek to deliver 
interesting and high quality facades, which complement 
the existing and emerging character of the area. The 
accommodation layout will be required to provide 
liveable bedrooms, study areas and other facilities.
8.86. Proposals for student housing should be 
located within or adjacent to designated town centres 
with a PTAL of 4 or higher so that students can easily 
access public transport, workplaces and amenities. 
Developments located close to transport nodes will 
also support with the movement of students especially 
during the start and end of terms. 
8.87. OPDC will expect proposals to be accompanied 
by a Residential Management Plan setting out how any 
impact on the surrounding area and the amenity of the 
neighbouring residents will be mitigated, particularly 
in relation to noise, disturbance and amenity 
impacts. These plans must also provide details of the 
management regime to be implemented on site, from 
first occupation and on an ongoing basis. Management 
and maintenance plans should, as a minimum, include 
detailed information as described in paragraph 8.57 
Policy H6 on Build to Rent. Compliance with approved 
management and maintenance plans will be secured 
through Section 106 agreements.
8.88. In accordance with the latest Mayoral guidance 
and/or policy student housing proposals should make 
an appropriate contribution to affordable student 
accommodation, subject to viability. At the time of 
publication of this Local Plan, this requires schemes to 
deliver 35% of accommodation as affordable to benefit 
from the Fast Track Route.SUPPORTING TEXT
8.81. The Mayor’s Academic Forum has provided 
projections for the growth of full time students in 
London. These projections estimate the need for 
approximately 88,000 net additional Purpose Build 
Student Accommodation (PBSA) bedspaces between 
2016 and 2041, or 3,500 when annualised over the 25 
year period.
8.82. OPDC recognises the many positive benefits 
that universities and higher education institutions and 
their students bring to London. Both enhance an area’s 
reputation as a dynamic and vibrant location, create 
a critical mass for the delivery of goods, services and 
events, provide local businesses with skilled workers 
and seasonal workers and can aid place making, 
regeneration and investment.   
8.83. To demonstrate there is a local or London-wide  
need and ensure the accommodation will be supporting 
London’s higher education institutions, the student 
accommodation must either be operated directly by a 
higher education institution or the development must 
have an undertaking in place from initial occupation, to 
provide housing for students at one or more specified 
higher education institutions, for as long as the 
development is used for student accommodation.
8.84. Provision of purpose built student 
accommodation will be supported as part of an overall 
mix of housing types across the area but it must not 
result in an over-concentration in any one particular 
location in order to protect the long-term sustainability 
of local communities. This will avoid issues of:
a) not achieving a mix and variety of housing in a 
location;
b) overconcentration of one form of dwelling type;
c) directly related noise and management concerns;
d) vacant premises at particular times of the year; and
e) pressure on the transport infrastructure at particular 
times of the year (end/start of terms).208
Chapter 9
EMPLOYMENT209
9.1. Economic activities in Old Oak and Park Royal 
make a vital contribution to the sustainability of the 
local and London economy. The area has a rich history 
of manufacturing and production, including developing 
iconic products such as the Routemaster Bus, Heinz 
baked beans, Guinness and Rolls Royce cars. This 
industrial legacy is reflected in its diverse economic 
profile, with over 1,700 businesses ranging from 
small to multi-national operations, across a number of 
sectors and specialisms and employing around 43,000 
people. 
9.2. The development of a new major commercial 
centre over the next 30 years alongside the protection, 
strengthening and intensification of Strategic Industrial 
Locations represent opportunities to retain, grow, 
innovate and diversify the economic base.  A mix of 
employment sectors will be encouraged in order to 
create vibrant industrial, commercial and mixed use 
locations. Additional space will be created to support 
more businesses and jobs – an additional 36,350 new 
jobs over the next 20 years.  Regeneration, on the 
scale envisaged will shape the local and sub-regional 
economy and strengthen London’s role as a global city. 
It will also provide new and existing communities with 
access to a range of different jobs and training and 
support local businesses in accessing supply chain 
opportunities. 
9.3. This chapter sets out how new developments 
will protect, strengthen and intensify industrial areas 
and support new employment growth across a variety 
of sectors in other locations. This chapter should be 
read in conjunction with the strategic policies contained 
within the Strategic Policies Chapter (Chapter 3), 
specifically Policy SP5 (Economic Resilience). 
The spatial priorities and distribution for different 
employment uses are covered in the Places Chapter 
(Chapter 4).Introduction
Employment Policies:
• E1: Protecting, Strengthening & Intensifying the Strategic Industrial Location
• E2: Employment Sites Outside SIL
• E3: Supporting Small Businesses and Start Ups
• E4: Work-Live Units
• E5: Local Access to Training, Employment and Economic Opportunities
Figure 9.1: Small Business in Park Royal (credit: OPDC by Mattr Media Ltd)
210
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Industrial Land Review and Addendum
• Industrial Estates Study
• Park Royal and Old Oak North Intensification Studies
• Park Royal Atlas
• Socio Economic Baseline StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP5
• Place Policies (All)
• Employment Policies (All)
Figure 9.2: OPDC Future Employment Growth SectorsPOLICY E1: Protecting, Strengthening & Intensifying the Strategic Industrial Location
OPDC will protect, strengthen and intensify land 
within the designated SIL boundary by ensuring 
proposals: 
a)  are comprised of uses suitable for broad industrial 
type activities, in line with Mayoral policy and/or 
guidance, that contribute to meeting the strategic 
target of 36,350 new jobs in Policy SP5 and the 
relevant place jobs targets in Chapter 4;
b) achieve no net loss of industrial floorspace 
capacity and where feasible, intensify the use of 
sites, in particular on Site Allocations and on other 
sites identified in OPDC’s Park Royal and Old Oak 
North Intensification Studies; 
c) provide a mix of unit sizes including small 
business units. Existing small business units 
should be reprovided;
d) provide adequate servicing and delivery 
space in accordance with Policy T7. Particular 
consideration should be given to the need for 
appropriate yard space provision to allow for the 
viable function of businesses; and
e) are well designed for their intended purpose 
having regard to providing flexibility for a range 
of broad industrial type activities, including 
appropriate identified future employment growth 
sectors. Adequate floor to ceiling heights should 
be provided having regard to relevant evidence 
base studies.SUPPORTING TEXT
9.4. London’s industrial land is vital to the functioning 
of its economy, providing goods and services to its 
businesses and people. Growth in London’s economy 
and population and the densification of the city will 
mean that London’s industrial land will need to work 
harder and more effectively, to support the efficient 
functioning of our capital.
9.5. Together, Park Royal and Old Oak North are the 
largest reservoir of industrial land in London, and are 
designated as a Strategic Industrial Location (SIL) (see 
figure 9.4). Large industrial estates are one of the few 
areas that can accommodate uses, including industrial 
activities, operating 24 hours a day and creating noise, 
which can lead to land use conflicts elsewhere.
9.6. The OPDC area has a long history of economic 
innovation and growth. Today, it is still hugely 
successful, and is home to around 1,700 businesses, 
including particularly high concentrations of food manufacturing, transport, logistics and wholesale, 
creative services/manufacturing businesses and a 
well established network of artist studios. Combined, 
these employ 43,100 members of staff, many of which 
live locally. Evidence demonstrates strong demand for 
industrial space in the OPDC area1, and anticipates 
that there will be continued demand from a range of 
broad industrial type activities which are likely to grow 
and be attracted to SIL within the OPDC area (see 
figure 9.2). Across SIL there is capacity to deliver 8,350 
new jobs.  
9.7. The evidence of an accelerated loss of industrial 
land across London means that the remaining industrial 
land supply must be protected and used as intensively 
and efficiently as possible. 
9.8. The OPDC area could achieve an overall 
increase in floorspace suitable for broad industrial 
type activities and intensification in SIL will be key to 211
achieving this2. This intensification could be achieved 
through a number of interventions such as horizontal/
vertical extensions, infill development, development 
on vacant land and comprehensive development of 
existing sites. Design approaches could and should 
include multi-storey industrial typologies. 
9.9. Policy E1 seeks to, as a minimum, protect 
existing industrial floorspace capacity or the potential 
industrial floorspace that could be accommodated 
on site. Sites should deliver high plot ratios through 
industrial intensification where feasible, subject to 
transport impacts, agent of change, delivery of a high 
quality public realm and all other relevant planning 
policy considerations. Applicants must set out all 
options explored for intensification in their Planning 
Statements. OPDC will accept schemes that provide 
industrial intensification, except where robust evidence 
has been provided by the applicant demonstrating 
that it is not feasible and/or the considerations above 
cannot be met. It is important that appropriate industrial 
use classes are secured in order to ensure floorspace 
can permanently accommodate industrial uses, and 
thereby maintain no net loss or deliver a net gain of 
industrial floorspace capacity as well as protecting the 
function and integrity of SIL.
9.10. There are an array of different space types 
and sizes across the SIL, which helps to make it a 
competitive and attractive business location3. It is 
important that proposals in SIL are well designed and 
support the effective function of businesses across a 
wide range of sectors4 and business sizes. To support 
this, OPDC will look to secure a range of unit sizes 
that provide opportunities for businesses to start up, 
scale up and ultimately to remain in the area. The 
provision of small business units will be particularly 
important to allow for new businesses to locate and 
grow in the area. Proposals should provide adequate 
servicing arrangements to allow for the viable function 
of businesses and the provision of adequate minimum 
floor to ceiling heights will ensure that new units are REFERENCES
1. Industrial Land Review and Addendum
2. Park Royal Intensification Study
3. Industrial Estates Study
4. Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
5. LLDC Employment Space Design Study (2015)
Figure 9.3: McVities Factory, Park Royal (credit: OPDC by Mattr Media Ltd)E1
appropriate to a variety of economic sectors, ensuring 
longer term flexibility and adaptability. 
9.11. OPDC will apply the ‘agent of change’ principle, 
in accordance with Policy D5, when considering the 
impact of proposals adjacent to SIL to ensure that 
development will not harm the functioning of existing or 
future employment and industrial activities in SIL and 
vice versa, proposals for broad industrial type activities 
on the edge of SIL will need to adequately protect the 
amenity of adjacent mixed use developments.
9.12. Design and Access Statements should 
demonstrate that proposed units are well designed for their intended purpose and should look at a range of 
issues including the unit size(s), floor to ceiling heights, 
access and servicing, mitigation measures for noise, 
emissions etc, exterior environment and frontage, and 
interior layout. Examples of ideal design specifications 
for industrial units covering a number of these matters 
have been the subject of separate research and these 
should be used as a point of reference by applicants5.212SIL Land
Non-SIL Land
Figure 9.4: SIL Boundary213
Figure 9.4: SIL Boundary
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Cultural Principles
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Industrial Estates Study
• Industrial Land Review
• Park Royal and Old Oak North Intensification Studies
• Precedents Study
POLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP5
• Place Policies (All)
• Employment Policies (All)
• Town Centre Policies TCC1, TCC2, TCC4 and TCC8POLICY E2: Employment Sites Outside of SIL
Outside of SIL, OPDC will support proposals that:
a) deliver employment floorspace that:
i) contributes to meeting the strategic jobs target 
of 36,350 in Policy SP5 and the place jobs 
targets in Chapter 4;
ii) is well designed for their intended purpose 
having regard to providing flexibility for a range 
of appropriate identified future employment 
growth sectors; 
iii) accords with the Site Allocations and relevant 
place policy land use designations in Chapter 
4; and
iv) accords with Policy TCC8 Meanwhile Uses;
b) re-provide existing industrial floorspace suitable 
for broad industrial type activities on site where 
the existing use is compatible with the land 
use policy relevant to the application site. This 
reprovision should seek to incorporate existing 
businesses where possible by: 
i) undertaking proactive engagement to identity 
whether there are any existing businesses on 
site which it would be feasible and desirable to 
retain on site; and
ii) providing units of a suitable land use, unit 
size, design and with appropriate servicing to 
enable the retention of existing businesses;
c) support any existing businesses that can not be 
incorporated in line with part b) to relocate off site; 
and 
d)  involve the change the use of employment 
floorspace to other land uses, where it is 
shown to no longer be economically viable, as 
demonstrated by accounts data and through 
competitive marketing for a period of at least 12 
months for relevant employment uses without an 
appropriate offer being received.SUPPORTING TEXT
9.13. A significant quantum of new homes and new 
employment floorspace with opportunities for new jobs 
will be created outside of SIL through the regeneration 
and redevelopment of Old Oak South, North Acton, 
Park Royal Town Centre and First Central.
9.14. On sites outside of the SIL designation, 
there is capacity to deliver 28,150 new jobs, across 
a range of economic sectors1. The majority of this 
new employment floorspace will be delivered within 
the proposed new commercial centre around Old 
Oak Common station and within the new town 
centre hierarchy (Old Oak Major Town Centre, 
North Acton Neighbourhood Town Centre and Park 
Royal Neighbourhood Town Centre), but there will 
be opportunities to deliver employment floorspace 
elsewhere, as part of mixed use development and 
in locations that could be unsuitable for residential 
accommodation. Proposals will be supported that 
contribute to this target and the relevant place targets 
(see Chapter 4) and Site Allocation targets (see Policy 
SP10). 
9.15.  The delivery of high density development 
outside of designated SIL will mean that some existing 
employment sites will be redeveloped. However, 
there are opportunities to reprovide (co-locate) 
existing floorspace as part of future redevelopment in 
these areas. OPDC will seek to re-provide industrial 
floorspace as part of new mixed use development 
outside of SIL, unless it can be demonstrated that it is 
not compatible or would compromise the delivery of relevant Place policies or Site Allocation targets. Any 
reprovision, along with the industrial intensification 
in SIL (see Policy E1) will help deliver an overall net 
gain of floorspace suitable for broad industrial type 
activities across the OPDC area. It is important that, 
where required, appropriate industrial use classes are 
secured in order to ensure floorspace can permanently 
accommodate industrial uses, and thereby maintain 
no net loss or deliver a net gain of industrial floorspace 
capacity. OPDC will monitor the loss/gain of industrial 
floorspace through its Authority Monitoring Report 
(AMR) to ensure that overall, development is resulting 
in a net gain in floorspace suitable for broad industrial 
type activities.
9.16. The requirement for the co-location (or re-
provision) of floorspace suitable for broad industrial 
type activities will ensure that the legacy of economic, 
creative and cultural activity and vibrancy can continue 
as part of the area’s future.  Retaining uses such as 
creative industries could help establish identity and 
support community cohesion, particularly during the 
early years of the development.
9.17. OPDC will assess the compatibility and potential 
for reprovision and co-location of existing industrial 
floorspace within new development against all relevant 
planning considerations, including:
a) whether access requirements and servicing needs 
can be adequately accommodated;
b) whether potential transport, environmental and 
amenity impacts can be effectively mitigated (i.e. 
mixing uses can be less problematic if industrial 
uses are not noxious, quieter and don’t require 
regular servicing); and
c) whether the existing broad industrial type activity 
requires a land-take/floorspace that would 
compromise the delivery of identified housing 
targets.
9.18. To accord with part E2 b) and c), applicants 214
should submit a Business Relocation Strategy as part 
of their Planning Statements. This should include:
a) analysis to understand existing businesses on site 
including their use classes/ type of activity, potential 
compatibility with proposed land uses, size of the 
business premises, number of employees and 
lease arrangements. 
b) evidence of robust engagement with the affected 
businesses throughout the pre-application process, 
to ascertain whether businesses wish to be 
retained in suitable premises on site or relocated 
off site and what their requirements might be i.e. 
location, size and type of premises required, fit out 
and servicing requirements, location of consumers 
and suppliers. Where a business wishes to cease 
trading instead, then a signed statement from the 
business should confirm this position.  Where the 
building is vacant, applicants should engage with 
approved workspace providers and employment 
sectors to make sure the new employment space 
is appropriately designed to meet the needs of a 
range of appropriate business sectors.
c) a strategy detailing:
i) on-site retention – how the applicant will work 
with businesses that wish to be retained to 
ensure on site provision is designed flexibly 
to meet their needs. Consideration should 
be given to how the phasing of development 
supports on-site retention. Applicants will 
be encouraged to consider the potential for 
‘meanwhile’ premises that would be available 
on site on an interim basis that would meet the 
needs of business before it could be relocated 
permanently (see Policy TCC9). If appropriate, 
on-site retention could be provided within 
affordable workspace (see Policy E3); and
ii) off-site relocation - how the applicant will 
explore options with businesses who want 
or need to be relocated and confirmation of 
what assistance will be provided. This should E2
REFERENCES
1. Development Capacity Study Updateconfirm when relocation would need to occur 
and identify suitable, available alternative 
locations in accordance with the following 
sequential approach: 
 »the OPDC area; 
 »the 3 host boroughs (Brent, Ealing and 
Hammersmith and Fulham); 
 »west London; 
 »and then the rest of London and beyond.
9.19. In accordance with DI4b, where appropriate, 
OPDC would make use of compulsory purchase 
powers to facilitate business relocations. This would 
be considered on a case by case basis. Given the long 
term phasing of certain sites outside of SIL, there is 
potential for premises and sites to stay in productive 
use as interim employment uses prior to their planned redevelopment for mixed use in line with Table 3.1. Any 
proposals to support the effective functioning of these 
uses ahead of the sites’ comprehensive redevelopment 
would be assessed against policy TCC8 (Meanwhile 
Uses) and other relevant planning policies.
9.20. Both before and after the comprehensive 
redevelopment, there may be interest from developers 
to change the use of employment premises. In 
such circumstances, OPDC will expect evidence of 
competitive marketing of the premises in appropriate 
publications for a prolonged and continuous period 
without an appropriate offer being received, before 
accepting the change of use from employment to 
alternative uses.
Figure 9.5: White Collar Factory, Old Street, London (credit: Timothy Soar)215
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Circular and Sharing Economy Study
• Cultural Principles
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Industrial Estates Study
• Park Royal and Old Oak North Intensification Studies
• Socio Economic Baseline StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP4 and SP5
• Place Policies (All)
• Employment Policies E1, E2, E4 and E5
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC4POLICY E3: Supporting Small Businesses and Start Ups
OPDC will require proposals which generate new 
employment floorspace to: 
a) incorporate an appropriate quantum of;
i) affordable workspace offered at below market 
rate; 
ii) shared workspaces; and/or
iii) small business units
b) demonstrate that any affordable workspace 
provided under part a) would be managed by an 
appropriate workspace or studio provider and/
or be supported by an appropriate Management 
Scheme; and
c) demonstrate that the affordable workspace 
delivered provides an appropriate security of 
tenure. 
SUPPORTING TEXT
9.21. Spaces suitable for small businesses and/
or start-ups will play a role in informing the sense of 
place, supporting employment growth sectors identified 
in the Future Employment Growth Sectors Study 
(2017) and in developing Old Oak and Park Royal as a 
centre for innovation and enterprise. 9.22. Access to small business units or flexible and 
shared workspaces, such as co-working spaces, 
incubator spaces, accelerator spaces, creative/
artist spaces and makerspaces, can provide more 
affordable opportunities for smaller businesses and 
start ups. Shared workspaces also support the sharing 
economy1. In recent years shared workspaces have 
become a popular type of employment space provision 
for small start-ups. They often have flexible terms and 
provide business support which can be attractive to 
new businesses. Smaller units are not necessarily 
low cost, but they can have cost advantages for 
smaller businesses as they provide the ‘right’ amount 
of space. Examples of ideal design specifications for 
smaller employment spaces have been the subject of 
separate research which could provide a useful point of 
reference for applicants2. 
9.23. Workspace or studio providers can ensure 
that the affordable workspace secured through the 
planning process is properly managed over the longer 
term and that the intended objective to support small/
start up businesses is met. Their role will include 
providing appropriate rental terms, actively managing 
the selection of occupiers and occupier turnover, and 
putting in place and maintaining business support. 
Workspace or studio providers should meet required 
criteria, this could include:
a) having experience in, and sustainable operating 
model for, providing and actively managing the 
turnover of low cost or managed workspace;
b) having a strong record of successfully supporting 
business tenants, including start-ups, and across 
some or all of the identified growth sectors; and/or
c) demonstrating an ability to add local value, such 
as offering training or events which are open to the 
public.9.24. OPDC will approve a workspace or studio 
provider either by going through a process to 
evaluate and select providers to develop an approved 
workspace or studio provider list or by determining 
the suitability of the proposed workspace or studio 
provider(s) on a case by case basis, against the above 
criteria. This approval will be required in order to 
ensure that workspaces will be managed appropriately.
9.25. OPDC will consider the most appropriate type 
or nature of provision under Policy E3a) on a site by 
site basis. The agreed arrangements for affordable 
workspace including the quantum, type, rent levels, 
management and timescales will be secured via a 
legal agreement. Affordable workspace should also 
accord with relevant London Plan policy requirements. 
For proposals to support the expansion of existing 
business tenants it is recognised that on-site provision 
of small, open and/or affordable workspace may 
not be practicable. In this circumstance, alternative 
arrangements to support local business growth will be 
considered acceptable, such as how the expansion of 
the existing business operation could indirectly support 
small business growth.
REFERENCES
1. Circular and Sharing Economy Study
2. LLDC Employment Space Design Study (2015)216
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Precedents StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP4 and SP5
• Place Policies (All)
• Housing Policies H1, H2 and H7
• Employment Policies (All)
• Town Centre Policy TCC8POLICY E4: Work Live Units
Work-live units will only be acceptable where: 
a) there is demonstrable demand specifically 
for work-live or they are to be delivered as a 
meanwhile use on a temporary basis;
b)  they are outside of SIL and located in an area 
considered appropriate for this type of use; 
c) the residential and employment uses are 
intrinsically linked (either in the same building or 
tethered);
d)  where both work and live uses are occurring 
within a single unit, there is some internal division 
between the living and working spaces;
e)  where both work and live uses are occurring 
within a single unit, the spatial arrangement, 
design and building type is predominantly 
commercial in character; 
f) the access arrangements allow for visible and 
direct access for business visitors and suitable 
servicing by heavy goods vehicles;
g)  the environmental performance meets targets 
for residential accommodation, particularly with 
regards to sound proofing, energy and insulation; 
h)  where appropriate, spaces of interaction between 
occupiers are incorporated within the building;
i) it would be managed by an OPDC approved 
provider with a proven and successful track 
record of delivering work-live units and an 
appropriate management plan is secured;
j) they can support a mix of businesses, working 
across a wide range of sectors, particularly for 
the identified employment growth sectors in figure 
9.2;
k) businesses have active frontages and a visible 
street presence for branding opportunities; and
l) the tenure arrangements can demonstrate 
an intrinsic link between the both uses and 
appropriate protection and enforcement is in 
place to prevent residential reversion.SUPPORTING TEXT
9.26. Work-live opportunities have been considered 
as they could help deliver affordable workspace 
alongside housing. However, the demand for this 
type of accommodation has not been established, 
so this provision would need to be analysed against 
alternatives, such as affordable or managed 
workspace or other forms of housing. The protection 
of industrial land is an absolute priority, and work-live 
accommodation will not be acceptable in SIL; but this 
form of development could be appropriate on sites 
outside of, but adjacent to, SIL. Suitable locations for 
work-live accommodation will be assessed on a case 
by case basis.
9.27. Work/live units, if designed well, could be useful 
to a wide range of people, working in a wide range 
of disciplines. This could include families and social 
tenants, as well as the more obvious artists, makers 
and start-up businesses. The daily activity generated 
by multiple tenants occupying a property throughout 
the day could also provide a place making opportunity 
that can contribute to a vibrant street-scene. 9.28. To be considered acceptable, an applicant 
would need to provide an accurate demand analysis 
to support an understanding of the viability of any 
proposal. In circumstances where they may be 
considered acceptable, OPDC will expect proposals 
to be designed and managed to ensure adequate 
protection and enforcement of the employment use. 
9.29. To avoid residential reversion and support 
business activities, the design should take into account 
the following:
a) be finished in robust material finishes, high 
ceilings (above 2.8m), large access doors, clear 
business signage and wayfinding, robust access 
routes including deck access, ‘shell fit outs’ for 
tenants to take responsibility for finishes and allow 
customisation, use of robust materials such as 
concrete, steel and masonry;
b) provide a clear physical separation between 
residential accommodation and the workspace 
to prevent ‘residential reversion’ of employment 
floorspace, where the employment use is not suited 
to being completely ‘open’ to living accommodation. 
For units which contain both living and working 
space with a single point of access, mezzanine 
levels can be a useful method of dividing uses. 
In this case, access to the premises should lead 
directly into the workspace to prevent visitors 
needing to pass through residential areas;
c) suitable commercial access arrangements need to 
be designed in;
d) the spatial layout of work-live accommodation 
should assist in supporting opportunities for 
business-to-business networking and place making. 
Spaces of interaction can provide an opportunity 
for active frontages. These should be considered 217
in all dual use accommodation and may include 
cafés, business support areas, galleries and deck 
access particularly where tenants are able to 
utilise external areas and dedicated yard spaces. 
This balance between general public visibility and 
visibility amongst tenants and visitors only, must be 
carefully considered in response to the site context 
and proposed uses or tenants; and
e) privacy is important to both residential and 
business activities and inadequately insulated 
spaces may lead to sound pollution, high utilities 
bills and even lack of demand. The environmental 
performance of dual use accommodation should 
meet or exceed targets for residential properties 
to ensure they do not provide a poor quality of 
accommodation.
9.30. In order to maximise the potential 
neighbourhood impact of work-live schemes, ground 
floor, street-facing business space is preferable, 
although this may not be suited to all uses.
9.31. A rented tenure can contribute to retention of 
employment uses in work-live arrangements, as part 
of a landlord management programme. Where both 
uses are occurring within a single unit, a predominantly 
commercial lease that permits residential use will be 
required, to ensure the development is employment-
focused. Home ownership work-live tenures will 
normally be resisted.
9.32. Planning conditions and legal agreements will 
be used to secure the required arrangements.Figure 9.6:   Westferry Studios, East London (credit: studiohire.com)E4218
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Socio Economic Baseline StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2, SP5 and SP7
• Place Policies (All)
• Employment Policies (All)iii) providing new, on-site skills training centres; 
and
iv) maximising the use of local labour for 
construction and end use job vacancies.
This should include ways to proactively encourage 
applications from women, Black and Minority Ethnic 
(BAME) groups, Disabled people and ex-offenders. 
It should also seek to pay employees the London 
Living Wage (see Policy SP5).
b) Skills - the provision of construction 
apprenticeships and vocational training (on site 
and/or through outreach support) to be delivered 
directly by the main contractor and subcontractor/
supply chain, or through a shared apprenticeship 
scheme to help increase skills in the local labour 
pool;
c) Supply chain – procedures to ensure small and 
medium sized local businesses (local SMEs) and 
social enterprises have appropriate access to 
tender opportunities for the procurement of goods 
and services generated by the development both 
during and after construction; and
d) Mitigating impacts – strategy to minimise disruption 
for existing businesses and residents within the 
site, and adjacent to it.
9.36. The management plan element of the LLSESMP 
will be secured via a legal (s106) agreement. These 
should set clear targets, an action plan, an agreed 
programme of activities and monitoring measures. 
Obligations will be sought on the basis that the use 
of local labour, skills and suppliers will contribute 
towards reducing overall commuting journeys, 
minimising vehicle mileage and associated emissions. 
Given these benefits, the LLSESMP will form a key 
part of the measures required to mitigate transport 
and environmental impacts to make development 
acceptable. The obligations would be related to the 
construction and/or end use of the development 
and would be linked to the scale and nature of the 
proposals, i.e. local construction labour costs could be POLICY E5: Local Access to Training, Employment and Economic Opportunities
reduce and eliminate the pay gap between men and 
women (See Policy SP5). 
9.34. It is vital that change is planned so that local 
people (including existing and future residents 
and businesses) will be able to benefit from the 
employment opportunities that will come forward. 
OPDC intends to play an active role in implementing 
and coordinating initiatives to secure employment, 
training and apprenticeships through its own activities, 
through development proposals and through 
partnership working with the boroughs and employment 
and skills providers. However, new developments 
across the whole area need to play their part by 
providing employment and training opportunities. An 
informed and skilled local community can also provide 
the local labour force that existing employers need to 
help grow current businesses. 
9.35. To ensure proposals for major developments 
are meeting OPDC’s socio-economic regeneration 
priorities and the requirements of policies SP5 and E5, 
a Local Labour, Skills and Employment Strategy and 
Management Plan (LLSESMP) should be developed in 
partnership with relevant stakeholders, incorporating 
predictions on labour demand forecasts and likely 
skills requirements. The LLSESMP must be subject 
to approval by OPDC. The strategy element of the 
LLSESMP should be included within applicant’s Socio-
Economic Statements and should cover the following 
key areas:
a) Jobs - ways to help local people benefit from 
employment opportunities throughout the 
development timeframe, including:
i) a commitment to advertise job vacancies 
locally in local labour and business schemes 
and job centres; 
ii) funding Workplace Co-ordinators and 
bolstering existing local labour and business 
schemes/job brokerages; SUPPORTING TEXT
9.33. OPDC’s Socio Economic Baseline Study 
(2016) highlights that the area has lower household 
incomes, higher rates of unemployment and lower than 
average skill levels. Some of the areas to the north 
and south east of the OPDC area are shown to be in 
the 10% most deprived locations within the country. In 
light of this, getting more local people into sustained 
employment is key to the successful regeneration of 
Old Oak and Park Royal. Maximising access to local 
employment and training is a key priority for OPDC. 
Employment uses and associated education and 
training opportunities can play a fundamental role in 
improving on the existing socio-economic baseline. 
Businesses can also take direct action and an 
important step towards addressing in-work poverty and 
promoting economic fairness, by paying the London 
Living Wage and conducting gender pay audits to help For major development proposals, a Local Labour, 
Skills and Employment Strategy and Management 
Plan will be secured. This will enable them to 
demonstrate how they:
a) maximise the use of local labour;
b) provide construction apprenticeships and 
vocational training; and
c) ensure that small and medium sized local 
businesses and social enterprises have 
appropriate access to supply chain opportunities 
generated by the development.219
calculated based on the total value of the construction 
contract(s). Further details on the requirements and 
scope of the LLSESMP will be provided in the Planning 
Obligations Supplementary Planning Document (SPD).
9.37. In delivering its own regeneration priorities, 
OPDC is currently envisaging  working with 
stakeholders to support the following:
a) Brokering training, apprenticeship and jobs with 
employers, contractors, public, private and third 
sectors to link local young people and adults into 
training and sustainable jobs; 
b) Working with schools, the further education (FE) 
and higher education (HE) sector and businesses 
to deliver a high quality educational offer that 
responds to employers’ needs, raises young 
peoples’ aspirations and provides them with the 
knowledge and skills that they will need to compete 
effectively within a world city, whatever their chosen 
career; and
c) Using procurement of works and services 
to promote local employment, training and 
apprenticeships and encourage supplier diversity 
and SME involvement in supply chains.
9.38. OPDC will also work with partners and 
stakeholders, including:
a) HS2 Ltd, other transport bodies and their supply 
chains and end use employers to share labour 
forecasting data on construction and end-use 
requirements to help plan for local employment and 
skills offers; and
b) developing with partners, demand led, localised 
employment and training initiatives, including 
brokerage schemes so that employers are able to 
benefit from a local workforce that is appropriately 
trained and local people have access to job, 
training and apprenticeship vacancies.Figure 9.7: Existing Employment in Park RoyalE5
9.39. Applicants should engage early and work in 
partnership with OPDC, the boroughs, local businesses 
or business partnerships, local communities and other 
stakeholders to develop complementary strategy 
objectives and programmes of activity. This could include links with Job Centre Plus, local schools and 
colleges adult education and learning services, higher 
education institutions and voluntary and community 
organisations.220
Chapter 10
TOWN CENTRE AND 
COMMUNITY USES221
10.1. Town centre and community facilities 
provide the key services that people need. They can 
include facilities such as shops, cafes, restaurants, 
public houses, cultural and leisure venues, cinemas, 
museums, sports centres, hotels, schools, libraries, 
health centres, places of worship and community 
centres. Providing convenient access to these facilities 
is vital to creating lifetime neighbourhoods. The 
successful spatial distribution, design, delivery and 
operation of these facilities will ensure access for all 
members of society, help to reduce the need to travel, 
supporting transit oriented development, contribute to 
a layered city and encourage social interaction and 
leisure activities that improve health and wellbeing. 
They can also support place making by creating 
on-street activity and can enhance the economic 
prosperity of the area. 10.2. New town centre and community uses should 
be of a high quality and meet a diverse range of needs. 
The policies in this chapter set out how OPDC expects 
this to be achieved. 
10.3. This chapter should be read in conjunction 
with the strategic policies contained within the Strategic 
Policies Chapter (Chapter 3), specifically with Policy 
SP6 (Places and Destinations), which includes 
OPDC’s town centre hierarchy and with the Places 
Chapter (Chapter 4), which deals with the character 
of designated town centres and which sets out 
appropriate clusters for town centre uses.Introduction
Town Centre and Community Uses Policies:
• TCC1: Locations for and Impacts of Town 
Centre Uses
• TCC2: Vibrancy
• TCC3: Social Infrastructure
• TCC4: Culture and Art
• TCC5: Sports and Leisure
• TCC6: Public Houses
• TCC7: Catalyst Uses
• TCC8: Meanwhile Uses
• TCC9: Visitor Accommodation
• TCC10: Night Time Economy Uses
Figure 10.1: Bankside, London222
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP6
• Place Policies P1, P2, P3, P6, P7, P8, P10 and P11
• Design Policies D1 and D2
• Employment Policies E1, E2 and E3
• Town Centres and Community Uses Policies (All)POLICY TCC1: Locations for and Impacts of Town Centre Uses
To support, complement and avoid significant 
adverse impacts to the role and function of OPDC’s 
designated town centres and the surrounding town 
centre hierarchy, proposals for town centre uses:  
a) will be supported in OPDC’s designated town 
centres;
b) will be supported outside of designated centres 
within clusters identified as appropriate for 
town centre uses in the Places Chapter and in 
accordance with the clusters’ associated policy;
c) will be supported on the edge of or outside 
of designated centres where the sequential 
approach to site identification has been applied in 
accordance with the NPPF sequential test, except 
for in the Strategic Industrial Location where town 
centre uses will only be supported where they do 
not have an unacceptable adverse impact on the 
functioning of SIL by:
i providing walk-to services for SIL 
workers, such as cafes or creches, which 
demonstrably meet a need for walk-to 
services within the proposed use class;
ii being of a small-scale by not exceeding 
80sqm of floorspace; 
iii not resulting in the clustering of town centre 
uses; and
iv where feasible, supporting the viability of the 
industrial businesses’ operation;
d) will be supported, where they provide meanwhile 
space, in accordance with Policy TCC8;
e)  be delivered in phases, in accordance with 
demand created by the delivery of homes and 
jobs;  
f) should have regard to the up to date retail and 
leisure needs study for the OPDC area, including 
the recommended distribution of town centre uses 
across the area;
g)  deliver mitigation measures, where identified by 
an impact assessment in accordance with the 
NPPF and NPPG, where proposals are providing 
retail, leisure or office development that exceeds SUPPORTING TEXT
10.4. OPDC has designated a town centre hierarchy 
set out in Policy SP6, which focusses town centre 
uses, which generate high footfall, in accessible 
locations for those working in, living in and visiting the 
area.  The town centre hierarchy looks to focus town 
centre uses into three principle locations:
a) a new major town centre in Old Oak; and
b) two neighbourhood centres at North Acton and 
Park Royal Centre.
10.5. Details about the appropriate uses for each of 
these town centres can be found in the Places Chapter 
(Chapter 4). The Places Chapter also identifies 
clusters, focussed at key destinations and on key 
movement routes. Some of these are within designated 
town centres and are therefore appropriate for town 
centre uses. Some clusters have been identified 
outside of town centres and certain clusters have been 
identified as being appropriate for smaller scale “walk 
to” town centre uses. Proposals for town centre uses in 
these clusters would need to accord with the cluster’s 
associated policy in the Places Chapter (Chapter 4).10.6. OPDC endorses the ‘town centre first’ 
approach to the development of new town centre 
uses, as a central component to maintaining the 
character of successful and diverse centres and 
optimising accessibility to these uses. However, OPDC 
recognises the need for flexibility to meet changing 
needs. It may be appropriate for edge or out of centre 
town centre uses to help meet the area’s town centre 
use needs over the next 20 years. This could also 
include the potential need for temporary or meanwhile 
space to serve needs in early phases and town centre 
uses needed to support the construction community, 
associated with the construction of HS2 and other 
large schemes in the OPDC area. Where proposals for 
town centre uses are located outside of a designated 
centre, OPDC will expect the applicant to demonstrate 
a sequential approach to site selection, focussing uses 
firstly on the edge of designated town centres. 
10.7. OPDC acknowledges that small-scale walk-to 
town centre uses can help manufacturing businesses 
in SIL that may wish to sell their produce on their 
premises, help to serve the needs of workers and 
help to improve the character and vibrancy of the 
area. Proposals for this sort of operation will therefore 
generally be supported, but will be considered 
against the policy criteria, which seek to ensure that 
any negative impacts on the transport network are 
minimised and that they do not have a detrimental 
impact on the vitality and viability of designated 
town centres. Any such uses should be small-scale, 
consisting of no more than 80sqm, which is defined 
as the threshold for small units in OPDC’s Retail and 
Leisure Needs Study. 
10.8. In early development phases, meanwhile 
uses will play a critical role in providing services to 
communities and in place making and proposals for 
meanwhile town centre uses will be supported, where 
they accord with the requirements set out in Policy 
TCC8.the thresholds set out in paragraph 10.11; and
h) should contribute, where appropriate, to 
measures that will support the continuing vitality 
and viability of Harlesden District Town Centre, 
when providing town centre uses that exceed the 
thresholds set out in paragraph 10.11.223
10.9. In order to complement the surrounding 
town centre hierarchy and mitigate impacts, town 
centre uses should be phased in accordance with 
the provision of homes and jobs. It is recognised that 
in early development phases, town centre uses can 
support the activation of the area and place making 
and OPDC will take a more flexible approach to the 
phasing of town centre uses when considering these 
early development sites. This is particularly the case for 
proposals providing catalyst and/or meanwhile uses. 
The requirements for these are covered in policies 
TCC7 and TCC8.  
10.10. OPDC’s Retail and Leisure Needs Study 
(RLNS) identifies the likely town centre uses required 
to serve those living, working and visiting the OPDC 
area, and has informed the figures for non-residential 
floorspace set out in the site allocations within Policy 
SP10. These floorspace figures balance the needs 
generated by the development and the requirement to 
ensure that the existing network of town centres can 
also benefit from spending growth, providing wider 
benefits to the network of centres. It should be noted 
that these figures are based on previous estimates for 
A-Class uses prior to changes to the Use Class Order 
in September 2020. Current development capacity 
figures and up to date information on population 
projections and estimates of expenditure retention 
should be taken into account in proposals for town 
centres uses.
10.11. The OPDC area is relatively unique in that 
the designated town centres at Old Oak and North 
Acton either do not yet exist or are at a very early 
phase of their development. To ensure that the growth 
of these centres is carefully managed, OPDC will 
require development proposals that provide 5,000sqm 
of town centre uses in the Old Oak Major Town Centre 
or 2,500sqm of town centre uses elsewhere to include 
within their Planning Statement a Town Centre Uses 
Statement. The Town Centre Uses Statement should 
include:a) a vision statement, explaining the rationale and 
intended market profile of the development, 
including plans for how it will be presented to 
the market and its long-term management (for 
example, there might be a single entity managing 
the asset in a similar way to Covent Garden, 
Marylebone High Street or Regent Street). The 
statement should include (but not be limited to):
i) evidence on target market; 
ii) details of unit specification (i.e. size, height, 
depth);
iii) examples of comparable tenants the scheme 
will target; and 
iv) planning conditions or obligations being 
proposed by the applicant; and
b) a masterplan detailing:
i) the proposed quantum and phasing of town 
centre uses; 
ii) the proposed spatial distribution and mix of 
town centre uses;
iii) how these would relate to the existing and 
planned town centre uses on adjacent sites; 
and 
iv) a statement outlining how the proposals would 
support the wider vision and place making 
objectives of this Local Plan.
10.12. Impact assessments are a national 
requirement for retail, leisure and office schemes 
outside of designated town centres. An impact 
assessment is not usually required within designated 
town centres but OPDC’s Retail and Leisure Needs 
Study concludes that given that two out of three of 
OPDC’s designated centres are either non-existent 
or in an early phase of their gestation, there is a 
need for a greater degree of scrutiny of town centre 
use proposals as they emerge, to ensure that any 
proposals complement designated centres within 
OPDC and its wider hinterland. OPDC will require 
a full impact assessment for those applications that 
provide over 5,000sqm of town centre uses in the Old Oak Major Town Centre or 2,500sqm of town centre 
uses elsewhere. This should address the requirements 
of the NPPF and its associated National Planning 
Practice Guidance (NPPG), specifically, ensuring that 
the scale of the development is appropriate within 
the wider hierarchy of centres. Where necessary, 
impact assessments will need to take into account the 
cumulative effect of permissions. The assessment will 
assess the likelihood of a significant adverse impact 
on the investment within existing centres, and on their 
vitality and viability, taking into account the health of 
the existing centres.  Any mitigation being proposed by 
the applicant should be set out clearly.  
10.13. Harlesden is the closest town centre to the 
OPDC boundary. The centre is designated as a District 
Town Centre. OPDC’s Retail and Leisure Needs Study 
shows that due to its scale and proximity, the centre 
is likely to be the most impacted by the new town 
centre hierarchy within the OPDC area. There will 
be significant opportunities for Harlesden to try and 
capture trade from the new population and there is also 
a need to ensure that any risks to the functioning of 
the centre are appropriately mitigated. To explore and 
support opportunities for the centre, schemes caught 
by the relevant threshold will need to engage early with 
OPDC and the London Borough of Brent to consider, 
where required, contributions to measures that would 
potentially support the continuing viability and vitality of 
the centre. This should include, where relevant:
a) details of how proposed links with Harlesden would 
be designed, delivered and their timescales; and
b)  financial contributions to measures that would 
mitigate any identified significant adverse impacts 
to the centre.TCC1224
Figure 10.2: Local Town Centres
225
Figure 10.2: Local Town Centres
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Healthy Town Centres Study
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3, SP4 and SP6
• Place Policies P1, P2, P3, P6, P7, P8, P10 and P11
• Design Policies D2 and D6
• Employment Policy E2
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies (All)POLICY TCC2: Vibrancy
a) Applications for town centre uses will be supported 
where they:
i) are designed and serviced to support the 
role and function of the relevant town centre 
including maximising the proportion of the 
ground floor fronting a street as a positive and/
or active frontage. Servicing areas and blank 
façade should be avoided on key routes;
ii) support flexibility and adaptability so that 
uses can expand and/or change between use 
classes subject to demand and appropriate 
permissions/agreements; and
iii) include at least 10% of floorspace at ground 
level for units of 80 sqm or less when 
delivering more than 1,000 sqm of E-class 
uses at ground level;
b) Applications providing outdoor uses such as 
eating and drinking uses with outdoor seating, 
event space or street markets will be supported 
where they do not detract from residential amenity 
and transport connectivity;
c) Existing town centre uses should be protected, 
unless:
i) it is no longer economically viable as 
demonstrated by accounts data and through 
competitive marketing for a period of at least 
12 months;
ii) the facility can be appropriately replaced or 
provided elsewhere in the locality; or
iii) the facility is located within Park Royal SIL 
and exceeds the floorspace threshold in Policy 
TCC1 c) ii; or
iv) it is demonstrated that reprovision would 
compromise the delivery of housing and job 
targets, particularly within site allocations.
d) Applications for new betting shops, pawnbrokers, 
payday loan stores and games arcades will be 
supported unless they would result in more than 
one betting shop, pawnbroker, payday loan store 
or games arcade within 400m walking distance of SUPPORTING TEXT
10.14. Town centre uses within the OPDC area will 
play a critical role in place making. To support this, 
developers will be expected to maximise the proportion 
of ground floors of town centre uses fronting onto 
streets or public spaces that are active, by taking steps 
to reduce the amount of dead frontage and space 
given over to building servicing and management such 
as bin stores and plant. Proposals must ensure that 
town centre uses are accessible and are designed to the highest quality, considering how proportions, 
materials and detailing relate to and complement their 
surroundings, particularly in designated town centres. 
Where existing uses remain viable, OPDC will look to 
protect existing town centre facilities, or require their 
replacement within the locality.  
10.15. Given the scale of development envisaged 
within the OPDC area and the timescales over which 
this development is anticipated for delivery, it will 
be important for proposals to be designed to be 
sufficiently flexible to allow for changing conditions 
and needs, in accordance with Policy SP2. OPDC 
will encourage proposals that allow for flexibility in 
their size, for example by providing for expansion 
through the future creation of mezzanines or the 
subdivision/amalgamation of units. OPDC will also 
support proposals that, through their design, consider 
the ability for units to readily change use class. This 
flexibility should be demonstrated as part of a planning 
application submission.
10.16. Within the OPDC area, it will be important to 
provide a variety of retailers in order to create vibrancy 
and ensure the long term vitality of its designated 
centres. OPDC recognises that chain stores are likely 
to form a key part of the spine of the area’s town 
centres, but there is a risk that without appropriate 
interventions to support independents, the area’s 
town centres could become ‘cloned’ town centres. To 
support diversity, OPDC will expect E-class proposals 
to provide for a range of unit sizes. For major E-class 
use proposals providing over 1,000sqm at ground level, 
OPDC will require at least 10% of floorspace at ground  
level for units of 80sqm or less (defined in the London 
Small Shops Study 2010), which will help support the 
establishment of SMEs and independent retailers in the 
OPDC area, who tend to operate in smaller units. To 
assist with their affordability, these should be focussed, 
where feasible, within secondary retail frontages and 
applicants should actively market these units within the 
local communities for a sustained reasonable period 
prior to letting.the same use; and
e) Applications for new hot food takeaways will be 
supported where they
i) are located outside of 400 metres walking 
distance of the entrance/exit of an existing or 
permitted secondary school; 
ii) are located outside of 200 metres walking 
distance of the entrance/exit of an existing or 
permitted primary school;
iii) result in no more than 6% of the units within a 
designated centre or frontage being hot food 
takeaway units;
iv) result in no less than two other units between 
hot food takeaways; and
v) operate in compliance with the Healthier 
Catering Commitment scheme and 
Government Food Buying Standards for food 
and catering services.226
Figure 10.3: Street Food Market, King’s CrossTCC2
10.17. Uses that help to activate the public realm will 
play an important role in place making. However, the 
impacts on the amenity of residents and workers would 
need to be carefully considered. OPDC will require a 
management plan to be to be submitted for proposals 
for outdoor uses defined in TCC2(b) to demonstrate 
how uses do not detract from residential amenity 
(see Policy D5) or transport connectivity (See Policy 
SP7). A management plan for street markets would 
need to identify its hours of operation and storage 
arrangements when not in use, types of traders, 
advertising, servicing and pedestrian and transport 
impacts. A management plan for event spaces would 
need to define types of events, frequency of use, noise 
levels, advertising, servicing and pedestrian transport 
impacts.
10.18. The “Health on the High Street” report 
published by The Royal Society for Public Health in 
2015 provides a range of sources of evidence about 
the negative health impact of betting shops, payday 
loan shops, pawnbrokers, games arcades and fast 
food takeaways and the positive health impacts of 
health services, pharmacists, leisure centres/health 
clubs, libraries, museums and art centres and pubs 
and bars. There has been a growing concern in recent 
years about the proliferation and over-concentration 
of betting shops, pay-day loan shops, pawn brokers 
and amusement arcades and their impacts on mental 
health and the vibrancy and vitality of town centres. In 
2015 Government re-classified betting shops and pay-
day loan shops within a separate use class. OPDC’s 
Healthy Town Centres Study identifies the impacts that 
betting shops, pawnbrokers, payday loan stores and 
games arcades can have on the health and wellbeing 
of a community. In accordance with the aspirations for 
development in the OPDC area to promote healthy and 
active lifestyles as set out in Policy SP3, OPDC will 
look to manage these uses.
10.19. OPDC’s Healthy Town Centres Study also 
identifies the growing concerns about the growth in 
hot food takeaways and their impact on health, in particular, regarding the proximity of takeaways to 
schools and the impact that this has on childhood 
obesity. The type of food on sale nearest to schools 
can influence the diet of school children and the 
availability of “unhealthy” foodstuffs can make healthier 
choices less likely. To support the health and wellbeing 
of communities, OPDC will resist proposals for new 
takeaways in close proximity of secondary and primary 
school entrances and will accept the loss of existing 
takeaways within these areas. In addition, OPDC will 
resist proposals that would result in the clustering of 
hot food takeaways to the detriment of the character 
and function or vitality and viability of a designated 
centre. Data will be published as part of OPDC’s 
Authority Monitoring Report showing the location and 
proportion of hot food takeaways in town centres.10.20. The Healthier Catering Commitment is a 
scheme supporting food businesses in London to 
offer healthier food options. The scheme promotes 
a reduction in consumption of fat, salt and sugar 
and increases in availability of fruit and vegetables 
and a logo is awarded to those outlets that meet 
the set criteria. OPDC will condition all permitted 
applications involving hot food takeaways to require 
the operator to achieve, and operate in compliance 
with, the Healthier Catering Commitment standard. 
Public Health England’s Food Buying Standards aim 
at ensuring that food buyers maintain good standards 
of welfare, nutrition, environmental sustainability and 
ethics. In accordance with OPDC’s and the Mayor’s 
Good Growth aspirations, OPDC will condition all hot 
food takeaways to ensure operators are complying with 
these standards.227
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Precedents Study
• Social Infrastructure Needs Study Update
• Sports Courts and Swimming Pools StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3, SP4, SP6, SP9 and SP10
• Place Policies P1, P2 and P7
• Design Policy D2
• Delivery and Implemention Policies DI1, DI2 and DI3POLICY TCC3: Social Infrastructure
OPDC will seek to secure a range of high quality 
social infrastructure facilities for existing and new 
residents and workers by: 
a) protecting existing social infrastructure facilities 
unless:
i) the facility would be replaced or reprovided 
on-site or in an equal or better location to 
serve local needs and in both cases, to an 
equivalent or better quantum and quality; or;
ii) there is demonstrably no longer an identified 
need for the current use of the facility. In such 
circumstances, the applicant must provide 
evidence to demonstrate:
A) competitive marketing for a period of at 
least 12 months for alternative forms of 
social infrastructure without an appropriate 
offer being received; and
B)  that the loss of the facility would not lead to 
a shortfall in provision for the specified use 
for the population that it serves;
b) supporting proposals for new and/or enhanced 
social infrastructure facilities where; 
i) it can be demonstrated that the facility is 
meeting needs in the local area; and
ii) the proposal accords with other relevant 
planning policies and including the need to 
achieve homes and non-residential floorspace 
targets in Site Allocations;
c) securing the delivery of, or contributions towards, 
enhanced or new social infrastructure facilities 
to meet the needs arising from development. 
Social infrastructure facilities should meet the 
specification requirements outlined in supporting 
text to this policy and OPDC’s Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP), unless otherwise agreed by 
OPDC and the relevant service provider;
d) locating new social infrastructure:
i) in locations identified in the Places shown in 
figure 10.5 and OPDC’s IDP, unless the on-
site facility can be provided on an alternative 
site, if this is agreed by OPDC and the service SUPPORTING TEXT
10.21. Good quality social infrastructure facilities 
can have a significant bearing on the quality of life and 
health and wellbeing of a community. They encourage 
social interaction, promote learning and provide 
support services to those living, working and visiting 
an area. Figure 10.5 identifies the different types of 
social infrastructure facilities, which broadly fall into 
four categories – education, health, community and 
emergency facilities.
10.22. There are a number of existing social 
infrastructure facilities within the OPDC area, identified 
in figure A1.8 of the Local Plan Appendix. OPDC 
will look to protect these facilities unless it can be 
demonstrated that the facility is no longer required 
through competitive marketing and through there 
being evidence of sufficient capacity within existing or 
planned provision, as long as it can be demonstrated 
that there is sufficient certainty the planned provision 
will be delivered. Where this is not the case, OPDC 
will require social infrastructure facilities to be replaced 
onsite.  
10.23. OPDC will work positively with social 
infrastructure providers wishing to deliver new or 
expanded facilities that help to meet existing and future 
needs within the OPDC area and its surrounds. OPDC 
will also support facilities that better meet the needs of 
the area’s existing population and will work positively 
with other local authorities in accordance with the Duty 
to Cooperate to consider how OPDC can help address 
wider needs for social infrastructure provision arising 
from development, where necessary and appropriate 
and so long as OPDC is able to achieve its homes 
and jobs targets, particularly in Site Allocations (see 
Policy SP10, Chapter 3). Given the significant scale 
of regeneration planned in the area, OPDC has 
identified a need for a significant amount of new social 
infrastructure facilities to serve the population arising 
from development in the area. These requirements 
are set out in the following paragraphs, place policies provider and it is shown that the delivery of the 
facility on an alternative site meets the needs 
of the development and is deliverable;
ii) in locations that are highly accessible by 
sustainable forms of travel to the populations 
that they serve;
iii) community facilities within or in close proximity 
to designated town centres or clusters;
iv) education facilities in areas with good access 
by foot, cycle and public transport and close to 
areas of publicly accessible open space; and
v) emergency service facilities with direct access 
onto unrestricted highways;
e) securing the delivery of, or contributions towards 
3 neighbourhood police facilities within the OPDC 
area;
f) requiring high quality design of new or enhanced 
social infrastructure that:
i) is accessible and inclusive to all sections of 
the community;
ii) adheres to the latest national and regional 
design guidelines; and
iii) colocates facilities and uses where appropriate 
and feasible; and
g) working with service providers and other 
stakeholders to identify funding sources for the 
long-term management and maintenance of 
social infrastructure and where necessary and 
viable, securing contributions towards this from 
development proposals.228
Education
- Higher
- Further
- Secondary
- Primary
- Early years
- Special
Health
- Hospitals
- GP’s
- Special care
- Dentists
- Optometrists
- Pharmacies
- Public toiletsEmergency Service
-  Police
- Fire brigade
- Ambulance
H.
.Community
- Libraries
- Places of worship
- Halls for hire
- Youth space
- Flexible office space
Community cafe
-Drinking fountainsSocial 
Infrastructure  Figure 10.4: Types of Social Infrastructure Requirementsand further details are set out in OPDC’s Infrastructure 
Delivery Plan (IDP). OPDC is working closely with 
social infrastructure providers to develop a preferred 
approach to the delivery of social infrastructure 
facilities. This includes considerations such as:
a) the merits of enhancing existing social 
infrastructure facilities in the area versus the 
provision of new social infrastructure;
b) the potential needs for temporary or meanwhile 
facilities to serve earlier development phases 
in advance of the delivery of more permanent 
facilities;
c) the potential for early development sites to front-
load the provision of social infrastructure and/
or provide more infrastructure than is needed to 
meet the needs of the development. This could 
support early place making. In such circumstances 
contributions would be secured from future 
developments or other funding sources and a 
payback mechanism would be agreed with the TCC3
developer delivering the facility; and 
d) the need for flexibility to respond to the changing 
requirements of service providers and the needs of 
people over time.
10.24. Figure 10.5, the place policies and the 
IDP identifies the specific places required to deliver 
education, health, community and sports and 
leisure facilities. Further details on the specification 
requirements are set out in OPDC’s IDP. Development 
proposals will need to have regard to this and ensure 
that land required for these facilities is safeguarded 
in accordance with Policy SP10. Where development 
proposals are having to provide social infrastructure 
to meet a significantly greater need than that of just 
their own development, OPDC will look to employ 
a retrospective pooling contribution mechanism, to 
provide additional planning contributions towards 
delivery of the facility from other developments which 
benefit from the social infrastructure. 
10.25. OPDC’s Social Infrastructure Needs Study 
Update (2021) outlines the current approach to 
the provision of education, health, community and 
emergency service facilities in the OPDC area. The 
study has calculated needs based on the affordable 
housing policy and housing mix policy in this Local 
Plan (Policies H2 and H3, Chapter 8) and on the 
maximum development capacity figures in OPDC’s 
Development Capacity Study in order to identify 
the appropriate education, health, community and 
emergency service infrastructure provision to support 
the needs of the projected development over the Local 
Plan period. The study identifies existing schools, 
health and emergency service facilities that may have 
the potential for off-site expansion to meet the needs 
of the development in early phases. Proposals for 
the expansion of these facilities is not yet committed 
and OPDC will be working with the relevant service 
providers to further investigate the potential for these 
facilities to be expanded. OPDC will secure appropriate 
contributions from development proposals towards the 
expansion of any facilities. Applicants should engage early with OPDC and service providers to discuss the 
potential for any off-site expansion to meet the needs 
of their development and if off-site expansion proves 
infeasible, alternative provision would need to be made 
on-site. 
10.26. Given the scale of regeneration and 
development envisaged, there are also significant 
needs for the on-site provision of social infrastructure.
10.27. In respect of education, current modelling 
shows the need for on-site provision of:
a) a 3 form entry (FE) primary school, including early 
years provision; and
b) four super nurseries.
10.28. The trigger years for required on-site facilities 
have been matched against OPDC’s phasing trajectory 
in order to derive which sites are likely to be being 
constructed in the year the facility is required, which 
sites are available for their delivery and which sites are 
the most appropriate, based on an assessment against 
a set of criteria. The Social Infrastructure Needs Study 
identifies that based on current modelling, the primary 
school should be delivered in 2031 within the latter half 
of the Local Plan period. To reflect this later phasing, 
a degree of flexibility is required when identifying 
an appropriate location in accordance with Policy 
TCC3(d). Therefore, the location of the primary school 
will be kept under review. The four super nurseries 
should be spread across the OPDC area, with one 
each in Old Oak South (P1), North Acton and Acton 
Wells (P7) and Channel Gate (P9) with the location of 
the fourth nursery to be kept under review.
10.29. In respect of health, modelling undertaken 
by the Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs) shows 
the need for 1,564sqm of on-site health facility space 
within the Local Plan period. The local authorities and 
CCGs have confirmed that the preferred approach 
for the delivery of the on-site floorspace is within 
one building, which allows the provision of health 
services at scale and provides for cost efficiencies. 229
However, requirements will need to be kept under 
review, including the potential for a second facility in 
the longer-term. The Social Infrastructure Needs Study 
Update has assessed  different site options for the new 
facility and identifies North Acton and Acton Wells as 
the preferred option, based on current projections. 
10.30. In respect of community space, modelling 
shows the need for two community hubs, each of 
2,600sqm. The community hubs should provide for 
a variety of community facilities, including space for 
libraries, and could include facilities such as public 
toilets, a community café, faith space, youth space 
and halls for hire. New community spaces should be 
made appropriately available and affordable to the 
local community. Current modelling shows that one of 
these community hubs should be located in Channel 
Gate (P9) and the location of the other hub should be 
kept under review. The Social Infrastructure Needs 
Study also identifies a need for on-site emergency 
service provision and expansion of existing facilities. In 
relation to on-site provision, current modelling shows 3 
neighbourhood police facilities are required which can 
be co-located with other social infrastructure across 
the OPDC area. Requirements for sports and leisure 
facilities are set out in further detail in Policy TCC5.
10.31. It is recognised that the identification of 
appropriate on-site provision of social infrastructure is 
based on current assumptions on affordable housing, 
family housing and on the likely phased delivery and 
capacity of sites. As development proposals come 
forward OPDC will gain greater certainty about the 
required needs for social infrastructure, meaning the 
requirements for social infrastructure are likely to 
change over time. OPDC will monitor delivery on an 
ongoing basis, to ensure that the facilities proposed 
are the right size to meet needs. Any changes to the 
size requirements for the social infrastructure outlined 
above would need to be agreed by OPDC and the 
relevant service provider. 10.32. Given the timescales over which the plan 
is proposed and the complexity of delivery, there is 
a need for a degree of flexibility in the approach to 
on-site provision of social infrastructure. It is therefore 
likely that the place specific requirements for education 
and health facilities in particular will need to be kept 
under regular review, particularly for facilities identified 
within later development phases. In recognition of this 
need for flexibility, on-site facilities may be located on 
alternative sites if this is agreed by OPDC and service 
providers. The most up-to-date position on all required 
social infrastructure provision is set out in the Local 
Plan with further detail in OPDC’s IDP. 
10.33. Social infrastructure facilities tend to be 
locations for social interaction and will play an 
important role in terms of integrating existing and 
new communities in the area. When planning for 
the location of new social infrastructure services, 
consideration needs to be given to how the location 
of new social infrastructure helps to facilitate this by if 
feasible, or appropriate, being located in areas where 
both new and existing communities will be able to 
access facilities. 
10.34. When providing new social infrastructure 
facilities, OPDC will require that community facilities 
are within or in close proximity to designated town 
centres, where they will be easiest to access. In 
the case of education facilities, the priority will be 
to ensure that facilities are located close to publicly 
accessible open spaces. For early years through to 
higher education, this will provide opportunities for 
the potential use of sports and play facilities within 
open spaces. The University of the Arts London 
provides a good example of the benefits of providing 
higher education facilities close to open spaces, 
having dual benefits both for the space by activating 
it and for the students, by providing space for leisure 
and relaxation. For any on-site emergency service 
provision, the priority should be to locate facilities 
close to unrestricted highways in order that emergency services are able to respond as quickly as possible 
to emergencies. Proposals for large-scale social 
infrastructure that are not required to meet the needs 
of development and are not included in the Local 
Plan with further detail in OPDC’s IDP, would also be 
considered against the criteria in the catalyst uses 
policy (see Policy TCC7).
10.35. When providing new or enhancing existing 
social infrastructure facilities, OPDC will expect the 
highest standards of design. Facilities should be 
accessible and should be inclusive and welcoming 
to people from a wide variety of cultures and 
ethnicities, in accordance with Policy D2. For many 
social infrastructure facilities, Central Government 
publishes design guidelines for their construction, such 
as Building Bulletins for schools. Proposals will be 
expected to adhere to these guidelines, as well as any 
regional guidelines published by the Mayor of London. 
10.36. Opportunities to co-locate social infrastructure 
(placing two or more facilities together to share 
resources) should be taken where feasible. This can 
have significant added benefits in terms of making 
efficient use of space and saving on management and 
maintenance costs, creating a critical mass in terms of 
usage and in the case of health facilities and leisure 
and sports facilities, helping to promote health and 
wellbeing and provide a community hub. 
10.37. Reductions in funding have made it more 
challenging for service providers to maintain and 
operate social infrastructure facilities. These costs 
can in part be reduced through collocating facilities, 
but OPDC will also need to work closely with service 
providers to consider appropriate funding sources for 
both the existing and new community facilities in the 
OPDC area. This will include innovative approaches 
to funding such as private sector sponsorship and 
the community ownership and management of assets 
(see Policy DI3). Where necessary and feasible, 
OPDC will also secure planning contributions towards 
the management and maintenance of facilities from 
developers.TCC3230
Figure 10.5: Social Infrastructure
231
Figure 10.5: Social Infrastructure
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Cultural Principles
• Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP1, SP5, SP6 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1, D2 and D3
• Employment Policies E1, E2 and E3
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policy DI1POLICY TCC4: Culture and Art
that consideration has been given to the longer term 
maintenance of any installations. 
10.43. There are a number of local artists within 
and close to the OPDC area and developers will be 
encouraged to work with these artists and with local 
communities to develop ideas for a wide range of 
public art projects. 
10.44. OPDC’s Cultural Principles document 
identifies how cultural space can provide valuable 
facilities for the local area and needs and also help 
play an important role in continuing London’s position 
as the globe’s cultural capital. To support this, 
proposals providing in excess of 2,500sqm of town 
centre uses will be required to include within their 
Planning Statement a Cultural Action Plan that sets out 
how their scheme will contribute to the cultural offer 
in Old Oak and Park Royal. The Cultural Action Plan 
should include details such as:
a) the proposed locations for public art – on buildings 
and within the public realm;
b) proposed activities and projects that will support 
the creation of a cultural quarter;
c) proposed uses that will help to support culture in 
the OPDC area;
d) proposed work with local communities and cultural 
partners;
e) how the developer will engage with artists to help 
shape their proposal’s design; 
f) how the development will support the delivery of 
the Mayor’s Cultural Infrastructure Plan; and
g) where the development impacts on existing cultural 
infrastructure, how the developer will accord with 
the ‘agent of change’ principle (see Policy D5). SUPPORTING TEXT
10.38. The Mayor’s Culture Strategy for London 
promotes London as the world’s cultural and arts 
capital and how this role can help widen the reach of 
and access to culture and art, support education skills 
and careers and enhance the physical environment. 
As London’s largest regeneration project, OPDC can OPDC will support the provision of a high quality 
cultural offer in the OPDC area and Cultural Quarter 
by: 
a) protecting existing cultural space unless:
i) it is no longer economically viable as 
demonstrated by accounts data and through 
competitive marketing for a period of at least 
12 months for alternative cultural uses without 
an appropriate offer being received; or
ii) the facility is replaced or reprovided on-site or 
elsewhere in the locality to an equivalent or 
better quantum and quality;
b) supporting applications for new cultural space, 
where they meet current and/or future identified 
needs;
c) supporting the retention of existing, and the 
provision of new, artist studios in accordance with 
the requirements of policies E1, E2 and E3; and
d) securing contributions towards and/or the 
provision of public art.play a central role in delivering new cultural and arts 
facilities to help consolidate London’s position as a 
global leader for culture and art.
10.39. OPDC’s Cultural Principles document shows 
how important culture is to place making and how it 
can help integrate existing and new communities and 
provides case study examples of how the provision 
of culture, particularly in early development phases, 
can help to shape an area’s identity and can attract 
businesses, people and investment to an area. 
10.40. To support the creation of a high quality 
cultural area, OPDC will generally be supportive of 
new cultural facilities and will look to protect existing 
facilities, where they remain viable. 
10.41. Artists contribute to vibrancy, identity and 
place making and can encourage wider social value 
through mentoring, work experience, apprenticeships 
and volunteering opportunities, open studios, public 
performances/exhibitions, events, festivals, school 
arts programme or community workshops. OPDC’s 
Future Employment Growth Sectors Study notes that 
the OPDC area has a well-established community 
of artists, which OPDC will look to protect and/or 
re-incorporate studios within new developments, 
in accordance with Policies E1 and E2. OPDC will 
also support the provision of new artist studio space, 
subject to the policy criteria being satisfied.  In 
accordance with Policy E3, OPDC will look to secure a 
proportion of low-cost and/or open workspace provision 
from development proposals. 
10.42. Public art can play a particularly important 
role in early place making, helping to celebrate 
both the past and future of the area and helping to 
establish a distinctive character. OPDC will generally 
support applications for public art, but consideration 
would have to be given to the impact any proposal 
has on the legibility of the public realm, that the 
proposed public art is coordinated across the OPDC 
area and complements surrounding proposals and 232
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Precedents Study
• Sports Courts and Swimming Pools StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3, SP6, SP9 and SP10
• Places P1, P3, P6, P7, P8, P10 and P11
• Design Policies D1, D2, D3 and D8POLICY TCC5: Sports and Leisure
concessions access to sport and leisure facilities, 
particularly for those on lower incomes and for 
families with young people and children, who are often 
restricted from accessing private facilities. Specific 
large-scale public access facilities should be provided 
in the locations identified in place policies supporting 
text and OPDC’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). 
Fulham Pools (figure 11.2) provides a good example of 
such a facility, which is run by a commercial operator 
with private membership and certain members only 
facilities, but also provides public access for all ages 
and affordable concessions access to the swimming 
pool, gym, all weather courts and other ancillary 
facilities. 
10.48. As part of the provision of these concessions 
access facilities, particular consideration will be given 
to the need to secure access to public and affordable 
sports courts and swimming pools. Evidence1 has 
identified deficiencies in access to sports courts in the 
OPDC area. This identified that a population increase 
of 3,200 would generate a demand for one additional 
sports court (the size of a badminton court). Current 
projections estimate that development is likely to 
generate an additional population of approximately 
60,000 residents, giving rise to the need for an 
additional 19 sports courts in the area. The OPDC area 
is deficient in access to public swimming pools. The 
Sport Courts and Swimming Pools Study has identified 
that approximately 90 people gives rise to the need 
for 1sqm of pool space. Based on current population 
projections, this would result in a need for 650sqm of 
public pool space during the plan period, which would 
equate to approximately two 12x25m pools or one 
50x12m pool.
10.49. OPDC will also support applications for and 
secure the delivery of and/or contributions towards 
outdoor sports and leisure facilities including playing 
fields, that serve needs and provide public and 
affordable access. SUPPORTING TEXT
10.45. Sports and leisure are vital facilities for 
promoting people’s health and wellbeing, helping 
people to live active lifestyles and de-stress. OPDC is 
keen for the Old Oak and Park Royal area to be well 
served by a range of facilities, to support the needs of 
those living and working in the area. Applications for 
the loss of existing facilities will normally be refused 
unless one or more of the policy criteria in part a) can 
be satisfied. Assessments justifying the loss of a facility 
should form part of applicant’s Planning Statements 
and should accord with Sport England’s Playing Pitch 
or Assessing Needs and Opportunities Guidance.
10.46. Applications for the enhancement of existing 
facilities and provision of new facilities will generally be 
supported, subject to them being designed to a high 
quality and not giving rise to unacceptable impacts 
on amenity and on the transport network and public 
realm. The English Federation of Disability Sports’ 
Inclusive Fitness Initiative (IFI) has been established 
for over 10 years, supporting leisure centres to become 
more welcoming and accessible environments to 
disabled people. Facilities across the country have 
been awarded the ‘IFI Mark’ accreditation, which helps 
leisure facilities to get more disabled people physically 
active. 
10.47. Sports and leisure facilities are likely to be 
privately operated and run. OPDC recognises the 
role these private facilities can play in meeting needs. 
However, it will also be important to secure affordable OPDC will support the provision of a range of high 
quality public and private sports and leisure facilities 
by: 
a) protecting existing indoor and outdoor sports and 
leisure facilities, including playing fields unless:
i) the facility is surplus to requirements, 
evidenced by an up-to-date and robust 
assessment showing other facilities in the local 
area that can demonstrably meet needs if the 
facility is lost, in terms of their capacity, access, 
quality, function and affordability; or
ii) the facility can be appropriately replaced or 
provided in an equal or better location and to 
an equal or better quantum, quality and range 
of sport and leisure functions to serve needs; 
or
iii) the development is for an alternative sports 
and leisure facility, the identified needs for 
which outweigh the loss and whose quantum, 
quality and function demonstrably meet or 
exceed the provision within the existing facility;
b) supporting enhancements to existing indoor 
and outdoor sports and leisure facilities and the 
provision of new facilities, where the proposal:
i) meets current and/or future identified needs; 
and
ii) achieves the “Inclusive Fitness Initiative Mark” 
accreditation; 
c) requiring proposals to contribute towards and/or 
deliver public access and affordable indoor and 
outdoor sports and leisure facilities, including 
playing fields, that:
i) provides public access for all ages; 
ii) provides appropriate concessions access; 
iii) ensures that 1 sports court is provided for 
every 3,200 residents and 1sqm of swimming 
pool space is provided for every 90 residents; 
and
iv) delivers new public sports and leisure centres 
in locations identified in place policies 
supporting text and the Infrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP).REFERENCES
1. Sports Courts and Swiming Pools Study233
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Heritage Strategy
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP3, SP4, SP6 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D4 and D8
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies TCC1,   
 TCC2 and TCC10POLICY TCC6: Public Houses
OPDC will support the loss of public houses where: 
a) the public house has been competitively marketed:
i)  for 24 months as a public house;
ii)  at an appropriate price following independent 
valuation;
iii)  in appropriate publications and through 
specialised licensed trade agents;
iv)  in a condition that allows the premises to 
continue operating as a pub; and
v)  with no interest in either the freehold or 
leasehold as a public house; 
b) an objective evaluation method has been 
employed to assess the viability of the business 
and the outcomes demonstrate that the public 
house is no longer economically viable;
c) an assessment has been made of alternative 
licensed premises within easy walking distance of 
the public house and premises are identified which 
offer similar facilities and a similar community 
environment to the public house which is the 
subject of the application; 
d)  the proposed alternative use will not detrimentally 
affect the character and vitality of the area and will, 
where appropriate, retain as much of the building’s 
defining external fabric and appearance as a pub 
as possible; and
e)  there has been public consultation to ascertain the 
value of the public house to the local community 
and the proposal does not demonstrably constitute 
the loss of a service of particular value to the local 
community.SUPPORTING TEXT
10.50. Public houses act as hubs for community life, 
and are important for mental health and wellbeing. 
They exhibit qualities of a social space and promote 
community cohesion, provide economic benefits by 
providing jobs, support local food suppliers, bringing 
activity to town centres and can also provide heritage 
value. This policy will apply all existing and future 
drinking establishments including those that exhibit 
these qualities including public houses and wine bars. 
Within the OPDC area there are currently three public 
houses:
a) The Castle, North Acton;
b) The Fisherman’s Arms, Old Oak Lane; and
c)  The Grand Junction Arms, Acton Lane.10.51. OPDC’s Heritage Strategy identifies all three 
facilities as being of important heritage value and 
OPDC are proposing that they are locally listed. 
10.52. There has been growing concern about the 
loss of public houses in the UK and OPDC will seek 
to retain such premises, unless all the policy criteria 
can be satisfied. OPDC’s policy requirements accord 
with the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) guidance. 
The competitive marketing requirements for public 
houses are longer than for other town centre uses 
in recognition of the smaller number of public house 
operators and as a consequence, the need for a longer 
marketing period to identify an appropriate operator.
Figure 10.6: Grand Junction Arms234
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Catalyst Uses Study
• Cultural Principles
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP1, SP6 and SP9
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D3
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies (All) POLICY TCC7: Catalyst Uses
SUPPORTING TEXT
10.53. Regeneration of the OPDC area will result 
in large-scale development of brownfield land in a 
location that will be well connected. This is likely to 
make the area suitable for a number of larger scale 
destination or catalyst uses.
10.54. These sorts of uses, if planned well, can help 
to stimulate significant and positive change, helping to 
support economic growth, increase market confidence 
and create a recognisable identity. OPDC defines these 
uses as catalyst uses. Catalyst uses tend to broadly fall 
into four categories:
a) Sports stadia and facilities;
b) Retail and leisure; 
c) Culture, health and education; and
d) Business and conference space.
10.55. King’s Cross and Stratford provide two recent 
examples in London of how these sorts of uses can 
catalyse and shape the identity of major regeneration 
projects. In King’s Cross, the University of the Arts 
London and Francis Crick Institute have helped to 
create a vibrant district centred around the education, 
health and culture sectors. In Stratford, a wider range 
of uses includes the Olympic legacy venues, Westfield 
Stratford, Here East and the future planned Cultural 
and Education District.
10.56. OPDC’s Catalyst Uses Study notes that the 
scale of opportunity at Old Oak and Park Royal will 
allow differing character areas to emerge. The different 
areas could house multiple and complementary 
catalyst uses. It will be important to ensure these uses 
support the wider regeneration aspirations for the area, 
as set out in OPDC’s spatial vision, strategic policies 
and place policies. a) Proposals that comprise a use and/or building 
or a cluster of uses / buildings that occupy, 
inclusive of associated public realm, in excess of 
10,000sqm and / or 0.25 hectares of land and are 
sports stadia and facilities; retail and leisure uses; 
culture, education and health uses; or business 
and conference space uses should perform 
positively against the following five objectives and 
associated criteria set out in table 10.2:
i) is part of a holistic offer;
ii) is financially sustainable;
iii) complements the wider environment; 
iv) generates momentum in delivering the 
comprehensive redevelopment of the area; 
and
v) leverages HS2 and the Elizabeth Line.10.57. Catalyst uses can be small, medium and 
large-scale. OPDC’s Catalyst Uses Study identifies 
that small facilities could be readily incorporated in 
development plots and are unlikely to have a significant 
impact on OPDC’s ability to achieve its homes and 
jobs targets. These facilities would still need to be 
considered in accordance with other Local Plan 
policies. However, larger facilities, defined as being of 
over 10,000sqm of floorspace and/or 0.25 hectares of 
land, are likely to have a more significant impact on 
homes and jobs targets and on shaping the identity of 
the OPDC area and therefore merit greater scrutiny. To 
support this, the Catalyst Uses Study identifies a set of 
qualitative and quantitative criteria, against which these 
larger facilities should be assessed, in order to ensure 
that the facilities complement the wider regeneration of 
the area. These criteria are set out in table 10.2.
10.58. The five strategic objectives in table 10.2 set 
out OPDC’s key ambitions and expectations for any 
proposed catalyst in the OPDC area. More details 
on the expectations in relation to the five strategic 
objectives can be found in OPDC’s Catalyst Uses 
Study. For the qualitative criteria, the applicant’s 
Catalyst Uses Statement should demonstrate how the 
proposal supports these objectives. For the quantitative 
criteria, the Statement should assess the scheme 
against relevant comparable proposals identified 
in OPDC’s Catalyst Uses Study and against other 
projects comparable to the proposed catalyst, which 
could be from London, the UK or overseas. These 
comparable projects should be discussed and agreed 
with OPDC prior to the submission of the Statement. 
Catalyst Uses Statements would not be required for 
infrastructure facilities identified in the relevant policies 
of this plan of further detailed in OPDC’s IDP, which are 
necessary to meet the needs of development, such as 
a school or primary care centre.235
Table 10.2: Strategic Objectives for Catalyst Uses
Objective Qualitative Criteria Quantitative Criteria
Part of a holistic offer • It supports the delivery of the spatial vision and strategic 
policies; 
• It complements other existing or planned catalysts and 
surrounding uses;
• It does not inhibit development on surrounding sites; and
• It supports place making and identity.• It does not impact on the delivery of OPDC’s housing targets;
• It does not have a negative impact on land values of adjacent uses;
• It contributes to the quantum, quality and design of public realm and 
open space;
• It optimises the number of hours/days the catalyst is utilised per annum; 
and
• It optimises the proportion of active and/or positive frontage.
Financially sustainable • It is financially deliverable; 
• It does not negatively impact on the viability of the surrounding 
area, in terms of affordable housing delivery and infrastructure 
requirements;
• Arrangements are in place for its long term stewardship and 
management; and 
• It helps to leverage investment.• It is supported by appropriate capital and revenue expenditure on the 
facility and identified funding sources;
• The catalyst does not have unacceptable requirements for infrastructure 
to the detriment of securing funding and financing for other priority 
infrastructure; and
• The proposed catalyst provides appropriate contributions towards the 
costs of infrastructure requirements to support catalyst use.
Complements wider 
environment• It complements London and west London’s needs and growth 
aspirations; 
• it complements the local characteristics and meets the needs of 
and provides benefits for the local population; and
• it adds value to local economic activity• It optimises total direct and indirect jobs;
• It optimises full time equivalent (FTE) jobs;
• It has a high overall Gross Value Added (GVA) and average GVA per 
employee;
• It optimises direct, indirect and FTE jobs per hectare;
• It provides a range of direct, indirect and FTE jobs by sector and skills 
level; and
• It supports the delivery of additional (non-displacement) jobs within:
 »the OPDC area; 
 »the boroughs of Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith and Fulham; and
 »Greater London.
Generates or sustains 
momentum• It helps to kick-start and/or sustain development, investment and 
awareness.• It scores positively when compared against other comparable examples 
of other catalysts and statistical evidence of their impact on development, 
investment and awareness.
Leverages HS2 and the 
Elizabeth Line• It capitalises on the connectivity, identity and the large number of 
people that will be brought to the area by the planned HS2 and 
Elizabeth Line station.• It optimises net additional Gross Value Added (GVA) to London and the 
UK; and
• It optimises footfall per annum.TCC7236
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Cultural Principles
• Precedents Study
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP1, SP4, SP6 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policies D1 and D8
• Environment and Utilities Policies EU1, EU3 and EU7
• Employment Policy E3 and E4
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies (All)POLICY TCC8: Meanwhile Uses
a) OPDC will support proposals for meanwhile uses 
where the proposed use: 
i) contributes positively to the character and 
early activation of an area;
ii) reinforces the longer term uses planned for 
the area. Where appropriate, mechanisms 
should be put in place to support meanwhile 
occupiers securing permanent spaces within 
developments;
iii) would not impact on the deliverability of Site 
Allocations identified in table 3.1; and
iv) does not give rise to an unacceptable impact 
on residential amenity and on the transport 
network.
SUPPORTING TEXT
10.59. The value of meanwhile uses has been 
recognised across the property and regeneration 
industry, not least as a strategy for enabling early 
delivery of longer-term regeneration and development 
proposals.  Meanwhile uses provide the opportunity 
for early wins by quickly bringing life and activity 
to an area before permanent development begins 
and enabling a period of testing project ideas and 
establishing uses, which will ultimately inform the final 
scheme brief and design.10.60. Meanwhile uses are likely to play a huge 
role in early place making in the OPDC area, where 
there will be many temporarily vacant land parcels 
awaiting development in the longer term and where 
meanwhile uses can help provide facilities to support 
its designation as a Cultural Quarter (see Policy SP6). 
Meanwhile uses can also support the effective use 
of land, in advance of comprehensive development, 
through the provision of interim employment uses. 
10.61. OPDC will be generally supportive of 
meanwhile uses. However, it will be important to 
ensure that any meanwhile use does not result in an 
unacceptable impact on residential amenity and that 
the uses do not prevent development sites from being 
brought forward for development in a timely fashion. 
Ideally meanwhile uses would occupy spaces which 
are available for at least five years, in order to offset 
the start-up costs and establish viable businesses or 
organisations.
10.62. Through occupying temporary land or 
buildings, meanwhile uses can be low cost and low-
risk, making them attractive to business start-ups, 
community groups and the creative and cultural 
sectors. To support these, OPDC will work with 
developers to secure appropriate arrangements that 
could support occupiers of meanwhile spaces to 
secure space within permanent structures. Further 
details on the requirements for this are outlined under 
the requirements for the Meanwhile Strategy below. 
10.63. All major development proposals will be 
required to produce a Meanwhile Feasibility Study, 
which should be included within an applicant’s Planning 
Statement. The Study should identify whether the land 
or buildings affected by the development proposal are 
appropriate for meanwhile activities. This should:
a) clearly set out the proposed phasing of the site and 
the points at which land and/or buildings are likely to be vacant;
b) identify other opportunities and constraints to the 
provision of meanwhile facilities; and
c) make clear recommendations on the 
appropriateness of land and/or buildings on the 
site for different meanwhile uses, including but 
not limited to business space, retail, eating and 
drinking establishments, leisure, culture and sports 
space, public art and open space.
10.64. If appropriate for meanwhile activities, OPDC 
will secure a Meanwhile Strategy through a planning 
condition or Section 106 agreement, which should 
identify the proposed steps to promote meanwhile 
activities on the site. This should identify:
a) the types of meanwhile uses considered most 
appropriate for the site and how these can meet 
needs and support regeneration, early place 
making and the longer term success of the 
development;
b) the proposed approach to how these meanwhile 
uses would be taken forward, including details on 
timescales, phasing and how the proposal would 
complement surrounding developments and the 
longer-term place making vision for the area;
c) the proposed approaches to engaging with 
potential occupiers of the meanwhile space. This 
should focus on looking to incentivise business 
start-ups and local businesses and organisations to 
occupy spaces; and
d) the proposed approaches to enable meanwhile 
uses to occupy the permanent structures in the 
development. This could include providing business 
support, staggered rental rates and offering right of 
first refusal.237
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Cultural Principles
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP5, SP6 and SP9
• Place Policies P1, P3, P6, P7, P8, P10 and P11
• Design Policy D2
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policies TCC1 and  
 TCC2POLICY TCC9: Visitor Accomodation
OPDC will contribute to London’s visitor infrastructure 
and London’s overall need for hotel bedspaces by:
a) supporting proposals for new and expansions to 
existing visitor accommodation where they: 
i) are located in accordance with the NPPF 
sequential test and close to public transport, 
in particular rail stations, and do not give rise 
to unacceptable impacts on the transport 
network;
ii) provide at least 10% of hotel bedrooms as 
wheelchair accessible and submit Accessibility 
Management Plans; 
iii) are not permanently occupied; and
iv) do not compromise the delivery of housing 
targets and support the delivery of job targets, 
particularly within Site Allocations.
b) supporting a range of types of visitor 
accommodation over a range of affordabilities; 
and
c) supporting the provision of business hotels and 
multi-functional convention facilities.SUPPORTING TEXT
10.65. The London Plan identifies a London-wide 
need for an additional 58,000 hotel bedrooms by 
2041. Due to the OPDC area’s high public transport 
accessibility providing access to London at the rest 
of the UK, as well as its proximity to destinations 
such as the West End and Heathrow, it is likely to 
be an attractive location for visitor accommodation. 
To minimise impacts on residential amenity and to 
reduce reliance on private cars, the location of visitor 
accommodation should be delivered in accordance with 
the sequential test set out in the NPPF and should be 
located in areas with good access to public transport, 
in particular rail stations. OPDC will be particularly 
supportive of hotels close to the new Old Oak Common 
rail station and the potential for these to meet the need 
for more business hotels (see Policy P1).  
10.66. OPDC will also require developers to 
demonstrate that proposals do not have a detrimental 
impact on the amenity of neighbours, particularly 
residents and will require developers to submit 
management plans, secured through a Section 106 
agreement, demonstrating how potential impacts will 
be minimised and mitigated against.
10.67. Conditions will be applied to ensure that 
any hotel space is not permanently occupied. Hotel 
accommodation does not contribute to OPDC’s 
housing supply, so as part of the determination of 
applications, OPDC will consider whether the proposal 
impacts on the ability of OPDC to achieve its housing 
target, particularly if the proposal is within OPDC’s Site 
Allocations (see Chapter 3). 
10.68. Applicants will be required to provide at least 
10% accessible hotel bedspaces to meet the needs 
of disabled guests.  Accessibility Management Plans 
should commit to providing an enhanced level of 
customer care to disabled guests and, at the same 
time, optimise the use of the accessible rooms.10.69. OPDC will welcome proposals over a wide 
range of affordabilities, from high end 5* hotels down to 
value and budget hotels in order that a wide variety of 
tourists will be attracted to the area and to London. 
10.70. There is a particular need in London for 
high quality business visitor accommodation and the 
OPDC area will be particularly well suited to providing 
for this need with good connections to Heathrow, 
Gatwick, Central London and the north of England. 
Business accommodation should include provision for 
conference facilities and in large hotels, convention 
centre facilities, for which there is currently an under-
supply in west London.
10.71. Providing high quality facilities is essential 
as the quality of hotel accommodation often shapes 
visitors’ perceptions of the capital and encourages 
recommendations and/or repeat visits. OPDC 
will encourage developers to join national quality 
assurances such as VisitEngland’s National Quality 
Assessment Scheme.238
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Cultural Principles
• Retail and Leisure Needs Study and AddendumPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP6
• Place Policies (All)
• Design Policy D5
• Environment and Utilities Policy EU5
• Transport Policy T4
• Town Centre and Community Policies (All)POLICY TCC10: Night Time Economy
a) Planning permission for town centre uses, either 
as the main or as the ancillary use, will be the 
subject of conditions controlling hours of operation 
to minimise their impact on residential amenity;
b) There will be a presumption that town centre uses: 
i) within designated town centres should close 
by 00:00; and
ii) outside of designated centres should close by 
23:00;
c) Proposals for extended opening hours beyond the 
limits outlined under b) would need to demonstrate 
that; 
i) there would be no detrimental harm to the 
amenity of neighbours resulting from the use 
itself or from those travelling to and from the 
facility; and
ii) the proposal would not result in harmful 
cumulative impacts in association with other 
late licensed properties;
d) Where there are proposals for new residential 
properties and they are located within mixed 
use schemes or in close proximity to established 
or planned uses with late night licences, the 
proposed residential use will need to demonstrate 
that it is capable of mitigating against the impact of 
established or planned use such that the amenity 
of the future residents is protected.SUPPORTING TEXT
10.72. The night-time economy is worth £26.3 billion 
a year to the London economy and is part of the 
reason that London is an attractive place to live, work 
and visit. Town centre uses such as eating and drinking 
establishments and culture, sports and leisure uses 
can play a key role in contributing to the vibrancy and 
vitality of the OPDC area alongside adding activity to 
the public realm and supporting the local economy. 
The Mayor of London has published a 24 hour vision 
for London, which sets out the ambition for the capital 
to become a trailblazing city at night, competing with 
the likes of Berlin, Tokyo and New York. The Mayor’s 
Culture and Night Time Economy Supplementary 
Planning Guidance (SPG) (2017) identifies that to 
support the Mayor’s 24 hour vision opportunities should 
be taken to extend the opening hours of activities 
and uses. This could include more traditional night 
time economy uses such as eating and drinking 
establishments, alongside uses usually associated 
with the day time, such as shops, cafes, recreational, 
community and leisure facilities, helping to create a 
‘bridge’ between day time and night time economy 
uses.
10.73. OPDC will work with applicants to support the 
delivery of these uses in the OPDC area. However, if 
not appropriately mitigated, these uses can result in 
night-time activity which can give rise to impacts on 
amenity, particularly for residents.
10.74. OPDC will look to apply the ‘agent of change’ 
principle to appropriately manage the impacts of late 
night premises (see Policy D5). 
10.75. When a town centre use is the ‘agent 
of change’, OPDC will look to condition planning 
permissions. Proposals for late licences will be assessed in terms of the use’s impact on residential 
amenity and will consider issues such as noise within 
the premises, smells, light pollution and the impact of 
those going to and from the facility, such as traffic, car 
parking and anti-social behaviour. 
10.76. Conversely, under ‘agent of change’ principles, 
if a town centre use is in place before a residential 
development, as the ‘agent of change’, the residential 
development is responsible for militating against 
potential residents’ complaints, licensing restrictions or 
the threat of closure. Residential uses within or close to 
town centre locations, where there is potential for late 
night activities, should carefully consider the locations 
of habitable rooms and in particular bedrooms. They 
should also clearly demonstrate how noise attenuation 
measures have been included and designed to the 
highest standards. This approach is necessary to 
ensure both a vibrant night-time economy and high 
quality residential environment.
10.77. As part of mixed use proposals, OPDC will 
look to ensure that any proposed town centre use is 
appropriately mitigating its impacts on any residential 
use. Appropriate mitigation will include the use of 
planning conditions limiting the hours of operation. Any 
proposed residential units within mixed use proposals 
would also need to be designed so that they are 
mitigating potential impacts arising from town centre 
uses.239
240
Chapter 11
DELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATION 241
11.1. The regeneration of the Old Oak and Park 
Royal area represents one of London’s and the UK’s 
largest and most complex regeneration projects. The 
redevelopment of the area will be the responsibility 
of a number of stakeholders and the responsibility for 
its successful regeneration does not rest solely on 
OPDC as a planning authority. However, there are a 
number of strategies that OPDC can look to employ 
as statutory local planning authority, to help facilitate 
and coordinate the areas’ successful regeneration, 
including:
a) balancing the priorities set out in planning policy 
and securing appropriate funding and financing to 
support infrastructure delivery through the planning 
process;
b)  supporting the timely delivery and optimised 
approach to the phasing of the development in 
the area to realise, and where feasible, exceed 
OPDC’s homes and jobs targets; 
c)  undertaking engagement with a wide range of 
stakeholders and being a proactive local planning 
authority; and
d)  utilising other planning functions that support 
the timely regeneration of the area, including 
development management powers, compulsory 
purchase powers and producing, monitoring and 
updating planning policy. Introduction
Delivery and Implementation Policies:
• DI1: Balancing Priorities and Securing 
Infrastructure Delivery
• DI2: Timely Delivery and Optimised Phasing
• DI3: Stakeholder Engagement and being a 
Proactive Planning Authority
• DI4: Planning Powers and MonitoringFigure 11.1: Aerial View of Old Oak242
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Development Capacity Study Update
• Development Infrastructure Funding Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Precedents Study
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costs StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policies SP1, SP4, SP5, SP7, SP8 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Housing Policies H1 and H2
• Transport Policies (All)
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC3
• Delivery and Implementation Policies (All)POLICY DI1: Balancing Priorities and Securing Infrastructure Delivery
To support the successful regeneration of the area, 
OPDC will: 
a) balance the priorities for affordable housing, 
infrastructure delivery, other non-infrastructure 
related planning obligations and sustainability 
standards with site specific constraints and the 
needs for deliverability and securing the timely 
regeneration of the area;
b) secure the delivery of infrastructure necessary to 
support sustainable development, meet the needs 
of development and where necessary, mitigate the 
impacts of development as identified in the Local 
Plan policies and in the further detail set out in the 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) by:
i) securing appropriate on-site enabling and 
development works;
ii) negotiating s106 contributions which 
are necessary to make the development 
acceptable in planning terms, directly related 
to the development and fairly and reasonably 
related in scale and kind to the development  
to ensure that the appropriate infrastructure 
to support the Local Plan and proposed 
development is delivered;  
iii) securing off-site highway works where this is 
necessary;
iv) charging CIL on developments in accordance 
with the CIL Charging Schedules of the Mayor 
of London and OPDC; 
v) working with relevant service providers to 
secure infrastructure funding; 
vi) working with developers and infrastructure 
providers to establish commercial opportunities 
for private sector operators (e.g. ESCOs) or 
public authorities to deliver infrastructure; and
vii) where appropriate, considering potential 
alternative funding and financing mechanisms.SUPPORTING TEXT
11.2. The regeneration of Old Oak and Park Royal 
has the potential to deliver a significant number of 
new homes and jobs to help meet local and London-
wide needs. Catalysed by the planned HS2/Elizabeth 
Line and National Rail station at Old Oak Common, 
the regeneration of the area will take place over many 
decades. There are significant challenges that will need 
to be overcome in achieving this, including:
a) housing and employment delivery, in particular 
affordable housing as a key Mayoral priority; 
b) prioritising, funding and financing the delivery of 
infrastructure and other non-infrastructure related 
planning obligations; and
c)  bringing forward the planned scale of development 
across a series of challenging sites in a timely 
fashion that also achieves the Mayor’s aspirations 
for sustainability, health and wellbeing and place 
making. 
11.3. There is a strong symbiotic relationship 
between these issues. Housing and employment 
density, affordable housing, infrastructure delivery 
and other planning obligations, site constraints 
and ambitious sustainability standards all have associated costs. There will be a need to consider 
the ability of each site to contribute its fair share 
towards infrastructure (physical and social), affordable 
housing and sustainability standards, whilst ensuring 
new development is viable and that the market is 
appropriately incentivised to deliver, where possible. 
This includes taking account of different site specific 
constraints, which at the time of writing this Local Plan 
may not be fully understood. Site constraints may 
include exceptional or abnormal costs relating to issues 
such as high levels of contamination, requirements 
to divert major utilities or poor ground conditions 
necessitating special foundations or ground works. The 
presence of such issues will be expected to impact on 
land values and the costs for addressing these issues 
should not necessarily be borne through a reduction 
in planning obligations or sustainability standards. In 
taking a balanced approach to these above issues, 
OPDC would always need to be satisfied that the 
proposal delivers on the principles of sustainable 
development set out in the NPPF. 
11.4. The timely delivery of regeneration in the 
OPDC area is intrinsically linked with the need 
to deliver the infrastructure necessary to enable 
development and provide facilities and services to meet 
the needs of those living, working and visiting the area. 
A critical factor in the timely delivery of infrastructure is 
how it is funded and financed. 
11.5. The single most important piece of 
infrastructure being delivered in the OPDC area during 
the lifetime of the Local Plan will be the new Old Oak 
Common station, connecting HS2, the Elizabeth Line 
and National Rail services. The station forms part of 
HS2 and will be delivered by the statutory powers in 
the High Speed Rail (London – West Midlands) Act 
2017, which secured Royal Assent in February 2017. 
This is being funded by central government and this 
new station will be the primary catalyst for regeneration 
in the OPDC area. This station is planned to open after 
2028.243
11.6. The challenge for OPDC is securing funding 
and financing for a complementary package of 
infrastructure investments that can be delivered over 
time to support the Old Oak Common station and 
facilitate an optimised approach to the regeneration 
and redevelopment of the OPDC area.  While many of 
these investments may be comparatively small-scale, 
they will over time, constitute a substantial package. 
11.7. OPDC’s Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP) sets 
out further details on the key infrastructure required to 
unlock the comprehensive regeneration of the area. 
The IDP is an important supporting document for this 
Local Plan and will be updated regularly to stay ‘live’ to 
the infrastructure delivery requirements and challenges 
that implementing this Local Plan will entail. The IDP 
updates will be informed by phasing and capacity 
information that will also be regularly monitored as the 
development comes forward in the OPDC area. This 
information will be used to update the Local Plan.
11.8. The scale of infrastructure required to support 
the regeneration of the OPDC area is significant. 
OPDC’s IDP estimates that infrastructure could total 
approximately £1.5 billion. Much of this infrastructure 
is already funded, some of this infrastructure is not 
required within the plan period and some is considered 
desirable, but not essential to delivering the homes, 
jobs and place making ambitions within this Local Plan, 
but there remains a sizeable bill for infrastructure that 
is unfunded and that is required to deliver this vision 
and policy targets within this Local Plan. 
11.9. The priority for securing funding will be 
securing appropriate contributions from developments 
in the form of Section 106 agreements and Community 
Infrastructure Levy payments, but this alone will not be 
able to pay for all the essential infrastructure. Given 
the scale and nature of the investment needed, it is 
expected that both the public and private sector will 
need to play a role and that in addition to conventional 
funding and delivery arrangements, there will be 
the opportunity to consider use of more innovative DI1
funding and financing mechanisms that have been 
employed on similar larger regeneration schemes. 
OPDC will work with a variety of stakeholders to secure 
appropriate alternative funding sources to support the 
successful regeneration of the area. Details on the 
approaches to infrastructure delivery and sources of 
funding and financing are set out in the proceeding 
paragraphs and are also outlined in further detail in 
OPDC’s IDP.
11.10. A substantial amount of the infrastructure 
required for the sustainable development of the area 
will be provided through on-site development. This 
includes (but is not limited to) items such as enabling 
works (demolition, site clearance, decontamination, 
decking, sewerage), internal roads, public realm, 
open space and street greening. It is expected that 
developers will directly fund any enabling works 
needed prior to the main development of a site.  In 
addition to activities such as demolition, site clearance 
and decontamination, there are sites across the OPDC 
area where enabling works may include ‘infrastructure 
type investment’ such as structural ground works and 
decking structures.  As these costs are taken into 
account when assessing the commercial viability of the 
site, there may be exceptional circumstances where 
alternative funding and financing options are explored 
to enable development to progress.
11.11. Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning 
Act 1990 allows a local planning authority, such as 
OPDC, to enter into legal agreements (that bind 
the relevant development site) with land owners/
developers. A local planning authority can only enter 
into a Section 106 agreement where it is satisfied that 
to do so would meet the legal tests set out in regulation 
122 of the Community Infrastructure Regulations 2010 
(as amended). These legal tests are also set out in the 
policy.  A Section 106 agreement can control a range 
of matters such as the amount of affordable housing 
provided in the approved planning permission and/or, 
subject to restrictions on pooling of contributions, items 
of infrastructure or financial contributions towards their delivery, such as new schools and increased transport 
network capacity.  Non-financial contributions may 
include employment and training opportunities being 
made available on the development site. The basis 
for negotiations of Section 106 agreements and the 
range of obligations sought will be set out in OPDC’s 
Planning Obligations SPD. In accordance with OPDC’s 
Validation Checklist, applicants should submit Planning 
Obligations Heads of Terms as part of their planning 
application material, to provide clarity on how they 
propose to appropriately contribute to infrastructure 
provision identified in OPDC’s IDP.  
11.12.  Off-site highway works may also be required, 
where the developer pays the local highways authority 
to design and undertake scheme-specific highway 
works needed to satisfactorily tie in a scheme to the 
road network, or to mitigate adverse impacts which 
would otherwise arise in the immediate vicinity of the 
site. These works are often provided through Section 
278 agreements. Examples of the works covered by 
Section 278 agreements are vehicular crossovers and 
drop kerbs, or major highway works such as traffic 
lights or junction improvements, where a scheme is 
estimated to generate a large number of vehicular 
movements. A Section 278 agreement can either be a 
standalone agreement or form part of the Section 106 
agreement.  
11.13. The Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) is a 
levy on new development ‘of an amount per square 
metre Gross Internal Area (GIA)’ of net additional 
floorspace. It is usually set at a different rate for 
different types of floorspace and can be set at different 
rates for different areas. These variations in rates 
reflect differences in development viability and thus 
profitability for different types of land use. OPDC is the 
CIL charging authority for the OPDC area. OPDC’s 
draft CIL charging schedule is available on OPDC’s 
website. 
11.14. The Mayor of London’s CIL is also chargeable 
in the OPDC area. At the time of this Local Plan’s 244
Figure 11.2: Fulham Pools (credit: Virgin Active)DI1
publication, this Mayoral CIL rate stands at £60/m² and 
in broad terms applies to all development other than for 
education and health facility uses.
11.15. The increased population living and working 
in the area will result in increased taxes (income 
tax, council tax and business rates) and expenditure 
on services. This provides the potential for funding 
from the relevant service provider. OPDC is holding 
discussions with these service providers (see Policy 
DI3) to make them aware of the anticipated new 
population coming to the area, the phased programme 
for delivery and the anticipated infrastructure needs in 
order to identify potential funding to contribute towards 
infrastructure requirements. OPDC will work with the GLA, TfL, the local authorities and central government 
to consider the most appropriate opportunities.
11.16. Some types of infrastructure will be able to 
be run on a commercial basis and this can provide 
infrastructure funding and financing. An example of this 
is where energy service companies (ESCOs) are set 
up to invest in new energy facilities configured in such 
a way as to reduce the energy cost of a building. The 
building occupants, or landlord, then benefit from the 
energy savings and pay a fee to the ESCO in return. 
Another example is sports facilities run on commercial 
terms, but with concessions access for people living 
or working in the local area. Fulham Pools provides a 
local example of a facility run on this basis (see figure 11.2). 
11.17. Where neither development nor public or 
private service providers can meet the anticipated 
costs of development, the public sector can look at 
borrowing monies to fund and finance infrastructure. In 
the case of the OPDC area, there is currently a funding 
gap and OPDC has been in discussions with central 
government about potential borrowing and other 
options.   
11.18. A funding model incorporating retention of 
future tax increases is one potential approach. This 
is where additional revenue gains from taxes (in 
theory domestic or business property) generated 
within a defined area of development are used to 
repay borrowing for new infrastructure judged to be 
necessary to unlock regeneration in an area – often 
referred to as Tax Incremental Financing (TIF).  In the 
UK, growth in future business rates will be used to 
repay borrowing for upfront infrastructure (the Northern 
Line extension to Battersea being the most notable 
example).  An Enterprise Zone could also be used as 
a mechanism to capture the uplift over a long period 
of time from a set base (importantly assuming no 
resetting of the baseline) within a designated zone.
11.19. The use of a revolving investment fund could 
also be considered where there is a mismatch between 
the timing of delivery and funding.  This is where funds 
are raised, possibly alongside some public grant, to 
deliver a rolling programme of works on the expectation 
that future development contributions generated will 
repay.245
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Development Capacity Study Update
• Development Infrastructure Funding Study
• Infrastructure Delivery Plan
• Old Oak Strategic Transport Study
• Park Royal Transport Strategy
• Preliminary Infrastructure Design and Costs Study
• Social Infrastructure Needs Study Update
• Utilities StudyPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP1 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Environment and Utilities Policies (All)
• Housing Policies H1 and H2
• Transport Policies (All)
• Town Centre and Community Uses Policy TCC3
• Delivery and Implementation Policies (All)POLICY DI2: Timely Delivery and Optimised Phasing
To support the timely delivery of development in the 
area, OPDC will work with landowners, developers, 
infrastructure providers and other relevant 
stakeholders to:
a) ensure development proposals are being brought 
forward as early as possible, subject to the 
necessary infrastructure requirements to support 
the development being secured, in accordance 
with Policy SP10;
b) secure the timely delivery of infrastructure required 
to support the needs of development; and
c) ensure any barriers to the successful and timely 
regeneration of the area can be appropriately 
addressed and overcome.
SUPPORTING TEXT
11.20. Policy SP10 recognises the importance of 
timely delivery and figure 3.16 provides an overview 
of OPDC’s indicative phasing plan, which is heavily 
influenced by the planned delivery of the new Old Oak 
Common station. The approach to phasing is set out in 
OPDC’s Development Capacity Study (DCS). The DCS accords with the NPPF and National Planning Practice 
Guidance (NPPG) and identifies the sites within the 
OPDC area that are considered to be ‘deliverable’ 
and capable of being brought forward in the next five 
years and sites that are considered to be ‘developable’ 
and identified as contributing to OPDC’s supply of 
homes and jobs over 5-20 years. OPDC is engaging 
positively and proactively with the landowners and 
developers of the identified development sites in the 
DCS, to support the timely and coordinated delivery of 
these sites. Further details on this engagement is set 
out in appendices A and B of the DCS and information 
will be updated annually as part of OPDC’s Authority 
Monitoring Report.
11.21. OPDC will support the early delivery of 
development, wherever possible. This approach will 
deliver much needed new homes and jobs, help to 
change the character of the area from industrial to 
mixed use, and will build confidence in the future of the 
area. The majority of land identified as ‘deliverable’, 
or ‘developable’ in 0-10 years, on which early 
development could commence in advance of the 
opening of the Old Oak Common station, is located 
in the Places of Scrubs Lane (Policy P10), Willesden 
Junction (Policy P11), Old Oak Lane and Old Oak 
Common Lane (Policy P8), Channel Gate (Policy P9), 
North Acton and Acton Wells (Policy P7), and Park 
Royal West (Policy P4). 
11.22.   Whilst early development is supported, a large 
number of these sites are challenging and will require 
infrastructure investment (public transport, utilities and 
social) to unlock their comprehensive redevelopment 
at the scale of development promoted in this Local 
Plan. This infrastructure will be needed to connect 
early development into its surroundings to ensure the 
integration of new and existing communities. OPDC 
is working with a variety of stakeholders, service 
providers, developers and landowners (see Policy 
DI3) to ensure that infrastructure necessary to support 
the development of these sites is being appropriately secured and delivered.
11.23. Following the opening of Old Oak Common 
station after 2028 (and potentially in advance of 
that where feasible) sites needed to support the 
development of the station and other complex sites 
could have the potential for redevelopment. This is land 
is predominantly located in Old Oak South (see Policy 
P1), North Acton and Acton Wells (Policy P7) and 
Channel Gate (Policy P9):
a) The HS2 construction sites will be capable of 
being brought forward for development in a timely 
fashion around the time of the opening of Old Oak 
Common station. 
b)  In the longer term, The Elizabeth Line Depot and 
sidings could be brought forward for development. 
These will be complex to deliver and will require 
solutions to existing rail uses, taking into account 
future operational needs, to facilitate development. 
This would likely require either the full or partial 
relocation of the depot and/or decking the depot 
and sidings to enable development.
c)  In the longer term, OPDC would support 
development at both the Intercity Express 
Programme (IEP) depot and North Pole East depot 
sites, if solutions to their rail use could be found 
and agreement with all relevant bodies reached.  
11.24. This list is not exhaustive and as a fuller 
understanding of development potential within the 
area emerges other development opportunities and 
solutions will continue to be identified. Further details 
on site specific requirements for development, phasing 
and infrastructure can be found in table 11.1 and 
within the relevant Place policies in Chapter 4. Further 
details on the key stakeholders who OPDC will need 
to engage with to support the timely and successful 
regeneration of the area are also provided within the 
DCS and Policy DI3.246
Place Homes 
CapacityJobs 
CapacityKey 
LandownersJustification
Old Oak 
South 
(P1)100 17,100 DfT, TfL, and 
Network Rail• Old Oak South will be a complex site to develop that will require joint working between a variety of public sector bodies. It will be important 
that different public sector landowners work together to ensure development over and around existing infrastructure is coordinated and can 
create a coherent new place.  
• The High Speed Rail (London – West Midlands) Act 2017, which was granted Royal Assent in February 2017, establishes the parameters 
within which the Old Oak Common station would be built out.  To support the delivery of the Act, an associated planning regime (Schedule 
17) has been developed. This establishes the approvals process and sets out the grounds for OPDC to determine submissions for proposals 
such as construction arrangements, plans and specifications of proposed buildings and restoration of sites. The consideration on any 
approval for works to be carried out in relation to Phase One of HS2 are limited to those set out in Schedule 17. OPDC recognises the 
extent of High Speed 2 Limited’s powers, land interests and scope as set out in the Act. OPDC as local planning authority will work positively 
with HS2 and DfT to realise this and ensure the station and its associated interchange facilities are delivered in a timely fashion and is 
appropriately embedded into its surroundings.
• Securing longer term development on land around the station will likely only take place once construction land is no longer needed to 
support the construction of the station. This Local Plan establishes clear policy support for development around the station, and the detail for 
how the development of this site will come forward in time.   
• To the north of the station and associated construction site is the Elizabeth Line Depot and sidings, and to the south is the Intercity 
Express Programme (IEP). Both are operational transport depots. This Local Plan does not identify either site as likely to come forward for 
development in the Plan period. However, should a solution be found that facilitates redevelopment that all parties can agree on, OPDC 
would support the principle of mixed use development on these sites. The Elizabeth Line Depot and Sidings site will be challenging to deliver 
and the feasibility, timing and development capacity on this site will require ongoing monitoring and consideration as part of future reviews 
of this Local Plan. OPDC is working with TfL and DfT to consider options for its full and/or partial relocation/decking to support development. 
Any deck structure would artificially raise the ground level of the site and the subsequent challenge of knitting this site into its surroundings 
(in particular the HS2 station) would need to be addressed through detailed design. 
• Likewise, OPDC will need to monitor the potential phasing and capacity of the IEP depot site through future iterations of the Local 
Plan. Securing access to Wormwood Scrubs would require the delivery of new connections over and/or under this depot to connect the 
regeneration of Old Oak into this important metropolitan open space.
Old Oak North 
(P2)0 3,300 Cargiant, 
LBHF and 
Network Rail• Old Oak North is designated as SIL which the Local Plan continues to protect. 
• The majority of the land in Old Oak North is in the ownership of Cargiant and the successful industrial intensification of the area will require 
close working with this key landowner. Other key sites include a triangle of land owned by the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham 
and the European Metal Recycling site.
• The area is currently poorly connected into its surroundings and will require transport improvements to address this, including improvements 
to existing access points.
• The Local Plan safeguards the Old Oak Sidings (Powerday) site as a waste facility to meet LBHF’s waste apportionment (see Policy EU6) 
and it is therefore not identified as contributing to OPDC’s jobs targets within this Local Plan.
Grand Union 
Canal 
(P3)N/A N/A Canal and 
River Trust• The Grand Union Canal is managed by the Canal and River Trust (CRT). 
• This Place does not have a homes and jobs target; however, the Local Plan does identify a series of new and enhanced bridge connections 
and utilities crossings over the Grand Union Canal. Delivery of these will require agreement with CRT and landowners on either side of the 
canal.
• The canal can also play an important role as a transport corridor, as well as assisting with the management of surface water drainage and as 
an important leisure, and social destination that could become a focal point across the area. Table 11.1: Opportunities and Challenges for Delivery within the OPDC PlacesDI2247
Place Homes 
CapacityJobs 
CapacityKey 
LandownersJustification
Park Royal 
West 
(P4)1,575 3,510 Segro, 
Fairview 
Homes, 
London and 
Quadrant 
(L&Q)• Park Royal West is 320   ha in size and is in a variety of mixed ownerships. 250 ha of this land is SIL, which the Local Plan continues to 
protect.  
• The largest industrial landowner within Park Royal is Segro who have significant landholdings. They own the freehold for a number of 
industrial estates, including the recently constructed Origin Business Park. 
• There are opportunities to intensify employment space within Park Royal West to deliver more jobs. OPDC has been proactively engaging 
with landowners and businesses to demonstrate how they could make best use of their assets. OPDC has also been engaged with the host 
local authorities and the Park Royal Business Group to identify infrastructure requirements in Park Royal West and these requirements are 
included in the Local Plan and the further detail set out in OPDC’s IDP.
• Fairview Homes and L&Q jointly own the First Central site within the Brewery Cluster (see Policies P4 and P4C1), which is identified as 
contributing to OPDC’s 0-5 year supply (see figure 3.16). There are also a number of smaller non-SIL sites located around the site that could 
accommodate mixed use residential-led development. 
Old Park 
Royal
(P5)0 1,600 Mixed 
ownership• Old Park Royal is 40 ha in size, all of which is SIL. The Local Plan continues to protect this. 
• The area consists of mixed land ownership, which reflects the areas’  fine grain of streets and buildings. 
• Similar to Park Royal West, deliverability will largely be contingent on intensification of the industrial area. The Park Royal Intensification 
Study shows how sites within this place could be brought forward and contribute to OPDC’s jobs target. 
• OPDC has been actively engaged with the host local authorities and the Park Royal Business Group to identify infrastructure requirements in 
Old Park Royal. 
Park Royal 
Centre 
(P6)800 1,400 ASDA, 
NHS, mixed 
ownership, 
and existing 
residential• Park Royal Centre is a neighbourhood town centre and is predominantly in the ownership of ASDA and the NHS, who own Central Middlesex 
Hospital and OPDC is actively engaging with these landowners to consider the future aspirations and requirements for their respective 
landholdings. 
• The delivery of new homes and jobs in the place is largely contingent on redevelopment at the ASDA site. The site has development 
potential and has been shown within OPDC’s 6-10 year housing supply (see figure 3.16) and can also better manage the relationship 
between SIL and non-SIL uses within this neighbourhood town centre.
• The key infrastructure requirements for the place are related to the realignment of the vehicular junction in the centre of the place.
North Acton 
and Acton 
Wells 
(P7)8,000 6,200 Segro, Mixed 
ownership• The place is in mixed landownership, but Segro are a major landowner holding the freehold for the Victoria Road Industrial Estate. 
• North Acton has already experienced significant redevelopment in recent years with a number of sites in the area having already progressed 
significantly through the planning process.
• To the south, land can be brought forward in the next 0-10 years. 
• To the north of the place in Acton Wells, development is likely to be longer term. The majority of this land is required for HS2’s construction 
and is therefore unlikely to be brought forward until the late 2020s. There are also significant infrastructure requirements for these sites, 
including a proposed access to North Acton station, a new London Overground station at Old Oak Common Lane and the need for 
infrastructure associated with the West London Orbital Route. North Acton and Acton Wells is also identified as an area of search for the 
delivery of a new health hub.Table 11.1 (continued)DI2248
Table 11.1 (continued)
Place Homes 
CapacityJobs 
CapacityKey 
LandownersJustification
Old Oak Lane 
and Old Oak 
Common 
Lane (P8)2,750 1,700 Segro, mixed 
ownership 
and existing 
residential• The area is predominantly in mixed ownership with a variety of different business sizes and residential areas along its length, including 
existing residential neighbourhoods such as Wells House Road and Midland Terrace.  
• This Place will be impacted upon by the construction of HS2 with high levels of construction traffic passing through this place. 
• The area’s capacity to deliver new homes and jobs is limited largely to land in and around the Westway Estate and land around Atlas 
Junction, including the Oaklands site. 
Channel Gate 
(P9)3,100 600 Mixed 
(majority 
is being 
acquired by 
HS2 for HS2’s 
construction)• Channel Gate is currently in mixed land ownership, and portions have been acquired through the High Speed Rail (London – West Midlands) 
Act 2017 for the construction of the HS2 route and station at Old Oak Common. 
• The area is unlikely to be brought forward for development until the land is no longer required to support construction of the Old Oak 
Common station, which is currently programmed to open after 2028; however earlier development opportunities will be supported. 
• OPDC’s Place policy allocates the majority of Channel Gate for residential-led mixed use development. 
• To support the optimised delivery of this site, new infrastructure will be required, particularly new roads links into the site and new bridge links 
over the Grand Union Canal. 
Scrubs Lane 
(P10)3,500 1,100 Cargiant, 
mixed 
ownership• Scrubs Lane is in mixed land ownership, although Cargiant own three sites. OPDC is in active discussions with several landowners along 
Scrubs Lane about the early delivery of development sites in this place.
Willesden 
Junction 
(P11)N/A N/A Network Rail • There are some smaller development opportunities on land around the station, whereby there may be opportunities for early development.
• Upgrading Willesden Junction station in terms of capacity, interchange, and legibility will be a key requirement to the future success of this 
place and the wider OPDC area.
• Network Rail own the majority of land in Willesden Junction. OPDC will work closely with Network Rail to help support an optimised 
approach to development capacity and ensure the timely delivery of upgrades to Willesden Junction Station. 
• Connecting this Place into both Harlesden and Old Oak North will be challenging but will be important to improve connectivity and reduce 
severance.
• Some sites may be particularly challenging to bring forward as they may involve decking over live railway tracks and/or transport depots and/
or relocation.
Wormwood 
Scrubs 
(P12)N/A N/A LBHF • Wormwood Scrubs is owned by LBHF and is protected as Metropolitan Open Land (MOL) and by its own act of parliament, the Wormwood 
Scrubs Act (1879). 
• There are no plans to deliver homes or jobs in this place. 
• New accesses and sensitive enhancements to the Scrubs will be required in order that the Scrubs can positively fulfil the function of a 
metropolitan park and can be accessed by future people living, working and visiting Old Oak and Park Royal. To facilitate this, OPDC will 
work closely with LBHF and with the Wormwood Scrubs Charitable Trust, who are responsible for the running and upkeep of the Scrubs and 
who have responsibility for approving any works to the Scrubs. It will also be important to engage fully with local residents, businesses and 
interested groups. DI2249
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• Duty to Cooperate Statement
• Precedents Study 
• Statement of Community InvolvementPOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)POLICY DI3: Stakeholder Engagement and Being a Proactive Planning Authority
OPDC will proactively engage with stakeholders and 
encourage active participation in the planning and 
delivery of development in the OPDC area by: 
a) working with a variety of key stakeholders to 
support the timely and successful regeneration of 
the area;
b) reviewing OPDC’s Statement of Community 
Involvement every two years;
c)  supporting Neighbourhood Forums in the 
development of Neighbourhood Plans; and
d)  supporting community build, ownership and 
management programmes. 
SUPPORTING TEXT
11.25. The timely delivery of development and 
infrastructure within Old Oak and Park Royal will 
require a coordinated and integrated approach. To 
facilitate this, OPDC is working collaboratively with a 
wide range of stakeholders, including landowners and 
developers, public sector bodies and service providers 
and communities (residents and business groups).
11.26. Figure 11.3 identifies the key landowners within 
the OPDC area, at the time of writing this plan but 
landownerships will likely change over time. Table 11.1 
provides an overview of each of these land holdings, 
within each of the 12 Places as per chapter 4. 
11.27. Across the OPDC area outside of SIL 
approximately 70% of the developable land is currently 
within public sector ownership. This public sector land 
has the capacity to accommodate approximately 9,800 
homes and 40,400 jobs, of which 6,800 homes and 
21,150 jobs could be delivered within this Local Plan period (2018-38). This provides the public sector with 
significant opportunities to realise the optimal value 
from these assets and unlock significant opportunities 
for investment in homes, jobs, infrastructure and other 
economic benefits. To achieve this it will be important 
for the public sector to work collaboratively. The 
remaining developable land for mixed use development 
is in a mixture of different private ownerships. As a 
local planning authority, OPDC will need to play a key 
role in coordinating the delivery of this land to ensure 
it complements and supports the wider plans for the 
area.   
11.28. Across the Strategic Industrial Location, 
land ownership is predominantly privately owned 
and is more piecemeal. Therefore, there is a clear 
need to work with developers and landowners in the 
area to ensure that development is optimised and 
that a coordinated approach to development and 
infrastructure is taken. 
11.29. To facilitate this and to support the coordinated 
delivery of development, OPDC has established 
a Developer Forum, which convenes to share 
information, and discuss cross-site infrastructure 
requirements. Within Park Royal, OPDC is supporting 
the role of the Park Royal Business Group.  
11.30. A wide range of public sector bodies and 
stakeholders will each play a key role in facilitating 
the delivery of this Local Plan. There are a number 
of policy areas within the Local Plan that require 
joint working with adjacent local planning authorities, 
other public sector bodies and public and private 
service providers. OPDC is working closely with these 
authorities and bodies, liaising on policy, development 
management and infrastructure delivery matters. 
11.31. In respect of planning policy, in accordance 
with the Duty to Cooperate, OPDC meets on a bi-
weekly basis with the host local authorities of Brent, 
Ealing, Hammersmith and Fulham and with the Royal 
Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, TfL and the GLA. 
OPDC also meets regularly with other local authorities as part of wider sub-regional groups such as the 
Association of London Borough Planning Officers 
(ALBPO) and the London Waste Planning Forum 
(LWPF). In accordance with the Duty to Cooperate, 
OPDC also meets regularly with other key public sector 
stakeholders in the preparation of planning policy, 
including groups like the Environment Agency, Historic 
England and Natural England. Further details on 
OPDC’s activities in relation to the Duty to Cooperate 
can be found in OPDC’s Duty to Cooperate Statement, 
a copy of which can be found online.
11.32. OPDC works closely with a number of bodies 
in the consideration of planning applications. The host 
local authorities are actively involved in pre-application 
discussions with developers. OPDC also involves 
other public bodies, where appropriate, in the pre-
application process, including groups such as the GLA, 
TfL, Environment Agency, Historic England, Natural 
England and key service providers. Once applications 
have been submitted, public bodies are appropriately 
consulted and comments received are considered by 
officers in the determination of planning applications.
11.33. In respect of infrastructure, OPDC has been 
working in close collaboration with a variety of public 
sector bodies and service providers across both the 
public and private sectors to identify the infrastructure 
required to support the needs of development, when 
and where, identify its preferred delivery model and 
identify funding and financing options as follows:  
a) Transport: OPDC has been working jointly with 
a number of bodies to consider how transport 
improvements can be made to meet the needs 
of new development, support transit orientated 
development and deliver a highly connected new 
part of London. This includes groups such as 
the GLA, TfL, local authorities, DfT, HS2 ltd and 
MHCLG;
b)  Social infrastructure: Education, health and 
emergency service providers have been 
closely involved in the production of the Social 
Infrastructure Needs Study, which is informing 250
Figure 11.3: Land Ownership
251Figure 11.3: Land Ownership
REFERENCES
1. Development Capacity Study Update
the education, health and emergency service 
facility requirements set out in this Local Plan and 
the further details set out in the IDP. In respect 
of health, OPDC has also worked with the local 
Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs), local 
authority public health departments, North West 
London Health Trust and NHS England to derive 
the appropriate healthcare provision for the area 
and OPDC will continue to work with these groups 
to secure the appropriate delivery of healthcare 
infrastructure. In respect of education, OPDC has 
worked closely with the Local Education Authorities 
(LEAs) and the Education and Skills Funding 
Agency to identify education facility requirements. 
OPDC has also worked with the local authorities 
and other social infrastructure service providers to 
identify the other social infrastructure requirements 
associated with development in the area and these 
requirements are set out in this Local Plan with 
further detail provided in the IDP;
c)  Utilities infrastructure: Requirements will be 
significant to support the needs of the new 
development in the area. In support of the Local 
Plan, OPDC has developed a Utilities Study 
and as part of this, has engaged with a wide 
variety of utilities stakeholders to ascertain the 
likely infrastructure requirements to support 
the development of the area. This includes, for 
example, organisations such as National Grid and 
UK Power Networks (UKPN) for gas and electricity 
supply and Thames Water and the Environment 
Agency in respect of water infrastructure; and
d) Green infrastructure: OPDC’s approach to green 
infrastructure is informed by OPDC’s Environmental 
Standards Study, but also has close synergies with 
OPDC’s Integrated Water Management Strategy, 
Public Realm, Walking and Cycling Strategy and 
Sites of Importance for Nature Conservation Area 
Statement. In developing these studies, OPDC has 
been actively engaged with the local authorities 
and other key bodies such as Natural England, 
Environment Agency, Thames Water, Historic DI3
in OPDC’s SCI. 
11.37. Chapters 3, 4 and 11 will be treated as 
OPDC’s strategic policies when considering the 
general conformity of neighbourhood planning policies. 
Beyond this, there is extensive scope and flexibility 
for neighbourhood plans in the OPDC area to bring 
forward policies and guidance. Examples of what 
could be covered include development management 
policy matters, design codes, specific areas and/or 
neighbourhoods guidance, site specific guidance in 
particular consideration of how to shape development 
in accordance with housing targets, and priorities for 
the use of Neighbourhood Community Infrastructure 
Levy spending. 
11.38. In recent years there has been a growth 
in interest from community groups to deliver and 
operate facilities and buildings. Examples include 
Community Land Trusts, set up to develop and 
manage homes, Community Right to Build introduced 
through the Localism Act and allowing communities to 
build local facilities they need and Community Asset 
Transfer, where a community facility’s management 
is transferred to local community groups. An example 
of a community run social infrastructure facility 
is the Tottenham Hale Community Space “The 
Engine Room”, which is operated by the Diocese 
of London. OPDC will work with service providers, 
local authorities, developers, community groups and 
other relevant stakeholders to promote these models 
of delivery and management in the OPDC area, will 
provide support to interested community groups and 
will secure appropriate funding arrangements to 
support community ownership initiatives. England and the GLA. 
11.34. Community participation will be a defining 
factor in the delivery of successful regeneration in 
the OPDC area. Policy SP2 notes the importance 
of engaging with local communities, both residents 
and businesses, in informing policy and development 
proposals for the area. Local residents, workers and 
businesses are often experts for the area in which they 
live and/or work. As occupants of recent developments, 
they are well placed to advise planning authorities of 
their successes and failures to inform future learning. 
11.35. OPDC’s Statement of Community Involvement 
(SCI) sets out how OPDC plans to be exemplar in 
terms of community engagement. It recognises the 
importance of community involvement and sets out 
how OPDC will engage with communities in the 
preparation of local planning policy documents. It also 
sets out how developers should proactively engage 
with the local community, both pre and post the 
submission of planning applications and demonstrate 
how proposals have responded to comments received. 
To be successful and responsive to changing needs, 
the SCI should not be seen as a static document and 
OPDC is committed to undertaking a review of its SCI 
every two years. 
11.36. The Localism Act (2011) introduced 
neighbourhood planning, giving local communities 
the powers to establish neighbourhood forums and 
to develop neighbourhood plans for their local area. 
Neighbourhood planning is a valuable tool, giving 
local communities a powerful say on how they wish 
to see their area regenerated. To support the delivery 
of this Local Plan, OPDC is committed to working 
closely with and providing support to emerging and 
established Neighbourhood Forums in the development 
of their neighbourhood plans. Currently there are the 
Harlesden and Old Oak neighbourhood forums within 
the OPDC area who are progressing the development 
of their neighbourhood plans. Further details on how 
OPDC supports neighbourhood planning can be found 252
EVIDENCE BASE LINKS
• N/APOLICY LINKS
• Strategic Policy SP2 and SP10
• Place Policies (All)
• Delivery and Implementation Policies (All)POLICY DI4: Planning Powers and Monitoring
To support the timely, coordinated and comprehensive 
regeneration of the area, OPDC will:
a) utilise development management functions, 
including pre-application discussions and involving 
partner organisations where appropriate;
b) where there is a compelling case in the public 
interest, use compulsory purchase powers to 
facilitate land assembly and the acquisition of all 
necessary rights to carry out development; 
c) prepare supplementary planning documents 
(SPDs), development briefs and best practice 
guidance where necessary; and
d)  to measure the success of the Local Plan, produce 
an Authority Monitoring Report, monitoring against 
OPDC’s Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).
SUPPORTING TEXT
11.39. To support the successful regeneration 
over the lifetime of the Local Plan, OPDC will use 
its development management functions to support 
development in a timely fashion, in accordance with 
the policies of this Local Plan and in accordance with 
national and regional policy. These functions include:
a) pre-application advice; 
b) review of proposals by OPDC’s Place Review 
Group and Community Review Group;
c)  application validation and determination of planning 
applications; and 
d)  use of enforcement powers. 11.40. OPDC offers a pre-application advice service 
geared towards proactive and positive engagement 
with applicants. This will involve an applicant being 
provided with informal advice at an early stage in the 
planning process from a planning officer employed 
by OPDC. The benefits to an applicant seeking pre-
application advice include:
a) the opportunity to explore and understand the 
implications of relevant planning policies for their 
proposal; 
b) early identification of potential issues and/or 
constraints affecting  a particular site;
c)  the ability to improve on and achieve high quality 
design;
d)  early discussions about matters such as affordable 
housing and Section 106 Agreements;
e)  saving time and money and the likelihood of a 
quicker decision once the application is submitted; 
and
f) a greater chance of achieving and negotiating a 
positive outcome once a planning application is 
submitted. 
11.41. OPDC’s Statement of Community Involvement 
(SCI) sets out guidance for how applicants should 
engage proactively with local communities prior to the 
submission of planning applications (see Policy DI3). 
11.42. OPDC is committed to embedding place 
making within the plan making and development 
management process, and to achieving the highest 
standards of design in new development. As part of 
this, an independent and impartial Design Review 
Panel called the OPDC PLACE Review Group 
(‘OPRG’) has been established to advise OPDC on 
planning policy and development proposals. 
11.43. ‘PLACE’ stands for planning, landscape 
architecture, conservation and engineering. Panel 
members are professionals with experience in 
architecture, landscape architecture, urban design, 
environmental sustainability, inclusive design, development economics and delivery. OPRG reviews 
proposals at pre-application stage and post-submission 
before they are reported to OPDC’s Planning 
Committee. Further information about the PLACE 
Review Group’s purpose and function can be found on 
OPDC’s website. 
11.44. OPDC has also established a Community 
Review Group, which sits in parallel to OPRG. It is 
formed of residents and employees and similarly to 
OPRG, considers proposals at pre-application stage 
and post-submission before they are reported to 
OPDC’s Planning Committee.
11.45. OPDC has developed a Validation List, which 
is a list of information that must be submitted with a 
planning application for it to be deemed valid. This list 
is published on the OPDC website. 
11.46. Once a planning application has been 
submitted and validated by OPDC, the planning 
application is considered against relevant planning 
policy contained in the development plan taking 
account of any material considerations. This Local 
Plan, the Mayor’s London Plan, the West London 
Waste Plan (WLWP) and any neighbourhood plans 
form the development plan. Material considerations 
will include the NPPF and Supplementary Planning 
Documents. 
11.47. Where necessary, OPDC will also use 
its planning enforcement powers to ensure that 
unacceptable development built without planning 
permission or other consents does not compromise 
OPDC’s abilities to realise the spatial vision and the 
policies set out in this Local Plan.
11.48. Compulsory purchase is the power that 
enables public bodies to acquire land, or rights over 
land, compulsorily and affected landowners and 
persons with an interest in land will be entitled to make 
a claim for compensation. Land ownership boundaries 
can restrict delivery of the comprehensive development 
required to deliver the spatial vision and policies of the 253
DI4
Figure 11.4: Street Art, Old OakLocal Plan. Compulsory purchase is an important tool 
to assemble land (and rights over land) needed to help 
deliver social, environmental and economic change. 
11.49. It may be in the interests of the proper planning 
and delivery of the Local Plan for Old Oak and Park 
Royal for OPDC to acquire land using compulsory 
purchase powers to deliver its aims and objectives 
as a regeneration body, where there is a compelling 
case in the public interest to use such powers. Such 
circumstances would include:
a) supporting a comprehensive and coordinated, 
rather than piecemeal, approach to the 
development of land;
b) unlocking land to facilitate development in a timely 
fashion; and
c) supporting the delivery of infrastructure identified 
in the Local Plan and further detailed in OPDC’s 
Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP), and the creation 
of development opportunities arising from the 
provision of that infrastructure.11.50. In exercising its CPO powers, the Mayor must 
have regard to the DLUHC guidance ‘Compulsory 
Purchase and the Crichel Down Rules October 2015’.  
11.51. Along with the Mayor’s London Plan, OPDC’s 
Local Plan is the main Development Plan Document 
(DPD) for the area. This Local Plan has been written 
some three years into the life of what may be a 30 year 
regeneration programme. A significant evidence base 
has been prepared to support the policy positions set 
out in this Local Plan. The Local Plan establishes a 
set of strategic policies to guide the development and 
regeneration of the area. It is important that policies 
put in place now do not unduly restrict positive feasible 
outcomes. As an increasingly detailed understanding of 
this complex brownfield site emerges updated planning 
policy and guidance will be needed. 11.52. OPDC is able to develop other planning 
guidance documents that will play an important 
role in providing clarity to stakeholders and helping 
to bring forward development in a timely and 
coordinated manner. Known as Supplementary 
Planning Documents (SPDs), these would be prepared 
to provide further guidance to the Local Plan and 
help deliver its planning policy objectives. Updated 
information on OPDC’s proposed scope and timetable 
for production of SPDs is provided within OPDC’s Local 
Development Scheme.
11.53. In order to measure the success of the policies 
within this Local Plan and help to identify any potential 
need for a review of all or part of the Local Plan, OPDC 
will produce an Authority Monitoring Report on an 
annual basis to measure and assess the effectiveness 
of Local Plan policies and identify if alterations are 
necessary. The Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), 
which can be found on OPDC’s website, will be used 
as the basis for this assessment.254
Chapter 12
GLOSSARY255
Term Definition
Accessibility Refers to the extent to which employment, goods and services are made available to people, either through close 
proximity, or through providing the required physical links to enable people to be transported to locations where they are 
available. It also refers to the extent of barriers to movement for users who may experience problems getting from one 
place to another, including disabled people.
Accessible Design Design which creates an environment where employment, goods and services are made available to people, either 
through close proximity, or through providing the required physical links to enable people to be transported to locations 
where they are available.
Active Electric Charging Units These are parking spaces designed to accommodate electric vehicles. Active electric charging units are fully wired and 
connected, ready to use, points at parking spaces.
Active frontages Making frontages ‘active’ adds interest, life and vitality to the public realm.
This means:
 »frequent doors and windows, with few blank walls;
 »narrow frontage buildings, giving vertical rhythm to the street scene;
 »articulation of facades, with projections such as bays and porches incorporated, providing a welcoming feeling; and
 »on occasion, lively internal uses visible from the outside, or spilling onto the street.
Affordable Home Ownership Affordable housing products where a dwelling (or part share of a dwelling) is made available for purchase at sub-market 
rates.
Affordable housing This includes social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing, provided to eligible households whose needs 
are not met by the market. Eligibility is determined with regard to local incomes and local house prices. Affordable 
housing should include provisions to remain at an affordable price for future eligible households or for the subsidy to be 
recycled for alternative affordable housing provision.
Agent of Change Principle that whoever causes a change in the environment (agent of change) is responsible for managing the impacts 
of this change. Therefore, following this principle, incoming/new development should mitigate against potential issues 
arising from existing uses/development (i.e. new residential uses should address the noise impacts from existing 
entertainment/music venues)
Air Quality Management Areas (AQMA) Areas designated by local authorities because they are not likely to achieve national air quality objectives by the relevant 
deadlines.
Amenity The desirable or useful features of a building or place which support its ongoing use and enjoyment by building 
occupants, residents, visitors, workers etc. It is usually understood to mean visual and aural amenity. Factors relevant to 
amenity include the general characteristics of the locality (including the presence of any feature of historic, architectural, 
cultural or similar interest), daylight, sunlight, outlook, privacy , air quality, effects of wind, odour, noise and vibration. 
Amenity should be preserved, so potential impacts need to be assessed and managed.
Approved Provider (Housing) A body, either not-for-profit or for-profit, included on the Homes England’s statutory register of social housing providers 
and local authority housing providers.Glossary256
Term Definition
Approved Workspace or Studio Provider A workspace or studio provider which has been approved either through a process to evaluate and select providers to 
develop an approved workspace or studio provider list or by determining their suitability on a case by case basis, against 
set criteria.
Assets of Community Value (ACV) Land determined to be of community value because it furthers the social wellbeing or social interests of the local 
community (which include cultural, sporting or recreational interests). Local groups can nominate land/buildings for 
listing, and can bid to buy listed assets when they are to be sold.
Attenuation The process of water retention on site and slowly releasing it in a controlled discharge to a surface water or combined 
drain or watercourse.
Autonomous/automated vehicles Autonomous/automated vehicles are capable of navigating between destinations as a means of transport, with minimal 
or no (self-driving) human input.
Basins (Canal) An expanse of waterway alongside, or at the end of a canal, which allows for boats to moor or unload cargo without 
impeding the progress of other traffic. Basins should also allow room for a canal boat to turn.
Biodiversity This refers to the variety of plants and animals and other living things in a particular area or region. It encompasses 
habitat diversity, species diversity and genetic diversity.
Biodiversity has value in its own right and has social and economic value for human society
Biodiversity Action Plan A plan outlining a set of future actions that will lead to the conservation or enhancement of biodiversity.
Blue Badge Holders The Blue Badge scheme helps you park closer to your destination if you are disabled. Blue Badge parking permits let 
disabled drivers and passengers park nearer to where they are going.
Broad Industrial Type Activities Broad industrial type activities/industrial uses: Uses that are exclusively and permanently industrial in nature and 
therefore are appropriate within Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL). Typical uses include B2 and B8, and other industrial 
uses identified in Mayoral policy and/or guidance.
Building Information Modelling  (BIM) Building Information Modelling (BIM) models and manages information as well as graphics for sharing information 
through construction and the whole building lifecycle, eliminating the need to re-enter data, and avoiding data loss, 
miscommunication, and translation errors.
Built to Rent A development, or block/ phase within a development, under unified ownership and management which are held under a 
Built to Rent covenant for at least 15 years.
Business A commercial operation or company.
Car club A car club provides its members with quick and easy access to a car for hire. Members can make use of car club 
vehicles as and when they need them.
Catalyst uses Uses which can stimulate significant and positive change.
Character Character is created by the interplay of different elements, including the physical or built elements that make up the 
place, the cultural, social and economic factors which have combined to create identity, and the people associated with it 
through memories, association and activity.
Circular Economy Circular economy is an alternative to a traditional linear economy (make, use, dispose) in which resources are kept 
in use for as long as possible, extracting the maximum value from them whilst in use, then recovering and recycling 
products and materials at the end of each service life.257
Term Definition
Class E use/floorspace Class E uses includes:
 »Display or retail sale of goods, other than hot food;
 »Sale of food and drink for consumption (mostly) on the premises;
 »Provision of:  Financial services, Professional services (other than health or medical services), or Other appropriate 
services in a commercial, business or service locality;
 »Indoor sport, recreation or fitness (not involving motorised vehicles or firearms);
 »Provision of medical or health services (except the use of premises attached to the residence of the consultant or 
practitioner);
 »Creche, day nursery or day centre (not including a residential use);
 »Uses which can be carried out in a residential area without detriment to its amenity: 
 »Offices to carry out any operational or administrative functions;
 »Research and development of products or processes;
 »Industrial processes.
Clean Air Zones (CAZ) The CAZ concept, developed by DEFRA to help the UK achieve compliance with EU NO2 limits, is an area-based 
initiative to encourage the cleanest vehicles through levels of access control and the application of vehicle emissions 
standards, with the local authority working in collaboration with others to achieve the necessary outcomes.
Co-Living A form of community housing where residents share spaces and facilities.
Combined Heat and Power/Combined Cooling 
Heat and Power (CHP/CCHP)The combined production of electricity and usable heat. Steam or hot water, which would otherwise be rejected when 
electricity alone is produced, is used for space or process heating.
Commercial Schemes or Development Proposals to create floorspace/ premises which are to be used wholly or mainly for business and by businesses.
Communal Open Space Open spaces forming part an estate or block intended for use by residents of the respective estate or block. They are 
distinguished from publicly accessible open spaces or other public land open to members of the public by clearly defined 
boundaries.
Community facilities/uses Facilities such as libraries, places of worship, halls for hire, youth space and training and meeting space. This list is not 
exhaustive and other uses can be included.
Community Infrastructure Levy (CIL) Standard charge determined by the Local Planning Authority and levied on new development (an amount per square 
metre). The monies raised will be used to pay for infrastructure.
Comparison retail Floorspace dedicated to providing a range of comparison goods, including clothing, shoes, furniture, household 
appliances, tools, medical goods, games and toys, books and stationery , jewellery and other personal effects.
Competitive Marketing Strategy A Competitive Marketing Strategy should demonstrate the approach and methodology for marketing land or property 
where required in policy or associated justification text. This should set out the approach that a developer has taken to 
marketing land or property which maximises the chance that it will be used for its consented purpose which include an 
appropriate marketing period (minimum of 12 months) and that the land or property was offered at a market rate with 
appropriate fit out, rent free period and lease terms for the use proposed.
Connectivity Refers to the number of connections and their integration, layout and relationship to one another and the impact this has 
on getting from A to B, by foot, bicycle and vehicle.
Conservation Area This is an area of special architectural or historic interest (the character of which it is desirable to preserve or enhance) 
designated by a Local Planning Authority under Section 69 of the Planning (Listed Buildings and Conservation Areas) Act 
1990. A Conservation Area is a type of designated heritage asset.258
Term Definition
Consolidation centres Locations where larger vehicles unload materials and goods which are transported to their final destination by smaller 
vehicles.
Construction Logistics Plan Plans which aim to improve the sustainability of construction freight movements by establishing site management and 
procurement processes to reduce the impact of construction traffic on the road network.
Contaminated land Previous industrial processes disposed of waste by tipping it on the land; raw materials and fuel were often spilt 
‘contaminating’ the land at the sites. Pollution to rivers, groundwater, lakes etc can occur by the leaching of contaminants 
out of the soil into water courses through the natural drainage of the soil, or through surface runoff of water eroding 
and transporting contaminant materials into water courses. This in turn can have negative impacts on aquatic plant 
and animal life, and affect the quality of human drinking water. Typically, such sites are ‘cleaned up’ during the planning 
process.
Context The way in which places, sites and spaces inter relate with one another whether physically, functionally or visually, or the 
way in which they are experienced sequentially and understood.
Convenience retail Floorspace dedicated to providing a range of convenience goods such as food and non-alcoholic beverages, tobacco, 
alcoholic beverages, newspapers and periodicals and non-durable household goods.
Creative Industries Industries that are based on individual creativity, skill and talent with the potential to create wealth and jobs through 
developing intellectual property.
Data Infrastructure Digital infrastructure which may include technology, processes or organisations which manage and assess data.
Decentralised Energy Networks supplying heat, cooling and electricity from a central/local source directly to homes and businesses.
Defence Infrastructure Organisation An operating arm of the Ministry of Defence, which supports and manages the built infrastructure of the Armed Forces.
Delivery and Servicing Plans Plans which aim to improve the sustainability of freight and servicing by working with suppliers, clients and the freight 
industry to reduce the number of deliveries required, while ensuring remaining deliveries are made as safe and as 
environmentally friendly as possible.
Density Indicative housing density range has been provided to enable OPDC to define development capacity in accordance 
with national guidance. 
Within the OPDC area the indicative density range is 300 (low density) to 600 (high density) units per hectare. 
Commercial densities are measured using the Homes and Communities Agency Employment Densities Guide (2010).
Designated Heritage Asset A World Heritage Site, Scheduled Monument, Listed Building, Protected Wreck Site, Registered Park and Garden, 
Registered Battlefield or Conservation Area designated under the relevant legislation.
Development Development, as defined under the 1990 Town and Country Planning Act, is “the carrying out of building, engineering, 
mining or other operation in, on, over or under land, or the making of any material change in the use of any building or 
other land”. Most forms of development require planning permission.
Development Plan Document (DPD) Planning policy documents which make up the Local Plan. They guide development within a local planning authority area 
by setting out the detailed planning policies, which are used in determining planning applications.
District centre Provide convenience goods and services for local communities and are accessible by public transport, walking and 
cycling. Typically they contain 10,000–50,000 sqm of retail, leisure and service floorspace.259
Term Definition
Duty to Cooperate The duty to cooperate is a legal requirement set out in the Localism Act 2011. It requires local planning authorities and 
public bodies to engage constructively, actively and on an ongoing basis to maximise the effectiveness of Local Plan 
preparation in the context of strategic cross boundary matters.
Edge of centre For retail purposes, a location that is well connected and up to 300 metres of the primary shopping area. For all other 
main town centre uses, a location within 300 metres of a town centre boundary . For office development, this includes 
locations outside the town centre but within 500 metres of a public transport interchange.
Elizabeth Line The Elizabeth Line is the new high frequency, high capacity service linking stations in Reading,  London and the South 
East. This includes new connections and stations between Reading and Heathrow in the West to Shenfield and Abbey 
Wood in the east.
Prior to being to being named the Elizabeth Line, the route called “Crossrail”. The term Crossrail now refers to the 
construction project and activity related to the delivery of the Elizabeth Line.
Employment The state of having paid work or a job. Employment capacity is how many jobs are being provided and Employment 
density is a measure of how many jobs per square metre of space being created.
Employment Uses Uses which directly generate employment through business activities.
Energy efficiency Making the best or most efficient use of energy in order to achieve a given output of goods or services, for example in 
heating, lighting or providing other power output for use within buildings.
Energy from Waste (EfW) The process of creating energy, in the form of electricity and/or heat, from incinerating waste.
Energy hierarchy The Mayor’s approach to reducing carbon dioxide emissions in the built environment. The first step is to reduce energy 
demand, the second step is to supply energy efficiently and the third step is use renewable energy .
Energy Systems Catapult A leading technology and innovation centre set up to help the UK navigate the transformation of our whole energy 
system and capture the new commercial opportunities created, covering electricity, heat and combustible gases.
Equitable Equalisation Mechanism An arrangement to ensure that each developer contributes appropriately and proportionately to infrastructure provision. 
The arrangement would consider funding, provision of land or the direct delivery of infrastructure as a contribution and 
would look to attach a value to each of these, in order that contributions between different developers can be compared 
and fairly distributed.
Family Housing Housing which has 3 or more bedrooms.
Future Growth Sectors A particular form or branch of economic or commercial activity (referred to as a ‘sector’) where there is scope for 
continued growth in the future.
Genuinely Affordable Housing Homes that are affordable to the types of households that they are aimed at and are below market prices.
Greater London Authority (GLA) The GLA is the strategic citywide government for London. It is made up of a directly elected Mayor (the Mayor of London) 
and a separately elected Assembly (the London Assembly).
Green Belt Policy designation that helps to contain development, protect the countryside and promote brownfield development.
Green Grid A network of green spaces and features such as street trees and green roofs that is planned, designed and managed to 
provide benefits to people and the environment.260
Term Definition
Green Infrastructure The multifunctional, interdependent network of open and green spaces and green features (e.g. green roofs). It includes 
the blue infrastructure and the Blue Ribbon Network but excludes the hard-surfaced public realm. This network lies within 
the urban environment and the urban fringe, connecting to the surrounding countryside. It provides multiple benefits for 
people and wildlife including: flood management; urban cooling; improving physical and mental health; green transport 
links (walking and cycling routes); ecological connectivity; and food growing. Green and open spaces of all sizes can be 
part of green infrastructure provided they contribute to the functioning of the network as a whole.
Green Points System A checklist of green and blue infrastructure options for developers to use to achieve a minimum level of green/blue 
space. 
See also: Urban Greening Factor
Green Roofs (Intensive and Extensive) A green roof is a roof or deck onto which vegetation is intentionally grown or habitats for wildlife are established. 
An extensive green roof is a roof with shallow substrate depths with limited vegetation, formed typically of grasses.
An intensive green roof has an substantial substrate depth, allowing for a greater variety of and intensity of vegetation to 
be planted.
Green Streets Streets that, through a variety of design and operational treatments, give priority to pedestrian circulation and green 
infrastructure and which may be considered as public accessible open space. Green Streets should not be accessible to 
vehicles, aside from limited access for servicing and deliveries where appropriate.
Greenfield Runoff Levels The rate of rainwater runoff which takes place before a site is developed. It is calculated as the peak rate of run-off for 
a specific return period due to rainfall falling on a given area of vegetated land. OPDC’ s Integrated Water Management 
Strategy identifies that a greenfield run off rate for a central location in the OPDC area is 12.5 litres per second per 
hectare (L/s/ha). However, it recognises that this may vary significantly across the OPDC area and runoff rates should be 
confirmed at a site specific scale.
Greywater Wastewater generated from use in hand basins, baths and showers. Grey water generally excludes water used in toilets, 
the kitchen or for cleaning use, which has a greater concentration of contaminants.
Gross Value Added (GVA) A measure in economics of the value of goods and services produced in an area, industry or sector of an economy.
Habitable Rooms Any room used or intended to be used for sleeping, cooking, living or eating purposes. Enclosed spaces such as bath 
or toilet facilities, service rooms, corridors, laundries, hallways, utility rooms or similar spaces are excluded from this 
definition.
Healthy Streets The Healthy Streets Approach is the system of policies and strategies to help Londoners use cars less and walk, cycle 
and use public transport more.
Heavy Goods Vehicle (HGV) Trucks/ Lorries with a maximum gross vehicle weight of more than 3.5 tonnes.
Heritage asset A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration 
in planning decisions, because of its heritage interest. Heritage assets fall into two categories: 
 »designated (such as Conservation Areas and Statutory Listed Buildings); and
 »non-designated (such as Locally Listed Buildings, Areas of Local Character and Buildings of Local Heritage 
Interest)261
Term Definition
High Speed 2 (HS2) High Speed 2 is a planned rail line dedicated for high speed trains that will connect London to Birmingham after 2028 
and then, along a Y shaped route, to Crewe and Manchester in the West and the East Midlands, South Yorkshire and 
Leeds in the East from 2033.
Holistic Offer An Holistic Offer is where a major development scheme or catalyst project complements wider regeneration efforts and 
development proposals. An holistic offer should:
 »support the delivery of the spatial vision and strategic policies; 
 »complement other existing or planned catalysts and surrounding uses;
 »not inhibit development on surrounding sites; and
 »support place making and identity.
Hot Food Takeaways Premises where the primary purpose is the sale of hot food for consumption off the premises.
Houses in Multiple Occupation (HMO) Small HMOs are shared dwelling houses occupied by between three and six unrelated individuals as their only or main 
residence, who share basic amenities such as a kitchen or bathroom. Where it is more than 6 people, this is classified as 
a large HMO.
Housing tenure Housing Tenure broadly falls into two categories: 
1) Owner-occupied; and 
2) Rented.
Owner-occupied includes accommodation that is owned outright or with a mortgage. Shared ownership can also be 
included under this category.
Rented Accommodation can be:  
1) privately rented – all non-owner occupied property other than that rented from a local authority or housing    
association.
2) Social rented from private registered providers or Local Authorities (these include social rent, affordable rent (up to 
80% of the market) and intermediate rent).
Housing type Types of housing can include: 
1) House (detached, semi-detached, terraced);
2) Bungalow; and
3) Maisonettes (duplex flats) and flats (purpose build or converted).
Housing Zone Housing Zones are a partnership between the Mayor, the GLA and London Boroughs to accelerate new housing delivery 
in tightly defined locations. Stakeholder resources are aligned to speed up the delivery of new housing.  There are 
currently 20 Housing Zones across London.
Inclusive design Inclusive design creates an environment where everyone can access and benefit from the full range of opportunities 
available to members of society. It aims to remove barriers that create undue effort, separation or special treatment, and 
enables everyone to participate equally in mainstream activities independently, with choice and dignity.
Industrial Business Park (IBP) Strategic Industrial Locations (SIL) that are particularly suitable for activities that need better quality surroundings 
including research and development, light industrial and high value general industrial, some waste management, 
utility and transport functions, wholesale markets and small scale distribution. They can be accommodated next to 
environmentally sensitive uses.
Industrial Floorspace Space dedicated to uses which can be categorised as broad industrial type uses.262
Term Definition
Industrial Land or Areas Land in Strategic Industrial Locations, Locally Significant Industrial Sites and other industrial sites.
Infrastructure Services that are necessary for the day-to-day functions of the community and economy such as roads, railways, and 
social and community facilities. Infrastructure includes open spaces, utility services, transport, schools, health and 
leisure services, and energy.
Interchange The ability, and place, for people to efficiently transfer between transport modes. This can include transferring between 
different modes of transport such as rail/tube, bus, cycle, taxi etc.
Internet of Things A network of devices (things) which can communicate with one another, and collect and exchange data. This could 
help to make it easier to control and automate tasks. For example, a fridge automatically generating a shopping list and 
sending a supermarket order (i.e via mobile phone) for approval.
Interoperability The ability of the component parts of a system to operate successfully together. For example, the ability for systems to 
communicate and share information and data openly. This is important for the emerging Smart Cities and Internet of 
Things sectors.
Key Views Views seen from places that are publicly accessible and well used. They include significant buildings or urban 
landscapes that help to define the wider regional area.
Legibility The degree to which a person understands and recognises characteristics about an area which help them to navigate 
around an area.
Legible London Legible London is an easy-to-use pedestrian signage system that presents information in a range of ways, including 
maps and directional information, to help people find their way and encourage walking journeys.
Legible Street Network A street network that includes easy-to-use signage systems that presents information in a range of ways, including maps 
and directional information, to help people find their way. A legible network is one which makes navigation and movement 
easy and seamless, helping improve people’s understanding, enjoyment and experience.
Life Chances The opportunities that each person has to improve their quality of life and how likely it is that their life will turn out a 
certain way. How societies operate can positively or negatively affect a person’s life chances. A person’s life chances can 
be limited if discrimination, exclusion and disadvantage (a lack of equal opportunities) exists.
Lifetime neighbourhoods A lifetime neighbourhood is designed to be welcoming, accessible and inviting for everyone, regardless of age, health 
or disability, is sustainable in terms of climate change, transport services, housing, public services, civic space and 
amenities making it possible for people to enjoy a fulfilling life and take part in the economic, civic and social life of the 
community.
Light Goods Vehicle (LGV) Vans/ pick-ups with a maximum gross vehicle weight of up to 3.5 tonnes.
Linear Views Linear Views are narrow views to a defined object from an urban space of a building or group of buildings within a local 
setting.
Local Character Areas Small local areas, as identified in the OPDC Heritage Strategy and OPDC Character Areas Study, which have been 
defined based on predominant land use, building type or historical associations.
Local Economy The economy of the OPDC area and surrounding communities.
Local Heritage Listing Local Heritage Listings are non-designated heritage assets. Within the OPDC area they comprise the Local List and 
Buildings of Local Heritage Interest.263
Term Definition
Local Parks Open Spaces greater than 2 hectares providing for court games, children’s play, sitting out areas and/or nature 
conservation areas. Such spaces may accommodate both hard landscaped civic places and/or green landscaped 
places.
Local Plan The plan for the future development of the local area, drawn up by the local planning authority in consultation with the 
community. In law this is described as the development plan documents adopted under the Planning and Compulsory 
Purchase Act 2004. Current core strategies or other planning policies, which under the regulations would be considered 
to be development plan documents, form part of the Local Plan. The term includes old policies which have been saved 
under the 2004 Act.
London Living Rent An intermediate Rent to Buy product with locally specified, sub-market rents on time-limited tenancies.
London Living Wage The London Living Wage is an hourly rate of pay, as estimated by the Greater London Authority, to give a worker in 
London and their family enough to afford the essentials and to save. However , unlike compulsory wages, businesses 
choose to pay their employees the London Living Wage.
London Plan The Spatial Development Strategy for London prepared by the Mayor of London, which the Local Plan must be in 
general conformity with.
Londoners People who work and/or live in London.
Low Carbon Causing or resulting in only a relatively small net release of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
Low Cost Workspaces Spaces charged at subsidised rents for the occupiers or to the workspace provider (who must pass onto occupier). The 
provision of low-cost workspace should normally go beyond “shell and core” and include adequate power to all parts 
of the premises; basic lighting, floor and wall finishes together with WCs provided within the unit or communal WCs. 
Heating should also be provided where appropriate for the user. These works will avoid substantial fit out costs for 
potential occupiers and enable the workspace to be more affordable for smaller businesses.
Low Emission Neighbourhood (LEN) A Mayoral, area-based scheme that includes a package of measures focused on reducing emissions (and promoting 
sustainable living more generally). A LEN is delivered by a borough with support from Transport for London (TfL), the 
Greater London Authority (GLA) and the local community. The LEN concept was introduced in TfL’s Transport Emissions 
Roadmap (TERM).
Low Emission Zone (LEZ) The Low Emission Zone (LEZ) operates to encourage the most polluting heavy diesel vehicles driving in London to 
become cleaner. The LEZ covers most of Greater London and is in operation 24 hours a day, every day of the year.
Low Temperature District Heating Systems Strategically planned heat networks that can draw on various low carbon heat sources, designed for low temperature 
operation to support the efficient use of heat pump technology as the electricity grid decarbonises.
Major development Development involving any of the following:
1) Mineral working and deposits;
2) Waste development;
3) The provision of dwellings where:
 »10 or more dwellings are being provided; or
 »if number not given,  development on a site of over 0.5ha; 
4) the creation of more than 1,000sqm of floorspace; or
5) development on a site of 1 or more hectares.264
Term Definition
Major Town Centre Typically serve a borough wide catchment, and contain over 50,000 sqm of retail, leisure and service floorspace with a 
relatively high proportion of comparison goods. They may also have significant employment, leisure, service and civic 
functions.
Masterplan Depiction of how an area could be developed.
Mayoral Development Corporation An organisation created by the Mayor of London under the Localism Act 2011.
Meanwhile Uses A catch all title adopted in recent years to describe a diverse range of temporary uses on land and property awaiting 
longer term development. Meanwhile uses could include shops, cafes, bars, business space and culture, sports and 
leisure space. They can also include hoardings or open space or food growing space.
Medium Businesses Businesses employing less than 50 people.
Metropolitan Open Land Strategic open land within the urban area that contributes to the structure of London with the same planning status as 
Green Belt.
Metropolitan Park These are large areas of open space that provide a similar range of benefits to Regional Parks and offer a combination 
of facilities at a sub-regional level. They are readily accessible by public transport and are managed to meet best 
practice quality standards. Sites of Metropolitan Importance are selected on a London-wide basis reflecting their 
strategically-important conservation sites for London.
Metropolitan Town Centre Serve wide catchment areas which can extend over several Boroughs. Typically they contain at least 100,000 sqm of 
retail, leisure and service floorspace, and a significant proportion of comparison retail. These centres generally have a 
very good accessibility and significant employment, leisure, service and civic functions.
Mixed use development A well integrated mix of different land uses which may include retail, employment, leisure and other service uses) with 
decent homes of different types and tenures to support a range of household sizes, ages and incomes.
Modal/Transport Hierarchy Modal/transport hierarchy is all about the hierarchy of users in the planning and design processes for new developments 
and proposed traffic management schemes. It places pedestrians at the top, followed by cyclists then public transport, 
with unaccompanied private car-users last.
Moorings (Canal) A space within a canal where a canal vessel may be secured.
National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) Published on 27 March 2012, the NPPF sets out the government’s planning policy framework for England and how these 
are expected to be applied. It sets out the government’s requirements for the planning system. It provides a framework 
within which local people and their accountable local planning authorities can produce their own distinctive Local and 
Neighbourhood Plans, which reflect the needs and priorities of their communities.
National Planning Practice Guidance (NPPG) The NPPG provides more detailed information on topics covered by the National Planning Policy Framework.
Native Species Any species that has made its way to the UK naturally, not intentionally or accidentally introduced by humans.
Neighbourhood Plans A plan prepared by a Parish Council or Neighbourhood Forum for a particular neighbourhood area.
Neighbourhood Town Centre Typically serves a localised catchment often most accessible by walking and cycling and includes local parades and 
small clusters of shops, mostly for convenience goods and other services. It may include a small supermarket (typically 
up to around 500 sqm), sub-post office, pharmacy, laundrette and other useful local services.
They are below District Centres in the Town Centre Hierarchy so they could contain up to 10,000 sqm.
Neighbourhoods Potential smaller areas within the twelve places (see Chapter 4). These have yet to be identified and will emerge over 
time.265
Term Definition
Night Time Economy Economic activity which occurs between the hours of 6pm to 6am and involves the sale of alcohol for consumption (eg, 
bars, pubs and restaurants).
Non-Designated Heritage Asset A building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree of significance meriting consideration 
in planning decisions because of its heritage interest, but not otherwise designated under legislation.
Non-preclusion This relates to the requirement for development currently being planned to not prohibit the delivery of long-term 
aspirations.
OPDC Area The area of land located within the administrative boundary of the OPDC.
OPDC Environmental Modelling Framework An Environmental Modelling Framework created by OPDC, identifying which methodologies are most effective in 
measuring appropriate levels of amenity in high density areas as per Policy D6 (Amenity) of the Local Plan.
OPDC Heritage Themes These comprise five key heritage themes which relate to the majority of the heritage assets within both Old Oak and 
Park Royal:
 »Grand Union Canal heritage
 »Rail heritage
 »Industrial heritage
 »Historic residential enclaves
 »Historic open spaces
OPDC Region The OPDC area, as well as a wider surrounding area that comprises 35 Middle Super Output Areas (MSOAs) or 25 
Wards (including the three in the OPDC area).
Open space All land that is predominantly undeveloped other than by buildings or structures that are ancillary to the open space use. 
The definition covers a broad range of types of open space, whether in public or private ownership and whether public 
access is unrestricted, limited or restricted.
Open workspace Workspace typologies designed and managed to support small, medium and micro enterprises. These typologies are 
usually flexible, with shared facilities and low-cost or managed workspaces and can include office space with flexible 
rental terms, co-working spaces, incubator spaces, accelerator spaces, creative/artist spaces and makerspaces. They 
tend to be flexible, and can be affordable and are ideally managed by an appropriate workspace provider .
Opportunity Area London’s principal opportunities for accommodating large scale development to provide substantial numbers of new 
employment and housing, each typically has capacity for more than 5,000 jobs and/or 2,500 homes, with a mixed and 
intensive use of land and assisted by good public transport accessibility.
Out of Centre A location which is not in or on the edge of a centre but not necessarily outside the urban area.
Passive Electric Charging Units These are parking spaces that are easily adaptable to accommodate electric vehicles. Passive provision requires 
the necessary underlying infrastructure (eg capacity in the connection to the local electricity distribution network and 
electricity distribution board, as well as cabling to parking spaces) to enable simple installation and activation of a charge 
point at a future date.
Payback Mechanism A mechanism whereby the developer will cover the cost of providing a facility, and is then reimbursed by OPDC over a 
period of time through planning contributions from other development schemes.
Permitted development Permitted development rights are a national grant of planning permission which allow certain building works and changes 
of use to be carried out without having to make a planning application. Permitted development rights are subject to 
conditions and limitations to control impact and to protect local amenity.266
Term Definition
Place The result of a complex interplay of different elements, e.g. the cultural and social factors which have combined to create 
identity, the physical or built elements that make up the place and the people associated with it through memories, 
association and activity. Also referred to as ‘sense of place’.
Place making Recognising the distinctiveness of individual locations in plans, policies and proposals, and responding accordingly.
PLACE Review Group The PLACE (acronym for Planning, Landscape, Architecture, Conservation and Engineering) is an independent review 
group tasked with improving the quality of development proposals and embedding place making into planning policy 
at the OPDC. The group operates according to the recommendations set out in the Government commissioned Farrell 
Review of architecture and the built environment.
Places Areas which currently and / or have the potential to exhibit local distinctiveness that creates a unique sense of place. For 
the OPDC area, these are suggested to be:
 »Old Oak South
 »Old Oak North
 »Grand Union Canal
 »Park Royal West
 »Old Oak Park Royal
 »Park Royal Centre
 »North Acton and Acton Wells
 »Old Oak Lane and Old Oak Common Lane
 »Channel Gate
 »Scrubs Lane
 »Willesden Junction
 »Wormwood Scrubs
Positive Frontage Building frontage which responds positively to the public realm in terms of orientation, design and uses. An example of 
positive frontage could include an industrial building which focuses ancillary office uses to the street frontage, providing  
regular windows and doors at a street scale.
Private Open Space Private outdoor space, accessible by an individual dwelling unit, in the form of gardens, balconies, roof terraces and / or 
glazed ventilated winter garden.
Public House Public houses:
 »Are licensed drinking establishments which exhibit qualities of a social space; and
 »may include expanded food provision; and
 »are open to and welcome the general public without requiring membership or residency and without charge for 
admission; and
 »allow drinking without requiring food to be consumed and have at least one indoor area not laid out for meals; and
 »allow drinks to be bought at a bar.
This definition includes all licensed drinking premises including wine bars.
Public realm This is the space between and within buildings that is publicly accessible, including streets, squares, forecourts, parks 
and open spaces.267
Term Definition
Public Transport Accessibility Level A detailed and accurate measure of the accessibility of a point to the public transport network, taking into account walk 
access time and service availability. PTALs reflect: walking time from the point-of interest to the public transport access 
points; the reliability of the service modes available; the number of services available within the catchment; and the level 
of service at the public transport access points - i.e. average waiting time. 
PTALs do not consider: the speed or utility of accessible services; crowding, including the ability to board services; or, 
ease of interchange.
Publically Accessible Open Space (or Public Open 
Space)Spaces such as public parks, commons, heaths and woodlands, civic spaces and other open spaces with established 
and unrestricted public access. Publically Accessible Open Space may be owned and/or managed by either a local 
authority or private agency.
Publicly Accessible Private Realm Land which is owned privately but is proposed to be made available to the public on the basis of Local Plan Policy D2.
Purpose Built Shared Housing Housing schemes developed for the specific purpose of co-living or other forms of shared accommodation, where 
occupants have private bedroom suites, but share communal facilities including kitchens and dining areas, entertainment 
spaces and social spaces, and leisure and servicing facilities.
Quiet Ways A well-signed network of radial and orbital routes outside central London, mainly on low-traffic back streets, for those 
wanting a more relaxed cycle journey.
Quantitative Tracking Survey A survey to be undertaken by OPDC to track the perceptions of the development of the OPDC area over the next 20/30 
years of both the resident and business community.
Rail Accessibility The level of access provided by rail services.
Referable Schemes An application is referable to the Mayor if it meets the criteria set out in the Mayor of London Order (2008). The criteria 
includes:
 »development of 150 residential units or more
 »development over 30 metres in height (outside the City of London)
 »development on Green Belt or Metropolitan Open Land
Reflected Glare Reflected glare occurs when bright beams of natural or artificial light reflects off of smooth surfaces into people’ s visual 
cone or onto other surfaces (e.g., work surfaces, streets). In buildings, this influences both visual comfort and thermal 
load.
Retail Impact Assessment An assessment which measures the potential impact of a proposed development on:
 »existing, committed and planned public and private investment in a centre or centres in the catchment area of the 
proposal; and
 »town centre vitality and viability, including local consumer choice and trade in the town centre and wider area, up to 
five years from the time the application is made.
Retail Price Index (RPI) Retail Price Index - measure of inflation published monthly by the Office for National Statistics.
Review mechanism Legal clauses which provide trigger points to review planning obligations and the ability to re-assess the level of relevant 
affordable housing contributions (i.e. if viability improves due to increases in land/sales values).
Roads Task Force The Roads Task Force (RTF) is an independent body set up by the Mayor of London in 2012 to tackle the challenges 
facing London’s streets and roads. They have developed a long term vision for how London can cope with major 
population growth and remain one of the most vibrant, accessible and attractive world cities.
Secondary Materials Manufactured material that has already been used at least once, and is to be used again after recycling268
Term Definition
Section 106 agreement Section 106 of the Town and Country Planning Act 1990 allows a consenting authority such as OPDC to enter into legal 
agreements with developers to fund or deliver certain works to make development proposals acceptable in planning 
terms. This might include the amount of affordable housing which would be included in the development or an item of 
infrastructure or financial contribution towards it, such as a new school, employment and training support or increased 
transport network capacity.
Section 278 agreement These are agreements made under the Highways Act 1980 for the developer to carry out scheme-specific highway 
works needed to satisfactorily tie in a scheme to the road network, or to mitigate adverse impacts which would otherwise 
arise in the immediate vicinity of the site. Examples of the works covered by S.278 agreements are vehicular crossovers 
and drop kerbs (standard for most developments), or more major highway works such as traffic lights or junction 
improvements, where a scheme is estimated to generated a large number of vehicular movements.
Shared Facilities Facilities provided as part of residential or employments schemes which support the sharing economy within that 
building.
Within residential developments, such facilities may include communal kitchen areas, leisure spaces, toilets and washing 
areas, or study areas;
 
In workspaces, shared facilities may include assembly areas, storage areas for tools, or machinery which is shared 
between users.
Sharing Economy The sharing economy involves the sharing of goods, technology or services by groups of people and organisations to 
make better use of goods, skills, services, capital and spaces, sharing access and so reducing the need for ownership.
Silver Fleet Operator Recognition Scheme (FORS) A voluntary accreditation scheme that promotes best practice for commercial vehicle operators. FORS encompasses 
all aspects of safety, efficiency, and environmental protection by encouraging and training fleet operators to measure, 
monitor and improve performance.
Site of Importance for Nature Conservation (SINC) SINCs are a non-statutory designation, designated by the local planning authority. 
In London, SINCs are designated as one of a hierarchy of types:
 »Sites of Metropolitan Importance are selected on a London-wide basis.
 »Sites of Borough Importance (grade 1 and 2) are selected from candidates within each borough, so ensuring that 
each borough has some sites identified.
 »Sites of Local Importance are the lowest tier of sites, selected to redress any remaining local deficiencies
Site Waste Management Plans (SWMP) A plan prepared in advance of the commencement of any construction project outlining each waste type expected to 
be produced, the quantity of each different waste type expected to be produced, and the waste management action 
proposed for each waste type.
Small and Medium Enterprise (SME) Businesses which may be considered either small or medium.
Small Business Units Units that are equals to, or less than, 500 sqm or existing open workspaces.269
Term Definition
Small Businesses Businesses employing less than 10 people.
Small businesses can occupy small units or studios (typically less than 500 sqm source: LLDC) but they can also 
operate from incubator and accelerator spaces, as well as larger co-working/co-making or studio spaces (collectively 
referred to as open workspaces – see separate definition later in this paper).
Small Residential Development A residential development of less than 10 units.
Smart (city) technology Considered to be a diverse range of contemporary and emerging technologies which can be utilised to improve the 
quality of life for local people, support economic growth and enhance the environment.
Social Infrastructure Includes some uses within:
 »Class E (Provision of medical or health services (except the use of premises attached to the residence of the 
consultant or practitioner); Creche, day nursery or day centre (not including a residential use)
 »Class F1 (Learning and non-residential institutions not including residential use, that covers: Provision of education, 
Display of works of art (otherwise than for sale or hire), Museums,  Public libraries or public reading rooms, Public 
halls or exhibition halls , Public worship or religious instruction (or in connection with such use), Law courts)
 »Class F2 (Halls or meeting places for the principal use of the local community) 
 »Other community facilities; cultural uses; children and young people’s play and informal recreation facilities. 
This list is not intended to be exhaustive and other facilities can be included as social infrastructure.
As they serve visiting members of the public, they are typically sited in locations that are well connected to public and 
active travel networks and can provide active frontages onto streets and spaces. 
Social Rent (Including London Affordable Rent) Low-cost rented homes intended for low-income households, typically nominated by London Boroughs, who are unable 
to secure or sustain housing on the open market.
Soundmarks Soundscape design encompassing the preservation of certain sounds.
Soundscapes The overall quality of an acoustic environment as a place for human experience.
Specialist Housing Housing intended for those with specialist needs, including:
 »housing for disabled or older people;
 »move-on accommodation; or
 »other forms of supported and specialised housing.
Starter Homes A government initiative that aims to help first time buyers under 40 to buy a home. The new homes will be sold at a 
discount of at least 20% of the local market value, and at less than the price cap of £450,000.
Strategic Industrial Location (SIL) These comprise Preferred Industrial Locations (PILs) and Industrial Business Parks (IBP) and exist to ensure that 
London provides sufficient quality sites, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of industrial and related sectors 
including general and light Industrial uses, logistics, waste management and environmental industries (such as 
renewable energy generation), utilities, wholesale markets and some transport functions.
Street Rhythm Typical urban patterns and characteristics which are evident in a street scene. This may include the massing and 
proportion of buildings and building elements, the quality and type of street frontages, and the quality and types of public 
spaces.270
Term Definition
Street Scene All spaces and features which form the street environment, including buildings, street furniture, fittings and finishes and 
green infrastructure and open spaces
Streetscape Streetscape is a term used to describe the natural and built fabric of the street, and defined as the design quality of the 
street and its visual effect, particularly how the paved area is laid out and treated. It includes buildings, the street surface, 
and also the fixtures and fittings that facilitate its use – from bus shelters and signage to planting schemes.
Supplementary Planning Document (SPD) Documents which add further detail to the policies in the Local Plan. They can be used to provide further guidance for 
development on specific sites, or on particular issues, such as design. Supplementary planning documents are capable 
of being a material consideration in planning decisions but are not part of the development plan.
Supplementary Planning Guidance (SPG) An SPG (sometimes called supplementary guidance) gives guidance on policies in the London Plan. It does not form a 
part of the statutory plan. It can take the form of design guides or area development briefs, or supplement other specific 
policies in the plan. However, it must be consistent with national and regional planning policy. It should be clearly cross-
referenced to the relevant plan policy or proposal that it supplements. Public consultation should be undertaken and 
SPGs should be regularly reviewed. While only the policies in the London Plan can have the status that the GLA Act 
1999 (as amended) provides in considering planning applications, SPGs may be taken into account as a further material 
consideration.
Sustainability (sustainable development) This covers development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to 
meet their own needs. 
The NPPF sets out three elements of sustainable development: economic, social and environmental.
Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) Sustainable drainage systems (SuDS) are a natural approach to managing drainage in and around properties and other 
developments. Sustainable drainage measures are ones which avoid adding to flood risks both at a development site 
and elsewhere in the catchment by replicating natural drainage processes.
SuDS work by slowing and holding back the water that runs off from a site, alleviating flooding and allowing natural 
processes to break down pollutants.
Systems of Systems A collection of task-oriented or dedicated systems that pool their resources and capabilities together to create a new, 
more complex system which offers more functionality and performance than simply the sum of the constituent systems.
Tall buildings Within the OPDC area, tall buildings are defined as being above 15 storeys or above a minimum of 48 metres above 
ground level.
Through Routes A route which is used as a thoroughfare to get to another location. The origin and destination are connected with the 
through route.
Town centre Provides access to goods and services for people, corresponding to their role and function in the town centre hierarchy 
set out in the Mayor’s London Plan. They are accessible by public transport, walking and cycling. The ground floor 
uses provide active frontages onto busy streets and spaces and there can be a range of unit sizes to cater to different 
business needs.271
Term Definition
Town centre hierarchy Town centres are identified according to their role and function as part of the following hierarchy:
 »International centres
 »Metropolitan centres
 »Major centres
 »District centres
 »Neighbourhood/local centres
The scale and catchment of the centres (amount of retail floorspace, distance people are prepared to travel to them) 
decreases as you move down the hierarchy.
Town centre uses  »uses within Class E (see separate definition)
 »other appropriate uses where they serve visiting members of the public such as other retail development (including 
warehouse clubs and factory outlet centres); leisure, entertainment and recreation uses (including cinemas, bars 
and pubs, nightclubs, casinos and bingo halls); and arts, culture and tourism development (including theatres, 
museums, galleries and concert halls, hotels and conference facilities).
They typically need to be sited in locations that are well connected to public transport and active travel networks and are 
able to provide active ground floor frontages onto streets and spaces. 
Transit Oriented Development The creation of compact, walkable, pedestrian-oriented, mixed use communities centred around high quality public 
transport infrastructure.
Transport Assessment This is prepared and submitted alongside planning applications for developments likely to have significant transport 
implications.
Travel Plans Plans promoting and providing guidance on sustainable transport options for a given location with the aim of promoting 
sustainable and environmentally friendly modes.
Typology A form or type of development, for example mews, terraces, stacked maisonettes and mansion blocks are examples of 
residential typologies.
Ultra Low Emmisions Zone (ULEZ) The Ultra-Low Emission Zone (ULEZ) is an area within which all cars, motorcycles, vans, minibuses, buses, coaches 
and heavy goods vehicles (HGVs) will need to meet exhaust emission standards (ULEZ standards) or pay a daily charge 
to travel.
Urban Greening Urban greening describes the green infrastructure elements that are most applicable in central London and London’s 
town centres. Due to the morphology and density of the built environment in these areas, green roofs, street trees, and 
techniques such as soft landscaping, are the most appropriate elements of green infrastructure.
Urban Greening Factor A planning policy tool that has been adopted by a number of city authorities to increase greening of the built 
environment, by establishing minimum requirements for new development projects. 
See also: Green Points System
Urban Heat Island The phenomenon of how dense urban areas tend to get warmer than less built-up areas, and to cool more slowly.
Use Class Uses of buildings/land are categorised for planning purposes, these categories are known as use classes. A range of 
uses may fall within each use class.272
Term Definition
Vacant Building Credit National policy provides an incentive for brownfield development on sites containing vacant buildings. Where a vacant 
building is brought back into any lawful use, or is demolished to be replaced by a new building, the developer should be 
offered a financial credit equivalent to the existing gross floorspace of relevant vacant buildings when the local planning 
authority calculates any affordable housing contribution which will be sought. Affordable housing contributions may be 
required for any increase in floorspace.
Walk to services Walk to services: Small units, up to and not exceeding 80sqm that provide active ground floor frontages and serve 
visiting members of the public.
Waste apportionment A target (tonnes per annum) set by the Mayor of London for the amount of waste which needs to be managed by 
individual London boroughs.
Wayfinding Better wayfinding means improving the ease with which people can navigate themselves to, from and within an 
interchange facility or zone.
WELL Building Standard The WELL Building Standard is an evidence-based system for measuring, certifying and monitoring the performance of 
building features that impact health and wellbeing. The standard is unique and was developed over a number of years 
by the International Well Building Institute, in collaboration with the Green Business Certification Inc (which administers 
LEED) and with support for the Clinton Foundation. The development of the standard has involved a detailed peer review 
process. The standard is the first certification process to look specifically at the impact of key building elements on health 
and well being.  It covers the impact of buildings and indoor environments across a range of issues like air, water, light 
quality, design and fitness, comfort and mental health.
Winter Gardens Private outdoor space designed to be used all year round.
Work-Live Units Accommodation that combines both living and working spaces, with the workspace forming a permanent component of 
the accommodation.  This is different from ordinary home working in its nature and in the intensity of business use that 
may be involved.
Youth Play Play space for children over 12 provides spaces for young people to congregate together, socialise and participate in 
informal recreation or physical activity. This can include adventure playgrounds, sport courts, skate and bike parks, 
fitness equipment, outdoor stages, youth shelters and supervised facilities such as youth clubs.
Zero Carbon Zero carbon is defined as at least a 35% reduction in carbon emissions beyond Building Regulations 2013 Part L  
requirements on-site.
Zero Emmisions Network (ZEN) The ZEN is a free to join network, currently in place in the City Fringe Area, that helps businesses and residents reduce 
the impact they have on air quality.273
@OldOakParkRoyalContact us:
facebook.com/OldOakParkRoyal
info@opdc.london.gov.uk
020 7983 5732
london.gov.uk/opdc
287LOCAL PLAN APPENDIX
Background and Context
June 2022
288Appendix - Background and Context
BACKGROUND TO OPDC
A1.1. The Mayor of London established Old Oak and 
Park Royal Development Corporation (OPDC) on 1 
April 2015 as a ‘Mayoral Development Corporation’ 
under powers of the Localism Act (2011). OPDC is the 
second of its kind in London, the first being the London 
Legacy Development Corporation (LLDC). 
A1.2. The OPDC has a number of key aims, including: 
a) transforming one of London’s most inaccessible 
areas into a well-connected, world-class transport 
interchange;
b) enabling delivery of new housing and commercial 
development, surrounded by sustainable and 
thriving neighbourhoods and valued open space; 
c) protecting, intensifying and strengthening Strategic 
Industrial Locations; and
d)  protecting and improving Wormwood Scrubs.
A1.3. OPDC is the local planning authority for the area 
and as such is responsible for plan-making including 
the production of a Local Plan. The OPDC Local 
Plan sets out OPDC’s strategy for the sustainable 
development of its area as a whole, including the 
general amount, type and location of new development 
it considers could take place and the policies to which 
applications for planning permission should conform. 
The OPDC Local Plan period is 2018 to 2038.
A1.4. Its planning powers, including preparing and 
implementing the Local Plan, represent one part of 
the OPDC’s role as a Development Corporation. 
Working with its partners, including the host Boroughs 
of Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith & Fulham and the 
local community, OPDC will help implement projects 
and bring about change that will help meet the 
Corporation’s key aims.STATUS OF THE LOCAL PLAN
Legal Status
A1.5. OPDC’s Local Plan is a Development Plan 
Document (DPD) and is part of the government’s 
planning policy system introduced by the Planning and 
Compulsory Purchase Act 2004.
Policy Status
A1.6. Alongside the National Planning Policy 
Framework (NPPF), London Plan, Old Oak and Park 
Royal Opportunity Area Planning Framework, West 
London Waste Plan DPD, any ‘made’ Neighbourhood 
Plans and any adopted Supplementary Planning 
Documents (SPDs), OPDC’s Local Plan is a key 
planning policy document against which planning 
applications within the OPDC area will be assessed 
(see figure A1.1). 
A1.7. The policies in this Local Plan are consistent 
with the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
and in general conformity with the London Plan. 
Further, the Old Oak and Park Royal Opportunity Area 
Planning Framework (OAPF) adopted by the Mayor in 
November 2015 as Supplementary Planning Guidance 
(SPG) to the London Plan has helped to inform the 
policy themes and policies in this Local Plan. 
A1.8. In order to keep the OPDC Local Plan spatial 
and succinct, the Plan does not seek to repeat 
policies already contained in the NPPF and London 
Plan save for where such policies are particular to 
the area or type of development proposed or it is 
of particular importance to reflect them. This Local 
Plan should therefore be read in conjunction with 
the NPPF, the associated National Planning Practice 
Guidance (NPPG) and the London Plan. The policies 
contained within this plan are considered to comply 
with the NPPF and take a positive approach reflecting 
the overall presumption in favour of sustainable 
development.Relationship with the Old Oak and Park Royal 
Opportunity Area Planning Framework
A1.9. The Old Oak and Park Royal Opportunity Area 
Planning Framework (OAPF) was adopted by the 
Mayor in November 2015 as Supplementary Planning 
Guidance (SPG) to the Mayor’s London Plan. As SPG 
to the London Plan, the document is a significant 
material consideration in the determination of planning 
applications in the OPDC area. This existing OAPF has 
helped to inform the policy themes and policies in this 
Local Plan. 
Relationship with the High Speed Rail (London- 
West Midlands) Act (2017)West Midlands) Act (2017)
A1.10. A1.10. High Speed 2 (HS2) is the Government’s High Speed 2 (HS2) is the Government’s 
proposal for a new, high speed north-south railway. proposal for a new, high speed north-south railway. 
Phase One of the scheme will connect London to the Phase One of the scheme will connect London to the 
West Midlands and will run through the OPDC area. West Midlands and will run through the OPDC area. 
Part of the project involves delivery of the new station Part of the project involves delivery of the new station 
at Old Oak Common where there will be a connection at Old Oak Common where there will be a connection 
to the Elizabeth Line and the national rail services.  to the Elizabeth Line and the national rail services.  
A1.11. A1.11.  The High Speed Rail (London- West Midlands)  The High Speed Rail (London- West Midlands) 
Act (2017) grants deemed planning permission for Act (2017) grants deemed planning permission for 
phase 1 of the HS2 project. Matters such as the phase 1 of the HS2 project. Matters such as the 
principle for the railway works, their limits, and matters principle for the railway works, their limits, and matters 
of principle relating to mitigation are determined of principle relating to mitigation are determined 
through the Parliamentary Act, rather than the normal through the Parliamentary Act, rather than the normal 
Town and Country Planning Act process. The level of Town and Country Planning Act process. The level of 
detailed design necessary to enable the development detailed design necessary to enable the development 
to be constructed has yet to be carried out, so the to be constructed has yet to be carried out, so the 
deemed planning permission is subject to a series deemed planning permission is subject to a series 
of items that require the approval of local planning of items that require the approval of local planning 
authorities on the route, known as Schedule 17 authorities on the route, known as Schedule 17 
approvals. OPDC as the planning authority for the Old approvals. OPDC as the planning authority for the Old 
Oak and Park Royal area will be responsible for such Oak and Park Royal area will be responsible for such 
approvals. The considerations of any approvals for approvals. The considerations of any approvals for 
works to be carried out in relation to Phase One of HS2 works to be carried out in relation to Phase One of HS2 
are limited to those set out in Schedule 17. are limited to those set out in Schedule 17. 289SPDs Local PlanNeighbour-
hood PlansWest 
London 
Waste PlanLondon Plan & Old Oak 
and Park Royal OAPFNPPF and 
NPPGDuty to CooperateDuty to Cooperate
A1.12. The Duty to Cooperate is a legal requirement 
set out in the Localism Act. It requires local planning 
authorities and public bodies to engage constructively, 
actively and on an ongoing basis to maximise the 
effectiveness of Local Plan preparation in the context 
of strategic cross boundary matters. The duty to 
cooperate is not a duty to agree, but local planning 
authorities should make every effort to secure the 
necessary cooperation on strategic cross boundary 
matters before they submit their Local Plans for 
examination.
A1.13. The bodies covered by the Duty to Cooperate 
are prescribed in National Planning Practice Guidance 
and in the Town and Country Planning (Local 
Planning) (England) Regulations 2012 (as amended). In accordance with the Duty to Cooperate, OPDC 
has been working closely with such authorities and 
bodies in the production of this Local Plan and in the 
preparation of other planning policy and development 
management and infrastructure delivery matters. 
Details on OPDC’s engagement with such bodies are 
set out in OPDC’s Duty to Cooperate Statement, which 
can be found as a supporting study to the Local Plan 
on OPDC’s website.
Figure A1.1: Policy Status and Relationship2901. INTRODUCTION
2. SPATIAL VISION
3. STRATEGIC POLICIES
12. GLOSSARY11. DELIVERY AND IMPLEMENTATIONDEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT POLICIES4. PLACES
5. Design6. Environment and 
Utilities7. Transport 8. Housing 9. Employment10. Town Centre and 
Community UsesOld Oak South Old Oak North Grand Union Canal Park Royal West Old Park Royal Park Royal Centre
North Acton and 
Acton WellsOld Oak Lane and 
Old Oak Common 
LaneChannel Gate Scrubs Lane Willesden Junction Wormwood ScrubsPolicies will drive and guide future development and 
Supplementary Planning Documents.
Strategic Policies, Places and Delivery and 
Implementation Policies
A1.18. The strategic policies, place policies and 
delivery and implementation policies (chapters 3, 4 and 
11) form OPDC’s strategic policies for the area and 
establish the framework for fulfilling the spatial vision 
for the future of the OPDC area. The strategic policies 
dovetail with the OPDC’s corporate priorities and 
outline how the OPDC area will be transformed over 
the plan period. 
A1.19. Chapters 3, 4 and 11 will be treated as OPDC’s 
strategic policies when considering the general 
conformity of neighbourhood planning policies.
Development Management Policies
A1.20. The strategic aims of the Local Plan will be 
promoted through the development management 
policies, which plan positively to ensure development 
within OPDC accords with the Spatial Vision and 
strategic objectives. The more detailed development 
management policies, which are contained in chapters 
5-10, are effectively subsets of the strategic policies 
and should not be read in isolation of the strategic 
policies. 
A1.21. The development management policies set out 
detailed planning policies against which the OPDC 
will assess planning applications within its area. 
When considering development proposals, the OPDC 
will take a positive approach that reflects the overall 
presumption in favour of sustainable development 
contained in the NPPF and will work with applicants to 
secure development that improves the environmental 
social and economic well-being of its area. Planning 
applications that accord with the policies in the Local 
Plan will be approved unless material considerations 
indicate otherwise.HOW TO USE THE DOCUMENT
A1.14. Figure A1.2 identifies how the Local Plan is 
structured and the broad interrelationships between the 
different elements of the Local Plan.
Spatial Vision
A1.15. The Spatial Vision is OPDC’s vision for what the 
different places of Old Oak, Park Royal and Wormwood 
Scrubs will be like in twenty years at the end of the 
‘plan period’. It both leads and is informed by the policy 
content of the Local Plan to set out how the OPDC 
area is intended to benefit local people, the local 
economy and the built and natural environment. It also 
complements the wider OPDC Vision and Mission.
A1.16. The Spatial Vision is comprised of the 
Figure A1.2: Local Plan Structureoverarching Vision Statement and the Vision 
Narratives. The Vision Statement provides an 
overarching view of the future considering strategic 
elements. The Vision narratives seek to provide further 
detail by expanding the Vision Statement to define 
outcomes of development and regeneration at both the 
national and regional scale by ‘thinking big’, and to set 
out how local people will benefit from change and how 
neighbourhoods will improve by ‘going local’.
A1.17. These three elements provide the structure and 
the key themes for the policies of the Local Plan. The 
objectives for how the Spatial Vision will be delivered 
are embedded in the Strategic Policies and Place 
Policies that, alongside the Development Management 291Policy Title
Policy Text
Evidence 
Base Links
Supporting TextPolicy Linksbe updated. Updates to supporting studies will be 
provided on OPDC’s website.
A1.27. The Local Plan is supported by an Integrated 
Impact Assessment (IIA). The IIA fulfils the statutory 
requirements for a Sustainability Appraisal (SA) and 
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) (in a 
manner that incorporates the requirements of the 
European Union’s SEA Directive (2001/42/EU) and 
the transposing UK Regulations, the Environmental 
Assessment of Plans and Programmes Regulations 
2004). The approach also fulfils the requirements 
for Health Impact Assessment, Equalities Impact 
Assessment and Community Safety Impact 
Assessment. As per the other supporting evidence 
documents, the IIA can be viewed in line with the 
Statement of Community Involvement, which includes 
temporary arrangements to ensure effective and safe 
community engagement in the planning process while 
restrictions on social interaction remain in place and 
steps to support those without internet access. 
A1.28. Under Article 6 of the Habitats Directive, an 
assessment is required where a plan or project may 
give rise to significant effects upon any Natura 2000 
sites (also known as ‘European sites’). There are 
no European sites within the OPDC area; however, 
there are seven sites which form part of the Natura 
2000 network that could potentially be affected by the 
proposals of the Local Plan. A Habitats Regulation 
Assessment (HRA) screening has been undertaken to 
support the Local Plan to meet these requirements.  As 
per the other supporting evidence documents, the IIA 
can be viewed in line with the Statement of Community 
Involvement, which includes temporary arrangements 
to ensure effective and safe community engagement 
in the planning process while restrictions on social 
interaction remain in place and steps to support those 
without internet access.
Glossary
A1.29. The Local Plan is accompanied by a glossary to 
the rear of the Local Plan, which provides a definition 
for terms used throughout the Local Plan.Policy Structure
A1.22. Figure A1.3 outlines the Local Plan’s policy 
structure. The policy itself is contained in a coloured 
box. This is followed by two boxes that highlight the 
policies’ interdependencies with other Local Plan 
policies, as well as key supporting studies, which 
should be read alongside the policy. This is followed 
by supporting text, which provides further elaboration 
to the policies and justification for the approach being 
taken in the policy. The supporting text follows the 
ordering of the criteria in the policy. 
Figures and Photos
A1.23. Figures in the Local Plan should be treated as 
indicative. The exact boundaries for spatially specific 
policies are set out in OPDC’s Policies map. 
A1.24. Photos in the document have been referenced 
to identify their location and are generally either of 
locations within the OPDC area or are of precedents 
from elsewhere in London, the UK or internationally.
 Route, Infrastructure and Place Names
A1.25. To aid with the readability of the Local Plan, 
routes, pieces of infrastructure such as open spaces 
and bridges and places, that do not yet exist, have 
been given names (e.g Old Oak Street). These names 
should be treated as indicative and OPDC will be 
developing a separate Naming Strategy for new routes, 
spaces and places which will be used to inform their 
official naming
Supporting Studies
A1.26. The Local Plan is supported by a number of 
supporting evidence documents (see figure A1.4). 
These supporting studies have been referenced below 
the relevant Local Plan policies and where relevant in 
the supporting text to policies or in footnotes. All the 
supporting studies are available to view in line with the 
Statement of Community Involvement, which includes 
temporary arrangements to ensure effective and safe 
community engagement in the planning process while 
restrictions on social interaction remain in place and 
steps to support those without internet access. Where 
appropriate and relevant, supporting studies may Figure A1.3: Policy Structure292Local PlanIntegrated Impact 
Assessment and Habitats 
Regulation AssessmentWIDER CONTEXT
Strategic Context
A1.30. The OPDC area and particularly Old Oak is 
set to be transformed with the opening of Old Oak 
Common Station, which will connect Elizabeth Line 
and National Rail services to the newly built High 
Speed 2 (HS2) line. The station will be nearly the size 
of Waterloo, accommodating approximately 250,000 
passengers a day and putting Old Oak within 10 
minutes journey time of London Heathrow, the City and 
the West End and 38 minutes of Birmingham.
A1.31. Catalysed by this new station, the OPDC area 
can play a significant role in supporting good growth 
in London through the delivery of a new commercial 
centre, a new major town centre, new high density 
residential neighbourhoods, protecting and enhancing 
the Park Royal industrial location and providing a 
full range of supporting ancillary uses.The scale of 
development envisaged currently represents one of 
the UK’s largest regeneration projects, identified in the 
London Plan as being capable of delivering a minimum 
25,500 homes and 65,000 jobs and with the potential 
for development to generate an additional £7.6 billion 
per annum of gross value added to the UK economy. 
A1.32. Figure A1.5 shows the OPDC area in West 
London. Regeneration in Old Oak and Park Royal 
will play a key role in driving growth in West London, 
contributing over 12% of new homes and over 20% of 
new jobs for this area. 
A1.33. The new station at Old Oak Common, along 
with other transport infrastructure improvements 
including a potential new London Overground station 
will place the Old Oak and Park Royal as key transport 
hubs that will offer exceptional connectivity to many of 
west London’s key locations for growth. Consequently, 
the regeneration of Old Oak and Park Royal has 
the potential to bring significant benefits to the west 
London sub-region and act as a beating heart and 
driving force for its economy. Figure A1.4: Supporting Studies
A40 Study Absorption Rate Study Affordable Housing 
Viability Assessment Air Quality Study
Bus Strategy Update Car Parking Study Catalyst Uses StudyChannel Gate 
Development Framework 
Principles
Character Areas StudyCircular and Sharing 
Economy StudyConstruction and 
Logistics StrategyCultural Principles
Decontamination StudyDevelopment Capacity 
Study UpdateDevelopment 
Infrastructure Funding 
StudyDuty to Cooperate 
Background Paper
Energy, Daylight and 
Overheating in Tall 
Buildings StudyEnvironmental Modelling 
Framework StudyEnvironmental Standards 
StudyFuture Employment 
Growth Sectors Study
Grand Union Canal 
Massing and Enclosure 
Statement UpdateGypsy and Traveller 
Assessment and 
AddendumHealthy Town Centres 
StudyHeritage Strategy
Housing Evidence 
StatementIndustrial Estates StudyIndustrial Land Review 
and AddendumsInfrastructure Delivery 
Plan (IDP)
Integrated Water 
Management StrategyNorth Acton District 
Energy StudyNorth Acton Station 
Feasibility StudyOld Oak Intensification 
Study
Old Oak Outline Historic 
Area AssessmentOld Oak Strategic 
Transport StudyPark Royal AtlasPark Royal Intensification 
Study
Park Royal Development 
Framework PrinciplesPark Royal Transport 
StrategyPolicy Formulation 
ReportsPost Occupancy 
Evaluation Study
Precedents StudyPreliminary Infrastructure 
Design and Costing StudyPublic Realm, Walking and 
Cycling StrategyQuantitative Tracking 
Survey
Retail and Leisure Needs 
Study and AddendumsScrubs Lane Development 
Framework Principles 
UpdateSites of Importance for 
Nature Conservation 
StatementSmart Strategy
Social Infrastructure 
Needs Study UpdateSocio-Economic Baseline 
StudySports Courts and 
Swimming Pools StudyStrategic Housing Market 
Assessment
Strategic Site Allocations 
Viability AssessmentStatement of Community 
InvolvementSummary of Supporting 
StudiesTall Buildings Statement 
Update
The Land at Abbey Road 
StudyVictoria Road and Old 
Oak Lane Development 
Framework PrinciplesViews StudyWaste Apportionment 
Study
Waste in Tall Buildings 
StudyWaste Management 
StrategyWhole Plan Viability StudyWillesden Junction Station 
Feasibility Study
Wormwood Scrubs Survey Utilities Study293
HS1
VAUXHALL
NINE ELMS
BATTERSEA
18,500 HOMES
18,500 JOBSKENNINGTON
CLAPHAM
JUNCTIONNORTHERN
LINE
EXTENSION
BALHAM
STREATHAM
WIMBLEDONCROSSRAIL 2THAMESLINK
A3220A501A41A404A4005
A312
A312HIGH SPEED 2NORTH CIRCULAR
ELIZABETH LINE
LONDON  OVERGROUNDLONDON OVERGROUNDWEST COAST MAIN LINE
SKY LINE
MOTSPUR
PARKFULWELL
SUNBURY /hyphen.cap ON /hyphen.cap THAMESTWICKENHAMRICHMONDGREENFORD
NEW MALDEN
SHEPPERTONVICTORIA
1,000 HOMES
4,000 JOBS
EARLS COURT & 
WEST KENSINGTON
6,500 HOMES
5,000 JOBSWATERLOO
1,500 HOMES
6,000 JOBS
SOUTH WIMBLEDON
COLLIERS WOOD
5,000 HOMES
6,000 JOBSKINGS CROSS
1,000 HOMES
25,000 JOBSEUSTON
2,800/hyphen.cap3,800 HOMES
8,000/hyphen.cap15,000 JOBS
PADDINGTON
1,000 HOMES
13,000 JOBS
WHITE CITY
7,000 HOMES
2,000 JOBSKENSAL
CANALSIDE
3,500 HOMES
2,000 JOBSWEMBLEY
14,000 HOMES
13,500 JOBS
OLD OAK & 
PARK ROYAL
25,500 HOMES
55,000 JOBS
SOUTHALL
9,000 HOMES
3,000 JOBSHAYES
4,000 HOMES
1,000 JOBS
SLOUGH
GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY
HEATHROW
13,000 HOMES
11,000 JOBSHARROW &
WEALDSTONE
5,000 HOMES
1,000 JOBSTOWARDS
WATFORD,
NORTHAMPTON
TOWARDS
READING, SWINDON
AND BRISTOLTOWARDS
OXFORD, BANBURY
AND BIRMINGHAMTOWARDS
LUTON &
MILTON KEYNES
TOWARDS
EPSOMCRICKLEWOOD
BRENT CROSS
9,500 HOMES
26,000 JOBSCOLINDALE
BURNT OAK
7,000 HOMES
2,000 JOBS
TOTTENHAM
COURT ROAD
300 HOMES
6,000 JOBS
M4M1
A40
A40M40
M4
M3M25
SOUTH CIRCULAR
A3A4
A316A4
THAMESLINKC E N T R A L     L O N D O N
WEST DRAYTON
GREAT WEST CORRIDOR
7,500 HOMES
14,000 JOBS
KINGSTON
9,000 HOMES
5,000 JOBSFigure A1.5: Strategic Context294Local Context
A1.34. OPDC’s more immediate context contains some 
of the most deprived areas in the country. Locations 
such as Harlesden and Stonebridge are ranked within 
the top 10% most deprived wards nationally and 
have issues with income deprivation and health. It is 
important that development at Old Oak and Park Royal 
brings tangible benefits for local communities and 
offers life improving opportunities.
A1.35. Within the more immediate area there are some 
significant development opportunities. The OPDC 
area is in close proximity to other Opportunity Areas 
including White City, Wembley and Kensal Canalside 
and other large development areas such as Acton, 
Ealing and Alperton.  
A1.36. Rail and road infrastructure within and 
bordering the OPDC area currently separate many 
of the communities bordering the OPDC area. New 
development has the opportunity to overcome this 
severance and knit together this part of west London. 
The scale of transformation planned in the OPDC area 
can further spur their regeneration and help to unlock 
additional development and growth.
A1.37. OPDC will work with local authorities, 
landowners and communities across the area to 
achieve the successful integration of the OPDC area 
into the wider hinterland. Below is a list of the those 
largescale areas for regeneration in the wider region 
where joint working will be required to ensure that the 
benefits of the regeneration can be fully captured. 
• White City Opportunity Area is currently being 
transformed with the expansion of Westfield, 
development of Imperial College’s White City 
Campus and redevelopment of the BBC Television 
Centre. The White City OAPF was published 
in 2013 and development in this area is well 
underway. Coordinated public realm improvements 
could deliver better connectivity between the OPDC 
area and White City. Economic synergies will also be explored such as the potential for Imperial 
College to continue to grow its west London 
campus into the OPDC area;
• Harlesden Town Centre is a designated District 
Town Centre, providing much needed town 
centre facilities for people living in the area. The 
centre and its surroundings currently suffer from 
economic deprivation, falling within the top 10% 
most deprived wards nationally when measured 
against the Index of Multiple Deprivation (2019). 
Improved connections between it and the OPDC 
area provide significant opportunities for residents 
and businesses in Harlesden to benefit from 
regeneration. OPDC and Brent Council have 
established a Harlesden sub-group to coordinate 
projects and strategies for the area;
• Kensal Canalside Opportunity Area is 
immediately to the east of the OPDC area and is 
identified in the London Plan as having the capacity 
to deliver 2,000 new jobs and a minimum of 3,500 
new homes. The Royal Borough of Kensington and 
Chelsea are lobbying the Mayor of London and TfL 
for a new Elizabeth Line station at Kensal, which 
could further increase the area’s development 
capacity. There will be opportunities to improve 
connections between Kensal Canalside and the 
OPDC area and OPDC will work with the Royal 
Borough of Kensington and Chelsea to explore 
ways that this can be achieved;
• Alperton located to the west of the OPDC area in 
Brent has been identified as a ‘Housing Zone’ by 
the Mayor of London with additional funding for 
the delivery of affordable housing. The Alperton 
housing zone is identified as having the capacity to 
deliver over 3,000 homes; 
• Wembley Opportunity Area is less than 2 
miles from the OPDC area and is west London’s 
second largest Opportunity Area after Old Oak. 
Wembley has the potential to deliver 11,500 homes 
and 11,000 jobs. In the future, Wembley could 
potentially be better connected to Old Oak through 
the provision of a spur to the West Coast Main 
Line, but there are also other opportunities for more short-term solutions to better connect Wembley to 
the OPDC area; and
• Centres in the wider area such as Ealing, 
Southall, Acton, Wembley, Hammersmith and 
Kensington, will be influenced by the scale of 
development proposed at Old Oak and Park Royal. 
There is a need for close collaboration with the 
surrounding and host local authorities to consider 
what these influences might be and ensure that 
measures are taken to capture opportunities and 
mitigate any potential impacts.295
Park Royal
White City OA
Kensal OA
Wembley OA
Shepherd’s Bush
Harlesden Town Centre
Acton Town Centre
Ealing Town Centre
Old Oak 
To Harrow 
To the WestTo Central London
To White Cityand Wealdstone 
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDUNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDWillesden Junction
Kensal Green
White CityEast Acton North ActonHarlesden
UNDERGROUNDStonebridge Park
UNDERGROUNDHanger Lane
UNDERGROUNDPark Royal
Acton Main Line
UNDERGROUNDNorth EalingUNDERGROUNDWest Acton
Ealing BroadwayWormwood Scrubs
North Kensington
East Acton 
White City EstateKensal Rise
Maida Vale
North London Line
West Coast Main Line
Great Western LineGrand Union Canal
West London LineCentral LineA40Central Line
Central LinePiccadilly LineWest Coast Main Line
A40
Great Western Line
North London LineSt Mary’s 
CemeteryKensal Green 
Cemetery
HMP
Wormwood Scrubs  Hammersmith 
Hospital  Linford Christie 
StadiumWest Acton Alperton Housing ZoneStonebridge
0 0.25 0.5 0.125 Kilometers ±Figure A1.6: Surrounding Context
29621st Century
Old Oak identified as the 
location of the UK’s largest 
new train station in over a 
century as a hub for HS2, 
the Elizabeth Line and 
Network Rail;
Establishment of OPDC to 
deliver one of the largest 
regeneration schemes in 
the UK.Early 20th Century
Development of Park Royal 
as major industrial location 
within London, which played 
a major role in supporting 
military industry during both 
World Wars;
Development of factories for 
major employers including 
Guinness, Heinz, McVities 
and Rolls Royce.1830’s to 1860’s: 
Development of Railways 
and opening of Willesden 
Junction Station;
Access to area significantly 
improved, but railways 
resulting in formidable 
barriers between areas.1801: 
Opening of Grand 
Union Canal, 
significantly improving 
access to London and 
wider region. 1860s - 1900: 
Major growth of surrounding areas 
and outward spread of London, 
with encroachment upon the 
Scrubs and Old Oak Common;
Initial growth of new industry, 
sporadically located, primarily 
along the Canal and Scrubs Lane.Post War – late 20th Century: 
Further growth of Park Royal 
resulting in it becoming one of the 
largest industrial estates in Europe; 
Gradual transformation of 
industries from manufacturing to 
storage and retail distribution, and 
replacement/adaptation of many 
older industrial buildings.
Pre 1800: 
Patchwork of 
agricultural land, 
common land, with 
small hamlets at 
fringes.A1.41. In Old Oak, which is 190 ha is size and includes 
North Acton, the area is dominated by rail lines and 
the Grand Union Canal, with large industrial sites 
to the north and land for transport functions to the 
south of the canal. Wormwood Scrubs, at 68 ha, 
lies further to the south and is a valued ecological 
and amenity asset, protected by the Common Act 
its own Wormwood Scrubs Act and categorised as 
Metropolitan Open Space. The Park Royal area, at 
381 ha, is overwhelmingly industrial in nature and 
operates as one of the largest industrial estates in 
London, although there are also pockets of new and 
old residential areas and open spaces across the area. 
A1.42. The OPDC area is currently poorly served by 
community services. The only established town centre 
is in the centre of Park Royal, which includes a large 
ASDA superstore, Central Middlesex Hospital and 
some smaller retail facilities.
A1.43. The area surrounding Old Oak and Park Royal 
is made up of established residential neighbourhoods 
and town centres, including Harlesden, North 
Kensington, Acton, Stonebridge and Alperton. 
Hammersmith Hospital and Wormwood Scrubs Prison 
are located south of the Wormwood Scrubs, with White 
City to the south of the A40. The two established town 
centres at Harlesden and East Acton act as important 
hubs for their respective communities, providing a wide 
range of community services. There are a number of 
community facilities in close proximity to the OPDC 
boundary and these help to serve the needs of the 
existing workers and residents in the OPDC area. OPDC AREA CONTEXT
Key Neighbourhood Features and Facilities
A1.38. The OPDC area covers approximately 650 
hectares in inner north-west London within Zones 
2 and 3. Today, the area is predominantly industrial 
in nature, with large amounts of land used for 
transport functions as well as some small residential 
communities and important amenity and heritage 
assets. 
A1.39. Figure A1.7 provides an historic timeline for the 
area, more details of which can be found in OPDC’s 
Heritage Strategy. The area’s industry was borne 
largely as a result of being on the periphery of early 
Figure A1.7: Historic Timeline of Old Oak and Park Royal20th century London and the location of rail and canal 
infrastructure, helping to support the area’s growth. 
Today the OPDC area houses 1,700 businesses, 
employing 43,100 workers.
A1.40. Figure A1.8 provides a context map for the area. 
Today the area is heavily defined by the network of 
railways and busy arterial roads which run through and 
adjacent to the area. As well as defining boundaries, 
these features also act as social and physical barriers 
resulting in poor connectivity and between Old Oak, 
Park Royal and surrounding areas. 297
A40A40
St Mary’s Cemetery Kensal Green Cemetery
North Acton 
CemeteryLittle 
Wormwood 
ScrubsWesley
Playing 
Fields
Birchwood
Nature Reserve
Wormwood ScrubsASDA
East ActonCentral Middlesex 
Hospital
#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*#*#*#*
#*
#*#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#
#*
#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*
#*
#*#*#*#*
#*
#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*
#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
#*
#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*#*#*
#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
#*
#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*#*#*#*#*#*
!(!(
!(!(
!(
!(!(!(!(
!(!(!(
!(
!(!(!(
!(!(!(!(
!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!(!(!(
!(
!(!(!(
!(
!(!(
!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!(!(!(
!(!(
!(!(!(
!(
!(!(!(!(
!(!(!(!(
!(!(
!(
!!(!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!( !(
!(
!(!( !(!(
!(!(
!(!(!(
!(!(
!(!(
!(!(!(
!(EE
EE
EEEEEE
EE
EEE
EEE
E
E
EEE
EE
EE
EEE
EE
EEEEEE
E
EE
E
EEEE
E
®v
®v#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#* #*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*
#*
#*#*
#*#* #*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*
#*#*
#*#*
#*#*#*
#*#*
Hammersmith 
Hospital North Kensington
East Acton 
White City EstateKensal Rise
A406
West Acton 
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDUNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUND
UNDERGROUNDKensal Green
White CityEast Acton Harlesden
UNDERGROUNDStonebridge Park
UNDERGROUNDHanger Lane
UNDERGROUNDPark Royal
Acton Main Line
UNDERGROUNDNorth Ealing
UNDERGROUNDWest Acton
Ealing BroadwayOld Oak Common Harlesden Town Centre
HMP 
Wormwood Scrubs Linford Christie 
StadiumWillesden Junction
Hythe Road
Old Oak Common Lane 
North Acton Grand Union Canal
Grand Union CanalA406Stonebridge
Alperton
0 0.25 0.5 0.125 Kilometers ±
Figure A1.8: Local Context
#
Legend
    OPDC area
    Housing area
    Housing area in OPDC
    Town Centres
    Open Space
    Grand Union Canal
Social Infrastructure
    Hospital
    GP Practices
    Community Centre
    Sport and Leisure Facilities
    Libraries
    Places of worship    
    Post Offices
    Pubs
Schools
    Nursery
    Primary
    Secondary
    All Through
    Otherv
E
!!
!!
!
#
Legend
    OPDC area
    Housing area
    Housing area in OPDC
    Town Centres
    Open Space
    Grand Union Canal
Social Infrastructure
    Hospital
    GP Practices
    Community Centre
    Sport and Leisure Facilities
    Libraries
    Places of worship    
    Post Offices
    Pubs
Schools
    Nursery
    Primary
    Secondary
    All Through
    Otherv
E
!!
!!
!
#
Legend
    OPDC area
    Housing area
    Housing area in OPDC
    Town Centres
    Open Space
    Grand Union Canal
Social Infrastructure
    Hospital
    GP Practices
    Community Centre
    Sport and Leisure Facilities
    Libraries
    Places of worship    
    Post Offices
    Pubs
Schools
    Nursery
    Primary
    Secondary
    All Through
    Otherv
E
!!
!!
!
Current Town Centres298Figure A1.9: Economic, Social and Environmental Features
Economic Social Environmental
• The OPDC area, primarily the Strategic Industrial 
Location (SIL) at Park Royal, is the location of over 
43,000 workers across over 1,700 enterprises, and is 
estimated to deliver over £2.1 billion of economic activity 
per annum to the UK economy1.
• The OPDC area accounts for 30 per cent of employment 
in the local region and 1 per cent of all employment within 
London2.
• Wholesale Trade, primarily food, is the largest industry 
in the OPDC area, accounting for 14.5% of private 
enterprise. The other main sectors include:
 »Professional and Technical Services (11.4%);
 »Retail (9.6%);
 »Information and Communications (8.9%);
 »Business Administration (8.7%);
 »Manufacturing (8.2%);
 »Construction (8.0%); and
 »Motor Trades (5.6%).
• Over 80% of all enterprises in the OPDC area are micro 
enterprises, employing less than 10 people. This is 
lower than the London average of 90%, however this is 
offset by higher than average levels of small (16%) and 
medium (2.5%) size enterprises. The proportion of large 
enterprises at 0.5% is similar to the London average of 
0.4%.
• Food production and food wholesale are a major element 
of Park Royal’s economic activity, with over 30% of 
London’s food produced in the area.• The local area contains a number of areas within 
the 10% most deprived nationally, primarily to 
the north and south-west. Deprivation is more 
pronounced in access to housing and services, 
levels of income and employment, and crime 
levels2.
• Residents in the local area are less likely to own 
their own home and more likely to socially rent. 
46.7% of households in the OPDC area are socially 
rented, compared to 23.6% of households in the 
three adjoining boroughs. The area also has higher 
than average levels of household overcrowding.
• The median household income across the three 
host Boroughs of Brent, Ealing and Hammersmith 
and Fulham is £35,6713. 
• Residents in the OPDC Area are more likely to 
be long term unemployed, with 2.8% of residents 
long term unemployment compared to the London 
average of 2%.
• Residents in the local area are less likely to have a 
degree level qualification compared to the average 
across London.
• The health of the community in the OPDC region 
is below London average levels, with high rates 
of disability, long-term health problems and 
childhood obesity, alongside lower than average life 
expectancy.• Wormwood Scrubs, covering almost 68 ha is 
located at the south of the OPDC area. It is a major 
recreational and environmental asset for west 
London and is protected as Metropolitan Open 
Land (MOL) and by its own act of parliament, the 
Wormwood Scrubs Act (1879).
• The Grand Union Canal runs through both Old Oak 
and Park Royal and is an environmental site of 
metropolitan importance, conservation area and a 
significant amenity asset.
• North Acton Cemetery is located within the OPDC 
area, while St Marys Cemetery, Kensal Green 
Cemetery and Little Wormwood Scrubs are located 
outside the area to the east. There are also some 
small public and private open spaces within the 
OPDC area.
• Within the OPDC area, there are 19 Sites of 
Importance for Nature Conservation4 (See Figure 
6.3), with one of these (Grand Union Canal) of 
Metropolitan Importance. The multiple railway 
sidings running throughout the area also act as 
important wildlife corridors.
• Parts of Old Oak and Park Royal suffer from high 
levels of air and noise pollution, arising from heavy 
industrial uses and the primary transport corridors 
running through and adjacent the area5.
REFERENCES
1. Future Employment Growth Sectors Study
2. Socio Economic Baseline Study3. Housing Evidence Statement
4. SINC Statement
5. Air Quality Study299
300
@OldOakParkRoyalContact us:
facebook.com/OldOakParkRoyal
info@opdc.london.gov.uk
020 7983 5732
london.gov.uk/opdc