Borough of
Redditch
Local Plan No.4
www.redditchbc.gov.uk/localplan
ADOPTED
JANUARY 2017Contents
1
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Contents
Introduction
3
Local Challenges
4
Duty to Cooperate
5
What has influenced this Local Plan?
6
More information
6
Local Portrait
7
Vision
13
Objectives
15
Policy 1 Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development
16
Key Diagram
17
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
18
Policy 2 Settlement Hierarchy
19
Policy 3 Development Strategy
21
Policy 4 Housing Provision
22
Policy 5 Effective and Efficient Use of Land
23
Policy 6 Affordable Housing
25
Policy 7 Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
27
Policy 8 Green Belt
28
Policy 9 Open Countryside
29
Policy 10 Rural Workers Dwellings
30
Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
32
Policy 11 Green Infrastructure
33
Policy 12 Open Space Provision
34
Policy 13 Primarily Open Space
36
Policy 14 Protection of Incidental Open Space
38
Policy 15 Climate Change
39
Policy 16 Natural Environment
41
Policy 17 Flood Risk Management
43
Policy 18 Sustainable Water Management
46
Policy 19 Sustainable Travel and Accessibility
48
Policy 20 Transport Requirements for New Development
51
Policy 21 Alexandra Hospital Public Transport Interchange
53
Policy 22 Road Hierarchy
54
Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
56
Policy 23 Employment Land Provision
57
Policy 24 Development within Primarily Employment Areas
59
Policy 25 Development outside of Primarily Employment Areas
61
Policy 26 Office Development
62
Policy 27 Rural Economic Development
64
Policy 28 Supporting Education, Training and Skills
66
Policy 29 Broadband and Telecommunications
67
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Contents
2
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch
Town Centre and District Centres
69
Policy 30 Town Centre and Retail Hierarchy
70
Policy 31 Regeneration for the Town Centre
72
Policy 32 Protection of the Retail Core
76
Policy 33 Use of Upper Floors
77
Policy 34 District Centre Redevelopment
78
Policy 35 Health of District Centres
79
Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
80
Policy 36 Historic Environment
81
Policy 37 Historic Buildings and Structures
83
Policy 38 Conservation Areas
85
Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
88
Policy 39 Built Environment
89
Policy 40 High Quality Design and Safer Communities
91
Policy 41 Shopfronts and Shopfront Security
93
Policy 42 Advertisements
94
Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
96
Policy 43 Leisure, Tourism and Abbey Stadium
97
Policy 44 Health Facilities
99
Policy 45 Cemeteries
100
Strategic Sites
101
Policy 46 Brockhill East
102
Policy 47 Land to the rear of the Alexandra Hospital
107
Policy 48 Webheath Strategic Site
112
Policy 49 Woodrow Strategic Site
116
Monitoring and Implementation
119
Appendices
120
Appendix 1: RCBD1 Redditch Cross Boundary Development
120
Appendix 2: Schedule of Housing Sites
124
Appendix 3: Schedule of Employment Sites
126
Appendix 4: Infrastructure Implications of Local Plan No.4 Policies
128
Appendix 5: Saved Supplementary Planning Documents
139
Appendix 6: Glossary and Abbreviations
140Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Introduction
1.1
The Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (BORLP4) is the most important planning document
at the local level, as it provides a framework approach for growth of the Borough and it will form
part of the Borough of Redditch Development Plan. BORLP4 should be read in conjunction with the
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) Report and relevant documents which provide evidence for the Plan.
1.2
BORLP4 sets out the state of Redditch as it is now within the Local Portrait. There is a Vision
and Objectives that set out what Redditch will aim to be like by the end of the Plan period and
these have responded to the issues and challenges in the Local Portrait. The Plan period started in
2011 when we first started to collect the evidence and ends in 2030. The policies within BORLP4
explain how Redditch will get there. The Infrastructure Implications of BORLP4 (Appendix 4) sets
out the known infrastructure requirements arising from the Plan, the costs, responsible agencies
and delivery mechanisms necessary to allow development to come forward.
1.3
Also included in the Plan is a Key Diagram that presents the main elements of the Redditch
Development Strategy in diagrammatic and in detailed form. The Policies Map is a detailed map
showing all land use based policy designations.
1.4
On adoption, the Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 replaced all policies contained within
the Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.3.
Introduction
3Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Local Challenges
1.5
One of the aims for planning is to produce a Vision for the future of places that respond to local challenges.
1.6
In order make it easier for readers to follow the progress from the broad-level Vision and Objectives through
to the more specific policies, BORLP4 primarily follows seven key themes which run throughout derived from
common challenges emerging from Redditch’s evidence base, namely:
Sustainable places to live which meet our needs:
Population projections indicate significant new demand for housing over the Plan period due to natural
growth and migration
Land availability is scarce, particularly Previously Developed Land
Cooperate with our neighbours to locate a significant amount of Redditch’s unmet requirements in adjoining
Districts
Creating and sustaining a green environment:
Redditch is located within a highly sensitive landscape with the town’s growth now nearing its natural limits
Redditch has a lot of distinctive green features which define Redditch as unique such as open spaces and
Green Infrastructure network which needs to be protected
Locating growth in places to limit out-commuting, make best use of existing highway infrastructure and
promote sustainable transport options
Creating a Borough where businesses can thrive:
Dealing with high rates of vacancy and B1 office units not fit for purpose
Need to focus on catering for internal employer demand for business types
Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres:
There are areas in Redditch Town Centre that are in decline and need regeneration
Some District Centres suffer from safety, safety perception issues and other issues relating to the poor
quality of the physical environment
Protecting and enhancing Redditch’s historic environment:
Redditch has a rich needle-making heritage and historic buildings of local importance to protect
Creating safe and attractive places to live and work:
Some areas of Redditch suffer from a poor perception of crime and anti-social behaviour.
The implementation of improved design or designing out crime can help reverse this perception
Promoting Redditch’s community well-being:
Health of Redditch residents needs to be improved
1.7
BORLP4 reflects what the community in Redditch needs from its development requirements based upon a
robust Strategic Housing Market Assessment Scenario and the Borough Council commends this Strategy and
its offer for ensuring economic growth and prosperity.
Introduction
4Introduction
5
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Duty to Cooperate
1.8
BORLP4 relates only to the administrative area of Redditch Borough. However the planning decisions made
by a Local Authority can impact on neighbouring authorities so it is important that when making decisions a
joined up approach is taken.
1.9
Redditch Borough Council has worked with neighbouring Bromsgrove District Council and Stratford-on-Avon
District Council extensively to prepare BORLP4 especially on the collection of evidence to inform the
progression of the policies.
1.10
Separate consultations on Redditch’s cross boundary growth have been undertaken with Bromsgrove
District Council. This was undertaken so that both Redditch Borough Council’s and Bromsgrove District
Council’s joint proposals for Redditch growth cross boundary to meet the remainder of Redditch’s objectively
assessed housing requirements are consistent. The policy on Redditch Cross Boundary Growth features in
Bromsgrove District Plan (Adopted January 2017) and for reference is included as Appendix 1 in this Local
Plan No.4.
1.11
In addition, Redditch has worked with other Local Authorities, which although are not directly adjacent
to Redditch may have strategic matters that have implications for the preparation of BORLP4. In particular,
Redditch Borough Council and Birmingham City Council have jointly acknowledged there is a strategic planning
matter with regard to Birmingham being unable to accommodate all of its own housing needs. As required by
the Duty to Cooperate, due consideration will be given, including through a review of the BORLP4, to the
housing needs of another local planning authority in circumstances when it has been clearly established
through collaborative working that those needs must be met through provision in Redditch. With regard to
Birmingham City Council, the mechanism for resolving this potential strategic matter of Birmingham’s unmet
housing needs will be through the Greater Birmingham and Solihull Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) and
Redditch’s subsequent review of the BORLP4.
1.12
Redditch Borough Council is part of two LEPs both the Greater Birmingham and Solihull LEP and the
Worcestershire LEP. This places Redditch Borough Council in an enviable position to coordinate its strategy and
policies across a vast area. The policies and strategies of the Local Authority members of the two LEP’s have
been checked for consistency with Redditch Borough Council’s aims which ensures that this aspect of the Duty
to Cooperate has been fulfilled. Therefore it is felt that Redditch has and will continue to engage constructively
with all neighbouring local planning authorities on all relevant strategic planning matters.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Introduction
6
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)What has influenced this Local Plan?
1.13
The most important influence on BORLP4 is what local communities, stakeholders and developers have
to say on what the strategy is aiming to achieve. The Local Plan needs the support of the community, and
aims to help local people recognise that new development can benefit their communities by creating wider
sustainable communities, and that new housing and economic growth can revitalise areas.
National Planning Policy
1.14
BORLP4 also works within, and takes account of national planning policy set out in the National
Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) as well other local strategies and plans. The NPPF came into effect during
the preparation of BORLP4 and the introduction of a model policy into the Plan clarifies the Local Planning
Authority’s stance to the NPPF and its policy as a material consideration in the determination of planning
applications.
Waste Core Strategy for Worcestershire and Minerals Local Plan for Worcestershire
1.15
Another influence on BORLP4 is the Worcestershire Waste Core Strategy adopted in November 2012,
the important related content of which is reflected in BORLP4’s policy. The emerging Minerals Local Plan for
Worcestershire will replace the existing Minerals Local Plan and minerals policies set out in the Structure Plan
and will be used by the County Council to determine applications for minerals development in the meantime.
Sustainability Appraisal
1.16
All Local Plans must be accompanied by a Sustainability Appraisal, which incorporates a Strategic
Environmental Assessment (SEA). Draft Sustainability Appraisals were produced alongside every stage of the
Plan.
Delivery and Infrastructure
1.17
Redditch Borough Council has been undertaking discussions with key stakeholders and also those
stakeholders with responsibilities to deliver infrastructure. This ensures that the options taken forward to
resolve Redditch’s local challenges are actually deliverable. BORLP4 is underpinned by evidence to
demonstrate that there is a realistic prospect of the Plan being delivered.
Consultation
1.18
The preparation of BORLP4 was progressed over several years. For details of the stages of consultation
please see the Borough of Redditch Statement of Consultation.
More information
1.19
If you would like any further information on BORLP4 or any other related matter, please see Redditch
Borough Council’s website at
www.redditchbc.gov.uk/localplan
or get in touch at:
Development Plans
Redditch Borough Council
Town Hall
Walter Stranz Square
Redditch
Worcestershire
B98 8AH
Email:
devplans@redditchbc.gov.uk
Telephone: 01527 64252Local Portrait
1.20
Redditch is like no other place.
1.21
To understand Redditch’s distinctiveness, BORLP4 paints a ‘local portrait’ of Redditch setting out its main
issues, problems and challenges, so that it becomes clear that the vision and policies of the Local Plan aim to
resolve some of these issues.
Profile
1.22
Redditch Borough is within the County of Worcestershire and borders Warwickshire County to the east
and southeast. It is surrounded by Bromsgrove District to the west and north, Stratford-on-Avon District to the
east and southeast and Wychavon District to the southwest. The Borough is situated at the outer edge of the
Green Belt boundary for the West Midlands. Redditch offers easy access to the countryside and prominent
local areas, including culturally rich areas such as Stratford-upon-Avon and naturally rich areas such as the
Cotswolds. The Borough lies 15 miles south of the Birmingham conurbation and Birmingham airport is
approximately 25 minutes drive time away.
1.23
Redditch Borough consists of the main town of Redditch, the villages of Astwood Bank and Feckenham
and several other hamlets. It covers an area of 5,435 hectares (13,430 acres) with a population of 84,214
(2011 Census).
1.24
The Borough is split into the urban area of Redditch
in the north, accounting for 50% of the area and 93%
of the population; and the rural area to the south
with 7% of the population. The rural area consists
predominantly of Green Belt land, but also
open countryside, as well as the villages
of Astwood Bank and Feckenham.
1.25
Redditch was formerly a market
town until 1964 when it was designated
as a New Town; a status it maintained
up until 1985. During this period
the Redditch Development
Corporation was responsible
for the growth of Redditch,
predominantly to the east
of the town.
Local Portrait
7
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Local Portrait
8
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)People
1.26
The current population of Redditch Borough
is more than 84,200 (2011 Census) and this is
projected to rise to more than 88,000 by 2030.
The population of Redditch has increased from
78,813 (2001 Census).
1.27
Redditch Borough has a significant black
and ethnic minority population (5.2% of the overall
population) compared to Worcestershire, as well
as considerable Eastern European community at
present. These groups contribute to the diversity
and culture of Redditch.
1.28
Redditch Borough has similar crime levels
in comparison to the national average of England
and Wales. Recorded crime rates for Redditch have
fallen substantially since 2005/06 (92.2 offences
per 1000 population in 2005/06 to 57.7 offences
per 1000 population in 2012/13), although they
remain above the average for Worcestershire.
Perceptions of anti-social behaviour in Redditch
have also remained consistently above the average
for Worcestershire and the latest data for 2013
shows that nearly twice as many Redditch residents
feel unsafe when out after dark in their local area
when compared with residents in the rest of the
County.
Environment
1.29
In terms of the environmental aspects of
Redditch Borough, there are six Sites of Special
Scientific Interest, amounting to 54.7 hectares;
these are examples the country’s very best wildlife
and geological sites. The Borough has 24 Local
Wildlife Sites and there is also more than 87
hectares of land designated as Local Nature
Reserves, comprising five separate sites of semi
-
natural ancient woodland. There are two areas of
designated parkland, including the regionally
significant Arrow Valley Country Park (364 hectares)
which follows the course of the River Arrow and
Morton Stanley Park (38 hectares) in the
southwest of the urban area. Redditch Borough
has high levels of open space in comparison to
surrounding districts; this is one of the features that
makes Redditch distinctive. Indeed, the design of
open space was integral to the design of the new
town, with the New Town Planning Proposals
requiring that green infrastructure must be woven
into the fabric of the town.
1.30
The urban area of Redditch has a long and
complex history as well as a rich twentieth century
heritage, with many key archaeological sites beyond
the limit of the medieval town as defined by the
Central Marches Historic Towns Survey. The Borough
has a rich local history evident in the 161 Statutory
Listed Buildings, and 8 Scheduled Monuments.
There are also more than 500 other heritage assets
currently recorded, including locally listed heritage
assets which have features of archaeological,
architectural, historical or townscape significance
to the Borough.
Arrow Valley Country Park
Bordesley Abbey Scheduled Monument1.31
There are two conservation areas in Redditch
Borough, one of which is located in Redditch Town
Centre (Church Green) and the other in Feckenham
village. The Church Green Conservation Area is
focussed around the Church of St Stephen and an
area of civic open amenity space surrounded by a
number of statutory listed buildings.
1.32
The Feckenham Conservation Area
incorporates most of the historic village of
Feckenham and includes the parish church, the
village square, a Scheduled Monument and a
number of residential buildings which date from the
sixteenth century. This south western rural area is
an enviable historic landscape and was once part
of the ancient Feckenham Forest.
1.33
Redditch Borough Council takes an active and
determined role in the fight against climate change.
It boasts the first dwellings to have been assessed
against the ‘Code for Sustainable Homes’ built to
Code Level 3 and has committed to participation
in the Nottingham Declaration, signed in 2006, as
well as the Worcestershire Climate Change Pledge
signed annually since March 2008.
The use of
renewable energy in the Borough continues to grow,
with solar panels being installed on the roof of the
Town Hall and the Countryside Centre which also
boasts micro-wind turbines, solar hot water
panels, and a wood-burning stove. Redditch
Borough Council was the first council in the country
to re-use 100% waste heat generated from its
crematorium, diverting it to the Abbey Stadium
leisure centre, providing around 42% of its annual
heating bill and reducing the Council’s carbon
footprint by 4%.
Redditch has the third lowest CO
2
emissions per person amongst all other districts in
Worcestershire.
Local Portrait
9
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)
It also produces a considerably lower total amount
of CO
2
per year for the domestic sector (206 Kt)
than the national average (384.6 Kt) (based on
data from 2003). Since 2005 Redditch has had the
second highest reduction per capita in the County
(6.4% reduction) compared to a 4.2% reduction for
Worcestershire.
1.34
Growth to the South and Southwest of
Redditch is constrained principally because these
locations would significantly increase private
transport use, having a detrimental impact on
existing road congestion within Redditch and
neighbouring Stratford-on-Avon District. The cost
of necessary highway works, the distance from the
Town Centre, cost of sewerage system upgrades
and the likelihood of this leading to an overtly car
-
bound travel pattern constrain the potential
locations of development.
Transport
1.35
Redditch Borough has good transport links,
with the M42 (Junctions 2 and 3) located under
5 miles away and the M5 around 6 miles from
Redditch Town Centre. The railway station for
Redditch is located in the Town Centre and services
run three times per hour to and from Birmingham
New Street station and on to Lichfield. There are
segregated public transport only routes in the
four New Town District Centres (Church Hill,
Matchborough, Winyates and Woodrow), which
are used only by buses and emergency vehicles.
Although the ‘bus only’ lanes give high priority to
bus use, they do not benefit from the natural
surveillance of other vehicles and are frequently
separated from pedestrian routes and other
development that could help to discourage crime
and anti-social behaviour.
1.36
The urban area of Redditch generally enjoys
free-flowing traffic and relatively little congestion.
One key advantage for Redditch in terms of
transport is its size. As the Borough is relatively
small, distances covered travelling to work are low.
Redditch has one train station that is very well
used, two public transport interchanges in the
Town Centre (bus and rail), including one proposed
interchange at the Alexandra Hospital, bus-only
lanes running through a number of the District
Centres and a specific road hierarchy tailored to the
New Town layout. These features contribute to the
ease of travelling around the Borough.
Feckenham Conservation AreaBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Local Portrait
10
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)
Redditch experiences one of the lowest rates of
Road Traffic Collisions (RTCs) per 1,000 population
in Worcestershire. In 2010/11, there were 151 RTCs
within Redditch, a rate of 1.53 per 1,000 people.
Rail travel from Redditch to Birmingham is high;
the cross city line from Redditch to Lichfield is a
busy route which has recently expanded.
1.37
There are a range of issues that need to be
tackled to achieve modal shift including perceptions
of safety and security. Research indicates that a
significant number of people feel unsafe walking to
bus stops, waiting for buses and travelling on buses.
Close to 4% cite “feeling unsafe walking” as being a
main reason for stopping them from walking more
often. A similar percentage stated that “feeling
unsafe cycling” was a main reason stopping them
from doing so more often.
1.38
Worcestershire County Council and the
Department for Transport have invested
significantly in increasing the use of sustainable
modes of travel in Redditch through the Choose
How You Move Project between 2012 and 2015.
This project was developed based on the success
of the existing infrastructure and aimed to
encourage a successful modal shift. There are a
range of issues that need to be tackled to achieve
modal shift including perceptions of safety and
security.
Economy
1.39
For the period June 2006 - June 2007 4.4% of
Redditch Borough’s economically active population
was unemployed. For the period April 2009 - March
2010, that figure had risen to 8.7%. Figures show
that for the period July 2011 - June 2012
unemployment had fallen again, with 6.3% of
Redditch Borough’s economically active population
being unemployed. This is lower than both the
unemployment levels in the West Midlands (8.9%)
and across Great Britain (8.1%). 83.2% of the
Redditch population aged 16 - 64 is economically
active. This is higher when compared to 74.3% in
the West Midlands and 76.6% across Great Britain.
1.40
Redditch Borough has a high proportion of
manufacturing businesses when compared with
the rest of the County and region. In addition the
Borough has a high proportion of employees in the
distribution, hotels and restaurant sectors.
There are lower percentages of managers/senior
officials, professional or associate professional &
technician workers in Redditch Borough compared
to Worcestershire and Great Britain but more
than in the West Midlands. There are higher
percentages of process plant and machine
operatives and elementary occupations in Redditch
Borough compared to Worcestershire and Great
Britain, but the figure is on a par with the West
Midlands.
1.41
There are a number of overseas companies
established in the Borough such as AT&T and
Marubeni-Komatsu and the headquarters of GKN
are located in Redditch.
1.42
Redditch Town Centre is the focus for
shopping in the Borough and the surrounding area.
The Kingfisher Shopping Centre boasts big name
department stores, the flagship Debenhams store
as well as a range of high street names and smaller,
independently run shops. There are a number of
District Centres situated throughout the urban area
as well as local parades of shops, groups of shops
and corner shops. A number of District Centres
(Church Hill, Matchborough, Winyates and Woodrow)
suffer from a poor image as their inappropriate
design means that they are prone to having crime
and anti-social behaviour problems. Lessons have
been learnt from Council and Partnership projects
that can be implemented when re-development
occurs. Work has already been completed on the
re-development of Church Hill District Centre.
1.43
According to the Halifax Quality of Life Survey
(December 2012) 97% of households in Redditch
have a good level of broadband access with speeds
of at least 2Mbps.  Data from the County Research
and Intelligence Unit (February 2012) shows the
urban area of Redditch already has or is scheduled
for Superfast Broadband, but identifies areas in
the south of the Borough, such as Ham Green and
Feckenham as “slow spots” with speeds of less than
2 Mbps, some with less than 0.5Mbps.
1.44
The Retail and Office Needs Assessment
Update (2012) identifies a high level of vacant office
floorspace (26%) within the Town Centre, most of
which is not ‘fit for purpose’. However this figure is
slightly lower than the 28% vacant office floorspace
reported in 2009. Demand is low with most interest
coming from existing local indigenous office
occupiers looking for new premises on better terms.Local Portrait
11
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)
Education
1.45
Redditch follows a three tiered schooling
system that sees pupils progress from first, middle
to high school. Over 30 schools in Redditch conform
to this system and cater for some 12,000 pupils.
1.46
Around 25% of the Borough’s population is
under the age of 19 which is the highest in
Worcestershire. Young people in Redditch are more
likely to be in post-16 education than their peers
nationally. Some 54% of students attending schools
in Redditch achieved 5 A* - C grades at GCSE in
2010/11, which is close to the Worcestershire
average of 60%.
1.47
The proportion of residents aged 16+ with
no qualifications in Redditch is 25.1%. This
compares to a Worcestershire average of 23.0%
and an average across England of 22.5%. However,
research undertaken by the Redditch Business
Leaders Group in January 2012 found that 85%
of 16-21 year olds recently recruited were poorly
prepared for work. Employers felt that young
people lacked employability skills (timekeeping,
ability to work as part of a team, attitude etc.) and
that was more of a significant factor than lack of
formal skills and education. It is important to
maintain and improve the skills base of the
community in order to secure continued economic
development.
Housing
1.48
In 2010 the average house price in Redditch
was £165,970, lower than the average for
Worcestershire (£211,873) and lower than the
Regional average (£177,951). This is significantly
higher than in 2006 when the average house price
in Redditch was £150,501, lower than both the
average for Worcestershire (£184,936) and the
national average (£184,925).
1.49
As a percentage of housing stock, Redditch
Borough has a high amount of affordable housing
(22%) in comparison to the Worcestershire-wide
average (15%). However, supply still does not meet
demand.
1.50
As Redditch Borough has a relatively young
population, single pensioner households are
lower than the Worcestershire average (11.1% in
Redditch Borough and 13.7% for Worcestershire);
however there is a high percentage of one person
households (14.7% for Redditch Borough compared
to 12.9% for Worcestershire). With a young
population and the growth in single person
households nationally, a trend that is likely to
continue, there is a need for the market to respond
accordingly, but also to produce housing that is
sustainable and adaptable for the future changing
population of Redditch.
1.51
Generally house prices in Redditch, as well
as ownership levels, are lower than neighbouring
districts. However, Redditch Borough does offer a
vast amount of choice in terms of housing stock,
with housing that covers every size, style and
type of accommodation. Moreover, although
geographically smaller than the neighbouring
district of Bromsgrove, Redditch holds the same
level of housing provision. Redditch Borough,
through its varying type, style and location of
housing, seeks to accommodate the needs of the
whole of the Borough’s population. This means that
housing in Redditch Borough aims to be socially
inclusive, building and providing for those who
require it, including social housing, intermediate
ownership housing, as well as elderly and single
person households and private housing of
different types in accordance with the Strategic
Housing Market Assessment.
1.52
Whilst there is a travelling show peoples’ site
in the Borough, currently there is no additional
provision for other gypsies and travellers.
Health
1.53
The ‘Health Profile for Redditch 2012’ (NHS)
suggests that the health of people living in the
Borough is mixed compared with the England
average. Levels of alcohol-specific hospital stays
among those under 18, smoking in pregnancy and
estimated levels of healthy eating and obesity are
worse than the England average. The rates of
statutory homelessness, long term unemployment
and drug misuse are lower than average.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Local Portrait
12
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)
1.54
Redditch has the lowest amount of residents
with limiting long term illnesses compared to all
other Worcestershire districts; this may be attributed
to Redditch’s younger population profile. However,
an ageing population is projected for the Borough.
The 2011 Census indicates that the over-65 age
group currently accounts for 14.3% of the total
population. Rates of early death from heart disease
and stroke and from cancer have fallen over the
past ten years and are similar to the England
average.
1.55
Life expectancy for men living in the most
deprived areas of Redditch is almost nine years
shorter than for men living in the least deprived
areas. For women, the corresponding difference
is over 10 years.
1.56
The proportion of children in Reception year
who are classified as obese is similar to the England
average.  Levels of physical activity in schools are
better than the England average. It is estimated that
levels of healthy eating and obesity in adults are
worse than the England average. Rates of road
injury and deaths are lower than the England
average.
Culture & Leisure
1.57
Cultural attractions within the Borough include
the Forge Mill Needle Museum which explores the
Borough’s needle making heritage, Bordesley Abbey
which offers access to a medieval Cistercian Abbey
ruin, and Arrow Valley Park, which centres on the
12 hectare (30 acre) lake and adjacent Countryside
Centre. The Town Centre offers the 420 seat Palace
Theatre as well as a multi-screen cinema located in
the Kingfisher Shopping Centre.
1.58
Sports facilities across the Borough cater
for traditional pastimes such as football, golf,
swimming and lawn bowls, whilst a skate park
encourages enthusiasts from further afield.
The town benefits from a newly refurbished and
extended Council run leisure facility at the Abbey
Stadium as well as a number of private facilities.
1.59
The profile of Redditch Borough is dynamic
and diverse. From its conception as a market town,
Redditch has continued to evolve and adapt in all
areas in line with the times. Changes in its profile
have reflected changes in society and in the future
Redditch will experience further change as it
continues to evolve.
1.60
A full and detailed description of the
distinctiveness of Redditch Borough is available in a
document entitled ‘Local Distinctiveness in Redditch
Borough’, produced by the Development Plans team
and available on the Borough Council’s website
www.redditchbc.gov.uk
Deprivation levels in the Borough
Least deprived                                       Most deprived
Palace Theatre, Town CentreVision
13
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Vision
1.61
The Redditch Sustainable Community Strategy
(SCS) has provided a foundation to develop a
Vision for the Local Plan, specifically the Vision and
priorities of the SCS have been considered in the
formulation of the Local Plan’s Vision. The SCS is
built around a shared vision for the Borough. It is
envisaged that by 2030:
“Redditch will be successful and vibrant
with communities that have access to good
job opportunities, good education, good
health and are communities that people
will be proud to live and work in.”
1.62
The Vision has also been formulated based on
the aspirations of the Redditch community and sets
out how Redditch Borough wants to be by 2030.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our
Needs
Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Creating a Borough Where Businesses Can
Thrive
Improving the Vitality and Viability of Redditch
Town Centre and District Centres
Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and
Work
Conserving and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic
Environment
Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
1.63
To support the sustainability of Redditch’s
three settlements, new growth will have been
achieved in a sustainable way. To achieve the
development strategy, Redditch Town will be the
main settlement in the Borough and focus for
development, with cross boundary development
adjacent to the Town to support it. Astwood Bank
will be a sustainable rural settlement and
Feckenham will cater for local needs.
1.64
In the past, Redditch hasn’t been able to bring
all designated employment land into use, meaning
that local residents may have had to travel outside
the Borough for work. To support a strategy for a
balance between the housing and employment land,
Redditch will have maintained an appropriate
balance. The amount and type of housing and
employment will have been determined in
consultation with local communities.
Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
1.65
By 2030, Redditch Borough will be distinctively
‘green’. The Green Strategy for Redditch focuses on:
Climate change mitigation and sustainable
buildings because the Borough has had low CO
2
emissions in the past which it wants to maintain;
Open space because green spaces are a unique
feature of Redditch as a former New Town;
Sustainable travel because of the distinctive
road hierarchies and bus routes with good
accessibility which will be maintained and
enhanced;
The natural environment and open spaces, as
these are a unique feature of Redditch which
give the urban area a rural atmosphere;
Landscape because there is a distinctive mix
of old and new in an extremely unique setting
making Redditch recognisable and because of
its geology and landform have established
sensitive environments;
Flood Risk and Water Management because of
the identified risk; and
Green Belt matters because some changes to
the Green Belt within Redditch at Brockhill and in
the Foxlydiate area are necessary.
1.66
To achieve this green strategy, Redditch’s
character, biodiversity, water environment, open
space and landscape will have been maintained
and enhanced. Also, new and existing low carbon
communities will be highly accessible and
attractive, making a positive contribution to
mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate
change. Sustainable modes of transport will be
supported and delivered as well as the
infrastructure and green infrastructure needed
to support planned development.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Vision
14
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)
Creating a Borough Where Businesses Can Thrive
1.67
Redditch will be an enterprising Borough and
local skills levels will have improved. To achieve this,
the Borough will contain diverse employment areas,
support existing business sectors while looking for
opportunities to improve and where possible to
diversify the economy. There will be opportunities
to improve the skills of the local workforce to help
them access new employment opportunities.
The Borough will have a prosperous rural community
whilst protecting the countryside. Homes and
businesses will be supported by high quality
communications infrastructure.
Improving the Vitality and Viability of Redditch
Town Centre and District Centres
1.68
Retail in Redditch will be successful. The retail
strategy is important for the Borough because
Redditch Town Centre attracts important shops and
facilities that otherwise wouldn’t be supported by
a population of its size and also because there are
parts of the Town Centre and District Centres that
suffer from poor design and other big issues.
1.69
To achieve the retail strategy Redditch will
have achieved regeneration. The Town Centre will be
vital and vibrant, supported by regenerated District
Centres at Church Hill, Matchborough, Winyates and
Woodrow. In particular, the regeneration of the Town
Centre will improve connectivity between key sites.
Centres will be defined in a Hierarchy of Centres
where the needs of the catchments are met.
Conserving and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic
Environment
1.70
Redditch has a special built environment and
heritage based upon the town’s transition from a
market town with a needle-based industry, through
to a New Town and, in 2030 what will be an
enterprising and successful urban area with other
historic settlements in the Borough. To deliver the
historic strategy, the heritage assets of the Borough
will be conserved and enhanced.
Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and
Work
1.71
Redditch will have achieved high quality and
safe design of its new buildings. This high quality
and safe design strategy is important because there
is a poor perception of safety amongst residents
and the uniqueness of Redditch’s built environment
must be supported. All new development will be of a
high quality and safe design and contribute towards
creating distinctive and sustainable places that
reflect the local character and are tailored to the
needs of the people that live in the Borough.
In particular, shopfronts will be well designed to
ensure security and to have a positive effect on
character and appearance and signage and
advertisements will be well designed and well
placed.
Redditch Open Air Market, Town Centre
Church Green Conservation AreaObjectives
15
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)
Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
1.72
Redditch’s tourism, leisure and cultural
facilities will be improved. There will also be
provision of a range of other attractive facilities so
that communities are sustainably provided for.
To achieve this attractive facilities strategy there will
be a focus on new and enhanced leisure provision
specifically in the Town Centre. New and enhanced
leisure provision and green infrastructure will
achieve healthy communities as well as provision for
healthcare facilities and enhancements to existing
healthcare. Finally Redditch Borough will contain
excellent services and infrastructure to support its
communities with a planned programme of delivery
of key infrastructure projects to support the
achievement of the Vision.
2.
To ensure that all new development in Redditch
Borough will work towards the achievement of
being carbon neutral in line with the National
Standards;
3.
To reduce the causes of, minimise the impacts of
and adapt to climate change;
4.
To protect, promote and where possible enhance
the quality of the Borough’s landscape and
Redditch Borough’s other distinctive features;
5.
To encourage safer, sustainable travel patterns,
improve accessibility and maintain a balanced
road hierarchy and reduce the need to travel;
6.
To enhance the visitor economy and Redditch’s
cultural and leisure opportunities including
Abbey Stadium;
7.
Reduce crime and anti social behaviour and the
fear of crime through high quality design and
infrastructure, with regeneration achieved at
Matchborough, Winyates and Woodrow District
Centres;
8.
To improve the vitality and viability of Town and
District Centres in the Borough by day and night
by promoting a vibrant mix of uses including
residential;
9.
To have sufficient homes meeting demographic
needs, including affordable housing, providing for
a range, mix, and type in the best locations,
including on Strategic Sites;
10. To have a strong, attractive, diverse and
enterprising economic base with sufficient
employment land, including Strategic Sites.
Redditch will have employees with higher skills
levels with strengthened links between business
and education;
11. To protect and enhance water, air and soil and
minimise flood risk;
12. Ensuring there is a range of health facilities
that support existing and new communities and
to promote the role of healthy living through good
planning;
13. To have demonstrated compliance with the
“duty to cooperate” by providing for Redditch’s
growth across Local Authority boundaries.
Abbey Stadium Sports Centre
Abbey Stadium Sports Centre Pool
Objectives
To deliver the Vision a set of 13 non-prioritised
Objectives have been developed that reflect the
aspirations of the vision and provide direction for
the BORLP4 policies. These are:
1.
To maintain and provide a high quality natural,
rural and historic environment with a
multifunctional Green Infrastructure network
which maximises opportunities for enhancing
biodiversity value, wildlife and ecological
connectivity;Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Presumption in Favour of Sustainable Development
16
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 1
Presumption in Favour of Sustainable
Development
Policy 1
When considering development proposals the Borough Council will take a positive approach that
reflects the presumption in favour of sustainable development contained in the National Planning
Policy Framework. It will always work proactively with applicants jointly to find solutions which mean
that proposals can be approved wherever possible, and to secure development that improves the
economic, social and environmental conditions in the area.
Planning applications that accord with the policies in this Local Plan (and, where relevant, with
polices in neighbourhood plans) will be approved without delay, unless material considerations
indicate otherwise.
Where there are no policies relevant to the application or relevant policies are out of date at the time
of making the decision then the Borough Council will grant permission unless material
considerations indicate otherwise - taking into account whether:
any adverse impacts of granting permission would significantly and demonstrably outweigh the
benefits, when assessed against the policies in the National Planning Policy Framework taken as
a whole; or
specific policies in that Framework indicate that development should be restricted.17
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
The policies in this chapter will deliver the Objectives:
“To have sufficient homes meeting demographic needs, including affordable housing, providing for a
range, mix, and type in the best locations, including on Strategic Sites”
“To have demonstrated compliance with the “duty to cooperate” by providing for Redditch’s growth
across Local Authority boundaries”
This chapter identifies the strategic housing requirement and shows where the most sustainable
locations are to meet Redditch’s housing and other development needs. There are policies to ensure
delivery of a range of provision to meet everyone’s housing needs, and to guide housing density to
ensure that developments are neither crammed in or wasteful of precious land supplies.
The reuse of previously developed land is promoted whilst other policies aim to protect inappropriate
development in Redditch’s rural area.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
18
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)19
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 2
Settlement Hierarchy
2.1
The Settlement Hierarchy categorises the Borough’s settlements based upon their role and function which
has been determined through the Accessibility Study and Settlement Hierarchy. This makes it clear how all of
Redditch Borough’s settlements are likely to be developed sustainably and how they will serve their
communities.
Policy 2
2.2
The location and scale of new development should accord with the following settlement
hierarchy and reflect the services present, accessibility, character and local distinctiveness of each
settlement.
Redditch urban area, as the Main Settlement shall be the focus for development as it provides
the highest level of services and facilities provision and offers the most sustainable location for
development. Where need cannot be met within the Borough, development will be focussed
adjacent to the Borough boundary in urban extensions.
Astwood Bank is a Sustainable Rural Settlement, excluded from the Green Belt, which offers an
appropriate range of services and facilities. Development within the settlement boundary, as
defined on the Policies Map, will be the focus for identified development needs and supporting
local services and infrastructure.
Feckenham is a small, rural settlement predominantly set within the Green Belt, which offers
limited local facilities but has important conservation and historic merit. In order to conserve
and enhance these characteristics, development within or adjacent to the settlement boundary,
as defined on the Policies Map, will provide for locally identified affordable housing and other
locally identified development needs only, in accordance with the most up-to-date guidance in the
National Planning Policy Framework and Parish Housing Needs Survey.
2.3
The remainder of Redditch’s rural area offers sparse development patterns with no local service
provision. These hamlets will provide for locally identified development needs only, in accordance
with the most up-to-date guidance in the National Planning Policy Framework.
2.4
Where development in the rural area has demonstrated a proven local need, measures should
be put in place through the use of planning conditions or planning obligations to ensure that the
development continues to meet this need in perpetuity.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
Reasoned Justification
2.5
The BORLP4 aims to deliver sustainable patterns of development which are appropriate and proportionate
to their location, and adequately provide for the communities that they serve.
2.6
Redditch urban area is the obvious primary focus for development as it is the main settlement within the
Borough and provides the functions and services for the majority of the Borough’s residential and economic
population. Therefore future development should continue to be directed towards the Borough’s most
sustainable settlement in order to maintain and enhance its important role within the settlement hierarchy.
Due to the compact and built up nature of Redditch’s most sustainable settlement, it is important that future
development which cannot be accommodated within the urban area, is directed to the most appropriate and
sustainable locations on the edge of the urban area, i.e. strategic sites at Brockhill East and Webheath.
Reference should also be made to Policy 3 Development Strategy which states that all strategic sites can come
forward immediately.  Development needs which cannot be met within the Borough will be accommodated in
urban extensions adjacent to the Borough boundary.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)20
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)
2.7
The Accessibility Study and Settlement Hierarchy for Redditch Borough (October 2008) has determined the
role and function of the recognised settlements in the Borough by assessing Astwood Bank and Feckenham
against a series of key services, facilities and activities to determine what constitutes an appropriate level of
development. Ignoring the needs of these settlements may lead to their decline, and in some cases, a loss of
their sustainability. Without careful consideration of the roles they play and level of functions they provide, they
could be affected by unnecessary and inappropriate development, which compromises their local character
and function.
2.8
‘Locally identified development needs’ refers to the anticipated requirements, for example, housing,
generated by local growth or other trends, with the exception of inward migration. In the context of Feckenham,
‘locally identified development needs’ relates to the provision of local residential, business and community
needs to maintain the vitality of the communities they serve. If, for example, the provision of locally identified
affordable housing need is not deliverable on grounds of viability, consideration may be given to market
housing schemes that ensure the provision of an appropriate level of affordable housing, as long as the setting
and character of the rural settlement is not compromised. Proposals will also be judged against paragraph 55
of the NPPF.
2.9
In relation to Feckenham, ‘adjacent to the settlement boundary’ means sites which are contiguous to
the boundary. However, where there are no suitable sites immediately adjoining the settlement due to the
sensitivity of the setting of the settlement or adjacent buildings, consideration will be given to sites not
immediately adjoining the settlement boundary. To be acceptable, proposals will need to demonstrate that they
are closely related and sympathetic to the existing settlement pattern. It is not envisaged that the settlement
boundary would subsequently be redrawn to include new development for affordable housing within the
settlement.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
21
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 3
Development Strategy
3.1
Redditch Borough Council, as Local Planning Authority has an important role to play in ensuring the
efficient and sustainable release of land for development. It is important that development is delivered in the
most sustainable way possible and so the Development Strategy proposes a sustainable way of distributing
development to meet the Borough’s needs. The policy sets out what type of development can come forward,
its location, and its appropriate timeframe within the Plan period
Policy 3
3.2
All Strategic Sites for development can come forward immediately in accordance with the
policies in the Local Plan. The locations of Strategic Sites and the development principles they are
expected to meet can be found in Strategic Site Policies (Policy 31, Policy 34 and Policies 46 to 49).
3.3
With regard to all development, sites focussed on the urban area of Redditch are encouraged to
be developed earlier in the Local Plan period in accordance with Policy 2 Settlement Hierarchy, with
the exception of local needs housing, which should come forward throughout the Plan period as and
when ‘need’ arises.
3.4
In all cases, and in particular with the Strategic Sites, the suitability of sites to be brought
forward for development will be determined following satisfactory demonstration of how all
necessary infrastructure to enable development will be funded and delivered. This should be
thoroughly demonstrated with particular reference to the Borough Council’s most up-to-date
Infrastructure Delivery Plan.
3.5
The Borough Council will monitor the delivery of all development in line with the National
Planning Policy Framework’s requirements. Should the required rates of housing or employment
delivery not be achieved, the Borough Council will employ proactive planning measures such as
Supplementary Planning Documents, Local Plan review, compulsory purchase, active engagement
with developers or investigating potential funding sources.
Reasoned Justification
3.6
There is a requirement in national planning policy that Redditch Borough should have a continuous supply
of land for development throughout the Plan period. In order to ensure this requirement is met, all development
within the Redditch urban area, as the Borough’s principal sustainable settlement, would be required for
development immediately as there is limited land availability and little choice about the locations for
development within the Borough.
3.7
The Borough Council will maintain an Infrastructure Delivery Plan which identifies the infrastructure
required to deliver BORLP4. Planning applications for development on Strategic Sites will need to demonstrate
that the infrastructure required to support the development proposal can be funded and delivered at the
appropriate time.
3.8
The unique economic conditions require local authorities such as Redditch Borough to quickly recover
and deliver development to meet its needs. There are no known major constraints to delivery of development
in Redditch that would warrant a phasing policy, and the priority for the re-use of previously developed land
accompanied by a proactive approach to bringing forward Town Centre and District Centre regeneration, will
deliver much of Redditch’s brownfield development.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our NeedsBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)22
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 4
Housing Provision
4.1
Redditch Borough Council, as Local Planning Authority, has an important role to play in ensuring that
sufficient homes are provided to ensure Redditch’s growing population has access to a home that meets their
needs. This includes the provision of both homes to buy and homes to rent, and a variety of sizes and styles.
There is insufficient land within Redditch Borough to address the housing needs of its population up to 2030;
therefore some cross boundary growth will be required in Bromsgrove District to contribute towards meeting
those needs.
Policy 4
4.2
Provision is made for the construction and completion of around 6,400 dwellings between 2011
and 2030 to meet the local housing requirements identified in the Strategic Housing Market
Assessment.
4.3
Around 3,000 dwellings can be accommodated within Redditch Borough. Approximately 3,400
dwellings are to be accommodated in Bromsgrove District (see Appendix 1, Redditch Cross Boundary
Development). Details of the sites expected to contribute to meeting the Borough’s housing needs
can be found in Appendix 2 and are shown on the Policies Map and Key Diagram.
4.4
The Borough Council seeks to achieve a mix of housing types in terms of size, scale, density,
tenure and cost which reflects the Borough’s housing needs. The Borough Council will encourage the
provision of housing for elderly people. When considering proposals for new residential development,
consideration will be given to the extent that the proposed scheme reflects these requirements in
accordance with the current Strategic Housing Market Assessment and/or the Worcestershire Extra
Care Housing Strategy.
4.5
In order to achieve a supply of flexible and inclusive housing in the Borough that caters for life
-
long occupancy, all new affordable housing for rent will be expected to comply with the new technical
standards, excluding the additional optional standards. The private sector development industry will
be encouraged to implement these new technical standards within their development schemes.
Reasoned Justification
4.6
Land identified which could contribute towards housing provision indicates that around 3,000 dwellings
could be accommodated within the Borough boundary. However, evidence in the Strategic Housing Market
Assessment (SHMA) indicates that this will not meet the Borough’s housing needs up to 2030. It has therefore
been necessary to collaborate with Bromsgrove District Council to identify land in Bromsgrove District, in the
vicinity of Redditch, which is capable of accommodating Redditch’s land supply shortfall.
4.7
It is important that the housing needs of Redditch’s growing population are met and there is an adequate
mix of dwellings across all types and tenures. The Borough’s housing needs will be regularly monitored and
reassessed through updates of the SHMA. Furthermore, the Worcestershire Extra Care Housing Strategy offers
guidance on the housing needs of the aging population. Due regard should be paid to the most up to date
version of these Assessments to properly determine the appropriate housing needs for Redditch at any time.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs23
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 5
Effective and Efficient Use of Land
5.1
Land for development is a finite resource. Whilst it is acknowledged and accepted that some greenfield
land must be used to meet development requirements, there remains a need for prudent reuse of previously
developed (brownfield) land within the Borough which has the potential to contribute towards meeting
Redditch’s development needs. Furthermore, the greenfield land that is allocated for development should be
developed efficiently to maximise its potential.
Policy 5
5.2
Effective and efficient use of land must be sought in all new development schemes.
With respect to residential development, this will be achieved in the following ways:
i.
the reuse and regeneration of Previously Developed Land (PDL) will be actively encouraged.
Where the economic viability of a scheme on PDL is questionable, and can be fully demonstrated
by the applicant, the Borough Council may negotiate a more appropriate level of infrastructure
provision, or deferred payment scheme with the applicant, in order to secure beneficial reuse of a
site;
ii.
densities of between 30 and 50 dwellings per hectare will be sought in Redditch Borough, and 70
dwellings per hectare will be sought on sites for residential development that are within or
adjacent to Redditch Town Centre and the District Centres;
iii.
higher densities will be sought in locations close to public transport interchanges; and
iv.
higher densities will also be sought in other locations where it can be demonstrated that there
will be no detrimental impact on the amenity, character and environmental quality of an area.
5.3
Applicants should refer to the most up to date Strategic Housing Market Assessment to
determine the most appropriate types of dwellings required throughout the Borough. Lower density
developments may be appropriate on some smaller sites, self-build sites or when providing
bungalows. In these situations, lower densities will be considered acceptable where the scheme
reflects the Borough’s housing needs, there are site specific limitations which negate standard
densities being met, or where there would be a detrimental impact on the amenity, character and
environmental quality of an area if the standard densities were to be pursued on-site.
5.4
Schemes for the development of private residential gardens will generally not be supported
unless they lie within existing settlements, integrate fully into the neighbourhood, and can clearly
demonstrate that there would be no detrimental impact on the current and future amenity, character
and environmental quality of the neighbourhood. Development may be supported if there are
substantial overriding environmental, social and economic benefits to justify the development.
5.5
With respect to non-residential development, schemes on PDL, which propose the
re-development of tired or redundant sites, will be considered favourably.
5.6
There will be a presumption against development on PDL where it can be clearly demonstrated
that over time, land has been afforded beneficial amenity value or where biodiversity issues would
be compromised through redevelopment of the site.
5.7
Development proposals on land likely to be affected by contamination should demonstrate that
the site is capable of appropriate remediation without compromising development viability or the
delivery of sustainable development.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our NeedsBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)24
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Reasoned Justification
5.8
Encouraging development on previously developed land allows maximum use to be made of vacant and
previously developed sites within the Borough; thus reducing the pressure for development on greenfield sites
and maximising the use of existing infrastructure.
5.9
The National Planning Policy Framework removes the previous PPS3 requirement for a specific PDL target,
allowing local authorities the flexibility to consider whether a local target would be appropriate. The Strategic
Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) demonstrates that it is clearly not possible to deliver substantial
levels of housing on PDL in Redditch. This is due to its tight administrative boundaries which are surrounded by
Green Belt, and the nature of its previous New Town status, which limits the amount of development that may
have reached the end of its natural life and is prime for redevelopment within the urban area. The Borough
Council’s previous brownfield development target, identified in the Worcestershire County Structure Plan 1996
- 2011, stipulated a target of 25% of all residential development on brownfield land. The Borough Council was
able to more than double the brownfield delivery against this target during the period up to 2011. Therefore,
exceeding previous brownfield development targets, limits the scope and potential during this Plan period.
However, there is still a need to promote the reuse of PDL in the interest of Redditch’s capacity limitations, and
whilst it is not considered beneficial to set a PDL target, it would be prudent to actively encourage development
on the areas of known PDL within the Borough. The SHLAA and Employment Land Review (ELR) identify PDL
potential within the Borough. Therefore, the Borough Council considers it prudent to encourage regeneration
and redevelopment of sites which may be tired or have remained vacant for a number of years, in order to
revitalise these parts of the town, thereby encouraging future investment in Redditch and contributing towards
the Borough’s development targets.
5.10
Proposals also need to ensure that new development does not contribute to, or is put at unacceptable
risk from ground contaminants. Where sites are suspected of contamination, the Borough Council will
require the submission of an appropriate risk assessment and, if necessary, a site investigation and mitigation
scheme.
5.11
There are some instances where redevelopment of brownfield land should be resisted, such as
previously cleared sites which have, over time, become part of the open and green character of an area and
value is placed on the contribution these areas make to the community or biodiversity. In these instances, the
contribution these sites make to the character of the area will be afforded careful attention before their
redevelopment is considered.
5.12
The NPPF does not specify minimum density targets and considers that density levels should be set by
local authorities to reflect local circumstances. Based upon past density rates achieved in Redditch, at a time
when minimum density requirements were set, it is considered that continuation of these density ranges will
continue to be achievable and in keeping with the character of existing development within the Borough.
There may be instances when achieving minimum density targets will compromise meeting particular and
identified housing needs (such as bungalow developments), the character of the surrounding area or there are
physical limitations within the site boundary. In these circumstances, the opportunity to meet particular
housing needs, the character of the surrounding area and the sites’ physical constraints will be afforded
careful attention before higher density development is considered.
5.13
Homes with large back gardens are common feature in some of the older districts in the Borough and
previously a number of housing completions have come from developments on garden land. Although garden
land was previously defined as brownfield land, it has now been removed from this definition. This does not
mean that all development on garden land should be refused but rather that careful consideration should be
given to any proposals and whether there are any mitigating factors. One of the most important considerations
will be the retention of the existing character of residential areas. Development which significantly increases
the proportion of ground coverage or the scale of proposed buildings is likely to be out of keeping with its
surroundings and therefore is likely to be unacceptable and will be refused. Development of garden land will
only be supported where it fully integrates into the neighbourhood and is in keeping with the character and
quality of the local environment, unless it can be demonstrated there are significant overriding mitigating
circumstances.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs25
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 6
Affordable Housing
6.1
The Government believes that everyone should have the opportunity of a decent home, which they can
afford, within a sustainable mixed community. There is a national commitment to providing high quality
housing for people who are unable to access or afford market housing.
6.2
Affordable housing is defined as including social rented, affordable rented and intermediate housing,
provided to eligible households whose needs are not met by the market (NPPF, Glossary). Client groups who
are in need of affordable housing include vulnerable groups, low income households, key workers, existing
Council or Registered Providers (Housing Associations) tenants in need of larger or small housing, and those
persons trying to make the transition from social rented housing to home ownership.
6.3
A sufficient supply of intermediate housing tenures can help address the needs of key workers and those
people seeking to gain a first step on the housing ladder, reduce the dependency on social rented housing,
free up existing social rented homes, provide a wider choice for households and ensure that sites have a mix of
tenures.
6.4
Redditch Borough has the lowest average house price in the South Housing Market Area. However, despite
Redditch being the most ‘affordable’ Borough in the sub-region, the lower quartile multiplier implies even at
this level, many people will be financially excluded from purchasing market housing.
Policy 6
6.5
Redditch Borough Council is keen to promote opportunities for its residents to access low cost,
high quality housing, which presents opportunities to buy as well as rent. Therefore, the Borough
Council will seek to create sustainable communities by ensuring that a mixture of dwellings with
regard to size, type and tenure that reflect local housing need, are provided on, and integrated
within, each site as appropriate.
6.6
Contributions towards affordable housing will not normally be sought from development of 10
units or less, and which have a maximum combined gross floorspace of no more than 1000 sq m
(gross internal area). On sites of 11 or more dwellings (net), a 30% contribution towards the
provision of affordable housing will be expected. On-site provision should be made and must
incorporate a mix of dwelling types and sizes, which reflect the site’s characteristics, the
development as a whole, and meets the needs identified in the Borough Council’s most up to
date Strategic Housing Market Assessment or other up to date local housing need surveys, and in
consultation with the Borough Council’s Housing Strategy Team.
6.7
The Borough Council will seek to negotiate the mix of affordable housing tenures on individual
schemes taking account of local needs, the housing mix in the local area and the impact on viability.
A mix of the following tenures will generally be sought:
Social rented;
Intermediate housing/ Affordable rent.
6.8
To create mixed and balanced communities affordable housing should be distributed throughout
new developments and not be visually distinguishable from market housing.
6.9
In exceptional circumstances, where the economic viability of affordable housing contribution
is questionable, and this can be fully demonstrated against the Affordable Housing Viability
Assessment Toolkit, the Borough Council may negotiate a more appropriate level of affordable
housing provision, or deferred payment scheme where appropriate, with the applicant.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our NeedsBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)26
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Reasoned Justification
6.10
The Borough Council recognises the continuing need to provide housing across all market sectors within
the Borough and that Strategic Housing Market Assessments (SHMA) continue to report an increasing need for
affordable housing in Redditch. There is a need for social rented and intermediate products with the greatest
need being for social rented accommodation. Over time, the size and type of housing in the greatest demand
may alter; and any changes to the Borough’s housing needs will be reflected through regular SHMA updates.
Therefore it is imperative that the required need identified in the most up to date SHMA is provided for at that
time. The SHMA is updated on an annual basis to ensure up to date information is used in determining the
Borough’s housing needs. The tenure of dwellings that contribute towards the affordable housing provision is
detailed in the Glossary of the National Planning Policy Framework (Annex 2).
6.11
The Affordable Housing Viability Assessment (AHVA) has tested the viability of a range of development
scenarios within Redditch. The affordable housing requirements set in policy reflect the findings of the
Assessment. However, exceptional circumstances may arise due to economic conditions for example, which
may render a site undeliverable if the full affordable housing requirement were to be pursued. If exceptional
circumstances arise, and can be clearly demonstrated, the Borough Council will negotiate an appropriate,
deliverable scheme with the applicant. The AHVA is accompanied by an Assessment Toolkit, which assesses
sites under the same criteria as those used in the AHVA. This offers a reliable method for assessment which
relates directly to the policy’s supporting evidence.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
27
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Reasoned Justification
7.4
‘Planning policy for traveller sites’ (CLG, August 2015) is the current national planning guidance regarding
the provision of sites for Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople. This guidance requires Local Planning
Authorities to make an assessment of the need for traveller sites for the purposes of planning.
7.5
Sites will be allocated in accordance with national planning guidance and based on need identified in an
up to date Gypsy and Traveller Accommodation Assessment. Allocated Sites will be identified in an Allocations
Plan. The criteria contained within this policy will be applied to site allocations as well as proposals for sites
through planning applications.
7.6
Development proposals should be informed by the Landscape Character Assessment completed for
Worcestershire which considers the areas of the Borough that are most sensitive to development. It also
details mitigation measures for proposals with regard to surrounding landscape impact. Any proposals for
future sites will be considered with this Assessment in mind. Proposals must also consider the requirements
of Policy 2 Settlement Hierarchy and Policy 3 Development Strategy.
Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
Policy 7
Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople
7.1
It is important to ensure that the needs of all of the members of the Redditch Borough community are
catered for. In order to address the needs of Gypsies, Travellers and Travelling Showpeople, provision will be
made to meet their needs in the appropriate locations.
Policy 7
7.2
Provision will be made for new Gypsy, Traveller and Travelling Showpeople pitches, in line with
an up-to-date assessment of permanent and transit accommodation needs in line with Government
guidance.
7.3
The Borough Council will allocate site(s) to meet identified need through an Allocations Plan.
Proposals for new sites will be required to demonstrate that they:
i.
are located within a reasonable distance of existing facilities and transport networks with
satisfactory access and highway arrangements;
ii.
where appropriate, are located on Previously Developed Land;
iii.
are well screened and landscaped and will not cause unacceptable harm to the character and
appearance of the surrounding area;
iv.
will not result in loss of amenity to any neighbouring development, specifically in relation to the
transport movements associated with Travelling Showpeople yards; and
v.
have, or are capable of having, a satisfactory water supply, sewerage and refuse disposal
facilities.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)28
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
Policy 8
Green Belt
8.1
Designated Green Belt benefits from protection through national planning policy (the NPPF) meaning it will
be protected from inappropriate development. The preparation of this Plan has led to the removal of some land
from the previously designated Green Belt. Continued protection of the Green Belt can contribute to the Vision
and Objectives of this Plan for the Borough to have a high quality rural environment and to protect, promote
enhance the quality of the Borough’s landscape.
Policy 8
8.2
The designated Green Belt, located predominantly in the south west of the Borough is identified
on the Policies Map. The exceptional circumstances required to amend the Green Belt Boundary
have been demonstrated through the preparation of the Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4.
8.3
Applications for development in the Green Belt will be determined in line with national planning
guidance on Green Belts and other relevant policies within the development plan.
Reasoned Justification
8.4
The Borough’s Green Belt boundary was originally defined by the Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.2
(adopted 1986) and was maintained in the Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.3. The preparation of the
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 and associated evidence has justified the removal of certain sites from
the previously designated Green Belt. Reference should be made to the Redditch Green Belt Study for the
location of land removed from the Green Belt and the BORLP4 Policies Map for the extent of the revised Green
Belt boundary.
8.5
Inappropriate development is, by definition, harmful to the Green Belt (NPPF para 87). Applicants will be
required to demonstrate ‘very special circumstances’ to justify their proposal. New buildings in the Green Belt
will be considered inappropriate unless they are for a purpose, defined in the NPPF, as not inappropriate in
Green Belt (paragraphs 89 and 90). Specifically, providing the openness of the Green Belt and the purposes
of including land in the Green Belt are not compromised, appropriate facilities for outdoor sport and
recreation may include facilities such as small changing rooms or unobtrusive spectator accommodation for
outdoor sport, or small stables for outdoor sport and outdoor recreation.29
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
Policy 9
Open Countryside
9.1
The land south of the B4090 (the Saltway) is Open Countryside. Open Countryside is afforded protection
for its own sake to avoid unsustainable and dispersed patterns of development. This approach can contribute
to the Vision and Objectives of this Plan for the Borough to have a high quality rural environment and to protect,
promote enhance the quality of the Borough’s landscape.
Policy 9
9.2
The Open Countryside outside of the Green Belt is identified on the Policies Map. Development
in the Open Countryside will not be permitted except where it is:
i.
clearly necessary for the purposes of agriculture or forestry and cannot be sited in a settlement;
or
ii.
it is required to support small scale recreation; or
iii.
it is a necessary accompaniment to the establishment and success of an existing or new
enterprise which itself needs to be located outside a settlement; or
iv.
an acceptable, sustainable reuse of a rural building of a substantial and permanent construction
and where it is capable of reuse without major or complete reconstruction; or
v.
a replacement of, and comparable in size with, an existing building; or
vi.
an extension to an existing building which is in scale with the original building and does not
become the dominant feature; or
vii.
in accordance with Policy 2 Settlement Hierarchy.
Reasoned Justification
9.3
It is recognised that some development is necessary in the Open Countryside to support the economic
viability of an existing business or to enable the continued use of existing built development. Small scale
recreational use may also be appropriate in the Open Countryside, such as stables or hay stores. However,
it is also necessary to protect the countryside for its own sake and to prevent an unsustainable, dispersed
pattern of development. Applicants will be required to demonstrate, using appropriate evidence, the need for
a proposed development to be located within the Open Countryside. In the context of criterion (v) of this policy,
“size” means the volume, scale and height of a building.
9.4
Proposals for development in the Open Countryside will be required to demonstrate a proven local need in
accordance with Policy 2 Settlement Hierarchy. Proposals for economic development in the Open Countryside
will also be determined in accordance with Policy 27 Rural Economic Development. ‘Enterprise’ comprises
farm diversification businesses or other businesses where a location outside a settlement is essential to their
successful operation.  Where permission is granted for housing for the purpose of agriculture or forestry,
arrangements should be made to ensure that the dwelling remains in agricultural or forestry use.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)30
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
Policy 10
Rural Workers Dwellings
10.1
About 50% of Redditch Borough is designated Green Belt and Open Countryside (see Policies Map for
the extent) where isolated new dwellings would not normally be permitted. However, the Borough Council
recognises the importance of the rural economy and accepts that new dwellings may be required to support
agricultural enterprises.
Policy 10
10.2
New dwellings in the Green Belt and Open Countryside outside of the settlements of Astwood
Bank and Feckenham will only be permitted where there is an essential need for a rural worker to
live at or near their place of work. Applications for rural workers dwellings in the Green Belt will be
determined in accordance with national planning policy on Green Belts.
A.
New permanent dwellings will be allowed to support existing agricultural activities on well
-
established agricultural units, providing:
i.
there is a clearly established existing essential functional need;
ii.
the functional need relates to a full time worker or one primarily employed in agriculture;
iii.
the unit and agricultural activity is well established, is financially sound and has a clear prospect
of remaining so;
iv.
the functional need could not be fulfilled by another existing dwelling on the unit or any other
existing accommodation in the area which is suitable and available;
v.
the proposed dwelling is of a size commensurate with the established functional need; and
vi.
all other material planning considerations are satisfied.
B.
If a new dwelling is essential to support a new farming enterprise on a new or existing unit,
an application should be made for temporary accommodation. Such proposals will need to
demonstrate:
i.
clear evidence of a firm intention to develop the new enterprise;
ii.
an essential functional need relating to the enterprise;
iii.
the new enterprise has been planned on a sound financial basis;
iv.
the functional need could not be fulfilled by another existing dwelling on the unit or any other
existing accommodation in the area which is suitable and available;
v.
the proposed accommodation is genuinely temporary and the necessary infrastructure can be
provided without permanent harm; and
vi.
all other material planning considerations are satisfied.
C.
The Borough Council will use conditions to restrict the occupancy of dwellings permitted by this
policy to rural workers. Applications to remove such conditions will not be permitted unless the
applicant can demonstrate there is no longer any realistic agricultural need for the restriction to
remain.31
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Sustainable Places to Live which Meet our Needs
Reasoned Justification
10.3
The extent of the Green Belt and Open Countryside in the Borough and the settlements of Astwood Bank
and Feckenham are shown on the Policies Map. It is important that Green Belt principles are not undermined
by speculative development. Proposals for rural workers dwellings in the Green Belt must be supported by
evidence that development is essential and outweighs Green Belt considerations.
10.4
Applicants must provide evidence to demonstrate the essential need for a permanent new dwelling based
on functional and financial tests. The purpose of the functional test is to establish whether it is essential for the
proper functioning of the enterprise for one or more workers to be available at most times to provide essential
care or deal with emergencies that could cause serious loss to crops, livestock or products. The financial test
is necessary to demonstrate the enterprise is economically viable and can sustain the proposed dwelling and
full time (or equivalent) worker. Applicants will normally be required to show that the business has been
established for at least three years and profitable for at least one year. The appropriate size of a dwelling will
be determined based on the requirements of the enterprise rather than those of the owner or occupier.
10.5
Applications for temporary accommodation in relation to a new enterprise must also meet the functional
and financial tests. Temporary permission will normally be given for a period of three years after which time
permission should be sought for a permanent dwelling, justified under Part A above or, the temporary structure
should be removed. Temporary permission will not be granted in locations where the Borough Council would
not permit a permanent dwelling.
10.6
All proposals must also comply with the relevant policies in this Plan and satisfy any other relevant
material planning considerations, such as siting, design, access and impact on the surrounding environment,
etc.
10.7
Conditions restricting the occupancy of dwellings to rural workers have been applied to previous planning
permissions and will be applied to dwellings permitted under this policy. The onus is on the applicant to prove
that the essential functional need for the dwelling is no longer required when applying for such conditions to be
removed.Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
The policies in this chapter will deliver the Objectives:
“To maintain and provide a high quality natural, rural and historic environment with a Green
Infrastructure network which maximises opportunities for biodiversity value, wildlife and ecological
connectivity”
“To ensure that all new development in Redditch Borough will work towards the achievement of
being carbon neutral in line with the National Standards”
“To reduce the causes of, minimise the impacts of and adapt to climate change”
“To protect, promote and where possible enhance the quality of the Boroughs landscape and
Redditch Borough’s other distinctive features”
“To encourage safer, sustainable travel patterns, improve accessibility and maintain a balanced
road hierarchy and reduce the need to travel”
“To protect and enhance water, air and soil and minimise flood risk”
Redditch’s natural environment is one of its main distinctive features, the abundance of trees,
wildlife and open spaces provide the urban area with a natural backdrop that makes it special.
These policies will protect and enhance the natural environment and its flora and fauna, ensuring
any risks to it are minimised so that the Town’s places are well served by a multifunctional Green
Infrastructure network. There are also policies which are sensitive to the effects development can
have on our climate and strive to encourage measures to reduce the impacts of climate change.
To supplement this approach, this chapter also contains policies which support and promote a
shift towards greater public transport use in order to reduce the impact of emissions on the natural
environment.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)32
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment33
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 11
Green Infrastructure
11.1
Green Infrastructure (GI) is defined in the NPPF as ‘a network of multifunctional green space, urban
and rural, which is capable of delivering a wide range of environmental and quality of life benefits for local
communities’. In order to realise the Vision and Objectives of this Plan that, by 2030 Redditch Borough will
be distinctively ‘green’, a well planned and managed GI Network is essential. The multifunctionality of the GI
Network means that it can also contribute to delivering Objectives regarding biodiversity, climate change,
historic environment and flood risk.
Policy 11
11.2
The Green Infrastructure (GI) Network makes an important and valued contribution to the
Borough of Redditch and its distinctiveness. The GI Network is a multifunctional resource that
includes, but is not limited to, green spaces and corridors, waterways, natural heritage and wildlife
habitats.
11.3
The existing GI Network will be safeguarded and new development will be required to
contribute positively to the GI Network, in line with the findings of the Redditch Borough GI Strategy
and to support the Worcestershire Sub-Regional GI Framework. Opportunities will be sought to
improve and maintain the Network for the benefit of people, wildlife and the character and
appearance of the Borough.
11.4
The Borough Council will produce Green Infrastructure Concept Statements to guide
masterplanning and development of Strategic Sites.
Reasoned Justification
11.5
A multifunctional Green Infrastructure (GI) Network in Redditch Borough is of great importance for
protecting the environment, meeting recreational needs, providing wildlife habitats, offering flood protection
and improving water quality, maintaining an attractive townscape and historic environment and assisting in the
mitigation of the effects of climate change. As such, this policy should be read in conjunction with Policy 13
Primarily Open Space, Policy 15 Climate Change, Policy 16 Natural Environment, Policy 17 Flood Risk
Management, Policy 18 Sustainable Water Management, Policy 19 Sustainable Travel and Accessibility and
Policy 43 Leisure, Tourism and Abbey Stadium. Reference should also be made to the Worcestershire Access
and Informal Recreation Strategy (AIRS) and the Worcestershire Rights of Way Improvement Plans (ROWIP)
and, where possible, the aims of these can be delivered through the provision or enhancement of the GI
Network.
11.6
Green infrastructure includes the network of green spaces and natural elements across the Borough.
These areas are important in enriching the quality of life of local communities, improving health, supporting
regeneration and creating attractive environments. A Green Infrastructure Strategy for the Borough is being
completed which identifies and assesses the existing Green Infrastructure Network and makes
recommendations on how the Network can be enhanced, maintained and managed in the future.
11.7
A level of protection also needs to be provided to the ‘corridors’ between sites such as hedgerows and
watercourses. These features, which act as wildlife corridors or ‘stepping stones’ between habitats, help to
maintain the range and diversity of flora and fauna. In considering proposals for development within these
corridors, or for development that would potentially affect their function as a link in maintaining the flora and
fauna of the Borough, the Borough Council will require applicants to provide sufficient information to enable an
assessment of the proposal’s likely impact.
11.8
Green Infrastructure Concept Statements will be produced having regard to the emerging Green
Infrastructure Strategy for Redditch Borough and the emerging Sub-Regional Green Infrastructure Strategy
being produced by the Worcestershire GI Partnership.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)34
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 12
Open Space Provision
12.1
Open space can perform a range of functions and as such makes a significant contribution to the GI
Network of the Borough. It is an invaluable formal and informal recreational resource, is beneficial for nature
conservation and has a bearing on people’s quality of life. Policies 12, 13 and 14 ensure the protection of
existing open space (both designated and incidental) and require the creation of new open space as part of
new development, thereby helping to achieve this Plan’s Vision and Objectives to have a high quality natural
environment and to improve leisure opportunities.
Policy 12
12.2
The Borough Council will aim to maintain minimum standards of open space provision as
identified in the Open Space Needs Assessment and Playing Pitch Strategy. New development will
be required to make provision for new and/or improvements to open space, sports and recreation
facilities in accordance with the Borough Council’s Adopted Open Space Provision Supplementary
Planning Document (SPD) or any other form of planning obligation the Borough Council adopts.
New open space should be strategically located in order for it to contribute to the Green
Infrastructure Network and increase its multifunctionality. The Borough Council will support,
in principle, the development of new open space, sports and recreation facilities.
12.3
If the demand for allotments increases during the course of this Plan period beyond that
which can be accommodated within existing allotments, developers may be required to provide new
allotments in association with new developments.
12.4
Local Green Spaces will be designated by the Borough Council through the Allocations Plan,
where appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the National Planning Policy Framework
(NPPF). Once designated, Local Green Space will be managed in line with planning policy for Green
Belts.
Reasoned Justification
12.5
The Open Space Needs Assessment identifies the different types and amounts of open space in each
ward of the Borough. The Playing Pitch Strategy identifies the future need for playing pitches in the Borough
and recommends that current assets are maximised and current provision is protected. The strategy for
specific typologies of open space is currently contained in the Borough Council’s Open Space Provision SPD.
The Open Space Provision SPD recognises open space, sports and recreational facilities of high value which
may need protecting and sets out local standards for the provision of open space, sports and recreational
facilities. The Borough Council will negotiate with applicants to establish the appropriate amount and location
of open space provision based on the Open Space Provision SPD, Open Space Needs Assessment, Playing
Pitch Strategy and any other relevant evidence.
12.6
The Open Space Provision SPD is the Borough Council’s current adopted method of calculating open
space contributions. This may, in the future, be superseded by another method of collecting planning
obligations such as the Community Infrastructure Levy.
12.7
New open space, sports and recreation facilities such as playing pitches will be supported in principle
provided any ancillary facilities are appropriate.
12.8
Allotments are an important element of the open space provision within the Borough. Existing allotments
are Primarily Open Space and therefore any proposals for development affecting an allotment will be assessed
against Policy 13 Primarily Open Space.35
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
12.9
The NPPF makes provision for local communities to designate Local Green Space through local and
neighbourhood plans. Local Green Space will only be designated where it does not conflict with the Objectives
of BORLP4 and in accordance with the NPPF. Once designated, Local Green Space will be subject to the same
planning policy safeguards as land designated as Green Belt. The Allocations Plan will designate specific sites
for Local Green Space where there is a justification for that allocation.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)36
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 13
Primarily Open Space
Policy 13
13.1
Open space will be protected and, where appropriate, enhanced to improve quality, value,
multifunctionality and accessibility. In order to maintain the levels of open space provision in the
Borough, proposals which would result in the total or partial loss of Primarily Open Space will not
normally be granted planning permission unless it can be demonstrated that the need for
development outweighs the value of the land as an open area.
13.2
In assessing applications for development on Primarily Open Space the following will be taken
into account:
i.
the environmental and amenity value of the area;
ii.
the recreational, conservation, wildlife, historical, visual and community amenity value of the
site;
iii.
the merits of retaining the land in its existing open use, and, the contribution or potential
contribution the site makes to the Green Infrastructure Network, character and appearance of
the area;
iv.
the merits of protecting the site for alternative open space uses;
v.
the location, size and environmental quality of the site;
vi.
the relationship of the site to other open space areas in the locality and similar uses within the
wider area;
vii.
whether the site provides a link between other open areas or as a buffer between incompatible
uses;
viii. that it can be demonstrated that there is a surplus of open space and that alternative provision
of equivalent or greater community benefit will be provided in the area at an appropriate,
accessible locality; and
ix.
the merits of the proposed development to the local area or the Borough generally.
13.3
If development is permitted which results in the loss of a playing pitch or allotment site the
Borough Council will require the provision of equivalent or improved facilities and/or financial
contributions from developers.
13.4
Proposals for development on Primarily Open Space land that contribute to both the Green
Infrastructure Network in the Borough and the nature and purpose of the open space may be
deemed acceptable by the Borough Council.
Reasoned Justification
13.5
All Primarily Open Space is a valuable part of the Green Infrastructure Network of the Borough and fulfils
a number of functions including protecting the environment, meeting recreational needs, providing wildlife
habits and maintaining an attractive townscape. This policy applies to Primarily Open Space as identified on
the Policies Map and in the Open Space Needs Assessment and new areas of open space created by
developments during the Plan period. The Open Space Needs Assessment defines and identifies the different
types of Primarily Open Space in the Borough.37
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
13.6
Development proposals will be assessed against the current and potential attributes of the open space
in accordance with the criteria above. If it cannot be demonstrated that the need for a proposed development
outweighs the value of the open space, planning permission will not be granted.
13.7
If development will result in the loss of a playing pitch or allotment site, the Borough Council will negotiate
with the developer to determine the appropriate alternative provision and/or financial contribution. In relation
to playing pitches, the Borough Council will be guided by the recommendations of the Playing Pitch Strategy.
13.8
Applications for ancillary development on open space that would enhance the existing open space use
will be considered. Where a building is already located on land that is designated as Primarily Open Space,
proposed development within its curtilage or immediate surroundings may be acceptable subject to the
proposal complying with other relevant planning policies and material considerations.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)38
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 14
Protection of Incidental Open Space
Policy 14
14.1
Areas of open space that are not Primarily Open Space are areas of incidental open space.
Whilst incidental open space can make an important contribution to the Green Infrastructure
Network and overall open space provision in the Borough, it is acknowledged that it may be
necessary to develop some areas of incidental open space.
14.2
Incidental open space will be protected from development unless:
i.
the need for the development is considered to outweigh the need to protect the incidental open
space;
ii.
it can be demonstrated that the site does not make an important contribution to the Green
Infrastructure Network and has no particular local amenity or wildlife conservation value;
iii.
the site does not have a strategic function separating clearly defined developed areas or acting
as a buffer between different land uses;
iv.
it can be demonstrated that there is alternative provision of equivalent or greater community
benefit provided in the area at an appropriate and accessible locality; and
v.
the incidental open space does not play an important role in the character of the area.
Reasoned Justification
14.3
All areas of open space that are not Primarily Open Space (Policy 13) are areas of incidental open space
regardless of ownership or accessibility. Areas of incidental open space are usually undeveloped open areas
of land and are generally smaller than areas of Primarily Open Space. Nevertheless incidental open space can
provide a valuable resource and will normally warrant protection from development.
14.4
Applicants will be required to demonstrate the merits of their development in relation to the value of the
open space; if the merits of retaining the land in its existing open use outweigh the merits of the proposed
development, planning permission will not be granted. Sites that provide a link between other open areas or
act as a buffer between land uses will be safeguarded. Consideration will be given to the role the open space
plays in the character and street scene of the area in accordance with Policy 40 High Quality Design and
Safer Communities.Policy 15
Climate Change
15.1
It is now accepted that the world’s climate is changing; new developments in the Borough must mitigate
and adapt to the effects of this climate change. This policy seeks to ensure that new developments are
constructed in an efficient and sustainable manner in order to be climate resilient and to contribute to
reducing carbon emissions.
Policy 15
15.2
To be sustainable, new developments must have regard for the need to be climate-resilient.
For residential development this policy applies to planning applications of more than 10 units.
In order to ensure appropriate consideration of adaptation and mitigation to climate change has
been made, applications will be judged against the following criteria:
i.
development should be placed in accessible locations in order to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. Proposals should take account of the need for accessibility between any development
site and key facilities and consider how flexible and smarter working practices can be maximised
to reduce transport emissions;
ii.
the energy efficiency of the development must be maximised through its siting and orientation,
and through the adoption of energy conservation measures, including natural ventilation,
heating, street trees and lighting;
iii.
proposals must seek to meet the new national technical standards, excluding the additional
optional standards;
iv.
all new non-domestic development must be assessed against the BREEAM assessment method
(or any other national scheme which supersedes it);
v.
all proposals must demonstrate that the use of sustainable, locally sourced and recycled
materials has been considered and the waste hierarchy has been considered (waste
minimisation, reuse and recycling) during construction;
vi.
adaptation measures must be maximised, with particular emphasis on the provision,
enhancement and retention of Green Infrastructure (see Policy 11 for further detail).
15.3
The use of small scale renewable technologies will be encouraged in appropriate locations.
15.4
Low carbon vehicle infrastructure in appropriate developments and locations will be
encouraged.
15.5
This policy relates to all forms of renewable energy development other than wind energy
developments. Wind energy development will be considered against national policy and guidance.
Reasoned Justification
15.6
Locating development where it is accessible by a variety of modes of transport and to employ flexible and
smarter working practices, such as enabling working from home contributes to reducing carbon emissions
from travel. Accessibility to facilities such as the Town and District Centres should also be a key consideration.
This policy should be read in conjunction with Policy 19 Sustainable Travel and Accessibility.
15.7
New development should seek, as a priority, to reduce their demand for energy by maximising the
efficiency of the development. Natural ventilation is one way of making a building efficient using the natural
process of supplying and removing air from an indoor space. Natural heating can be achieved by employing
techniques such as passive solar design. Guidance contained in national Building Regulations can assist in
ensuring that buildings are built and run in an efficient manner.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)39
Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment15.8
BREEAM (BRE Environmental Assessment Method) is a widely used environmental assessment method
for non-domestic buildings. It sets the standard for best practice in sustainable design and is used as a
measure to describe a building’s environmental performance (
http://www.breeam.com/index.jsp
).
All non-domestic developments will be encouraged to meet the BREEAM rating (or any other national scheme
which supersedes it) where it is economically viable but are not required to meet standards above those set
nationally.
15.9
The use of sustainable, locally sourced and recycled materials will be required in order to prevent
negative effects on the natural environment. Using locally sourced materials prevents extensive distances
being travelled during the construction process. The use of sustainable, locally sourced and recycled materials
can be maximised through the use of recycled material on site, which also reduces the amount of waste going
to landfill sites. The EU Waste Framework Directive sets out five steps for dealing with waste, ranked according
to environmental impact – the ‘waste hierarchy’. Prevention, which offers the best outcomes for the
environment, is at the top of the priority order, followed by preparing for reuse, recycling, other recovery and
disposal, in descending order of environmental preference. In addition, to ensuring waste is minimised across
the lifetime of developments, Policy 40 High Quality Design and Safer Communities requires that appropriate
space for waste and recycling is made within the development.
15.10
The provision of Green Infrastructure is the most sustainable way to ensure proposals can adapt to
a changing climate. Ecosystems and the natural environment provide a tool for mitigating and adapting to
climate change and this should be considered in new development schemes and projects relating to the plan
(see Policy 11 Green Infrastructure for more information). Full account should also be taken of the effects of
climate change on flood risk and water supply (see Policy 17 Flood Risk Management and Policy 18
Sustainable Water Management).
15.11
Low carbon vehicle infrastructure in appropriate developments and locations will be encouraged as this
ensures that a reduction in carbon emissions from travel is realised. Low carbon vehicle infrastructure can
include electric vehicle charging points and any other emerging technology required to support the use of low
carbon vehicles.
15.12
If it is unviable for a development proposal to meet any of the requirements set out in this policy,
applicants will be required to demonstrate why it would be unachievable. This policy seeks to support the
target set out in the Climate Change Act 2008 which requires that emissions are reduced by at least 80%
by 2050, compared to 1990 levels.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)40
Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment41
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 16
Natural Environment
16.1
The natural environment is one of the assets of Redditch Borough that make it special. It is essential to
ensure that the natural environment is protected and enhanced and that good design principles are adopted,
particularly to ensure that features of the natural environment are incorporated into new development.
This policy can help to achieve the Objectives of this Plan for the Borough to have a high quality environment
and landscape.
Policy 16
A. Natural Environment and Landscape
16.2
A high quality natural environment and landscape is integral to delivering the Vision of BORLP4.
In order to achieve this all relevant proposals will be expected to:
i.
demonstrate how the use of natural resources will be minimised;
ii.
protect and, where appropriate, enhance the quality of natural resources including water, air,
land, wildlife corridors, species (including protected species), habitats biodiversity and geodiversity;
iii.
demonstrate the Borough’s distinctive landscape is protected, enhanced or restored, as
appropriate and proposals are informed by, and sympathetic to, the surrounding landscape
character;
iv.
avoid any significant adverse impact on skylines and hill features, including established views of
these features;
v.
where possible retain existing trees (including Ancient Trees), woodlands (including ancient
woodlands) and hedgerows (including important hedgerows) and semi-natural habitats with
appropriate management. Particular emphasis should be placed on the expanding and linking of
ancient woodlands, and the creation of targeted new native woodland for wider benefits; and
vi.
contribute to the achievement of relevant Worcestershire Biodiversity Action Plan targets where
appropriate.
B. Sites of Wildlife Importance
16.3
The location of sites of national (Sites of Special Scientific Interest), regional (Local Wildlife Sites)
and local (Local Nature Reserves) wildlife importance are shown on the Policies Map. Applications for
development should aim to conserve and enhance biodiversity by applying the principles of the NPPF.
In determining applications affecting sites of wildlife importance, the Borough Council will apply the
hierarchy of designated sites and appropriate weight will be given to their importance and contribution
to wider ecological networks.
16.4
Due to the national importance of Sites of Specific Scientific Interest (SSSI) proposals likely to
have an adverse impact within or outside of a SSSI, either individually or in combination with other
developments, will not normally be permitted. An exception will only be made when it can be
demonstrated that the benefits of the development clearly outweigh the impact on the site or network
of sites.
16.5
New development or land use changes likely to have an adverse effect on Sites of Special
Scientific Interest, Local Wildlife Sites and Local Nature Reserves, directly or indirectly, will not be
allowed unless there are no reasonable alternative means of meeting that development need and the
reasons for development clearly outweigh the intrinsic nature conservation and/or geological value of
the site or network of sites.
16.6
In all cases where new development or land use change is permitted, any damage to the nature
conservation and/or geological value of the site will need to be kept to a minimum. Adequate and
appropriate protection and enhancement of the site’s nature conservation and/or geological interest
will need to be secured, and where necessary, appropriate and adequate compensatory measures will
need to be provided, using conditions and/or planning obligations where necessary.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)42
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Reasoned Justification
16.7
Through new development proposals, the Borough Council will seek to promote the protection and
enhancement of the natural environment and landscape. Careful use should be made of natural resources in
order to conserve them for future generations. It is important to ensure that development proposals examine
closely the level of resource use required for their implementation (in particular those resources which are
finite), and the likely longer term impact of the development on resource use. The natural environment and
landscape quality of the Borough make a significant contribution to the wider Green Infrastructure Network and
so this policy should be read in conjunction with Policy 11 Green Infrastructure.
16.8
The Landscape Character Assessment (LCA) for Worcestershire (
www.worcestershire.gov.uk/lca
)
describes the key characteristics that define landscapes, in addition to identifying the sensitivity of those
landscapes to change. The LCA will be used in the process of assessing the impact of relevant proposals
on the character of landscape, ensuring that landscape character and sensitivity are fully considered in the
context of individual planning applications. This is particularly important in the landscapes surrounding
the urban areas of Redditch where there may be increased pressure from development. Here, the LCA will
be particularly important in ensuring that development relates to the sensitivity of the location and is
appropriate to the landscape character, strengthening and enhancing the character and local distinctiveness
wherever possible. The Worcestershire Historic Landscape Characterisation (HLC), Worcestershire GI
Framework and Worcestershire Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) should also be used to inform development
proposals.
16.9
Landscaping proposals associated with new developments should seek to maximise woodland planting,
wherever appropriate using indigenous species, and should aim to complement or enhance the landscape
character of the particular area. Reference should be made to the Worcestershire Landscape Character
Assessment to inform this.
16.10
Trees, woodland and hedgerows (including ancient trees, woodland and hedgerows) are important in
Redditch’s landscape and provide patterns of features which give areas local distinctiveness. They are highly
valued by local communities and Redditch’s woodlands are often used for informal recreation. Trees and
woodlands are also often of historic value. Ancient hedgerows are those which support the greatest diversity of
plants and animals and should be retained and managed appropriately in all situations. Trees and woodlands
(including the provision of new native woodland) can deliver a major contribution to resolving a range of water
management issues whilst also delivering other positive factors such as biodiversity, Green Infrastructure and
adapting and mitigating climate change.
16.11
The Worcestershire BAP includes targets for maintenance, restoration, expansion or creation
(as appropriate) for the conservation of habitats and species. Where appropriate, the Borough Council will seek
achievement of relevant BAP targets through new development proposals.
16.12
Within the Borough there are currently six sites of national wildlife importance designated as Sites
of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) which cover a range of different habitats. SSSIs are important for their
wildlife, geological or physiological features and are legally protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act
1981, as amended by the Countryside and Rights of Way (CROW) Act 2000 and the Natural Environment and
Rural Communities (NERC) Act 2006. Regional sites of wildlife importance in the Borough include Local Wildlife
Sites (LWS – formerly known as Special Wildlife Sites) which have been identified by the Worcestershire Local
Sites Partnership as being of substantive nature conservation value. Local Nature Reserves (LNR) are declared
by Local Authorities under Section 21 of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949, and
amended by Schedule 11 of the Natural Environment and Rural Communities Act 2006. Any additional wildlife
sites identified during this Plan period will also be protected by this policy. The principles of the NPPF to be
applied in determining planning applications affecting sites of wildlife and geological importance can be found
in paragraphs 109, 113, 117 and 118 of the NPPF.
16.13
When a development proposal is located some distance from a designated wildlife site it may still have
an adverse effect by, for example, polluting a water course or water catchment area, and account will be taken
of this possibility when applying this policy.43
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 17
Flood Risk Management
17.1
The potential for flood risk should be considered at all stages of the planning and development process,
particularly when considering the possible risks, implications and steps needed to prevent flooding affecting
new or existing development.
Policy 17
17.2
In considering all proposals for development, the following principles will be applied:
i.
the expectation that all development should fall within Flood Zone 1;
ii.
where land in Flood Zones 2, 3a or 3b (‘Functional Floodplain’) or above one hectare in Flood Zone
1 is proposed for development, a comprehensive Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) will be required;
iii.
incorporation of water efficiency measures and appropriate Sustainable Drainage (SuDS)
techniques that utilise retention methods. For Redditch, suitable methods include greywater
recycling, rainwater harvesting, green roofs, permeable surfaces, swales and ponds. SuDS
techniques which provide water quality improvements, utilise natural environment features and
contribute to the Borough’s Green Infrastructure will be encouraged.
17.3
Any development sites that are located in areas that are subject to flood risk will need to
demonstrate that there are no other reasonable locations for development in accordance with the
‘Sequential Test’ and ‘Exception Test’ (where appropriate) as set out in the National Planning Practice
Guidance and have regard to the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) for Redditch. A sequential
approach should also be taken in site design. Development will be designed to be safe taking into
account the lifetime of the development, and the need to consider and adapt to climate change.
17.4
In addition, any development in areas that are subject to flood risk will need to demonstrate
that adequate flood protection has been incorporated on site and that the effects elsewhere have
been fully assessed and mitigated against. Opportunities should be sought to demonstrate flood risk
improvements, wherever possible to provide multiple benefits when managing flood risks, for example
to provide amenity benefit or ecological improvements. It is expected that any on-site flood defences
required will be provided and financed by the developer of the site.
17.5
Where practicable, flood risk should be reduced by increasing flood storage, improving flood flow
routes and/or removing existing obstructions to flow.
Reasoned Justification
17.6
This policy should be read in conjunction with the Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) Level 1
and Level 2 for Redditch Borough. The SFRA maps all forms of flood risk and can be used to locate new
development in low flood risk areas (Flood Zone 1). Where development cannot be located in Flood Zone 1 the
‘Sequential Test’, as defined in the Technical Guidance to the National Planning Policy Framework should be
applied; the SFRA Flood Maps provide the basis for this. If, once the Sequential Test has been applied,
insufficient sites are identified the ‘Exception Test’ (as defined in the National Planning Policy Framework and
National Planning Practice Guidance) can be applied where necessary. This may, in certain circumstances,
justify development taking place in Flood Zone 2 or Flood Zone 3.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)44
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
17.7
Applications for development should be accompanied by a Flood Risk Assessment to demonstrate how
flood risk from all sources of flooding to the site and flood risk to other areas would be managed by taking
into account the potential climate change impacts. FRAs will be required alongside Planning Applications for
development proposals of 1 hectare or greater in Flood Zone 1 and all proposals for new development located
in Flood Zones 2 and 3. The minimum requirements for a FRA are as follows:
be proportionate to the risk and appropriate to the scale, nature and location of the development;
consider the risk of flooding arising from the development in addition to the risk of flooding from all sources
to the development;
take the impacts of climate change into account as per the Technical Guidance to the NPPF;
be undertaken by competent people, as early as possible in the particular planning process, to avoid
misplaced effort and raising landowner expectations where land is unsuitable for development;
consider both the potential adverse and beneficial effects of flood risk management infrastructure including
raised defences, flow channels, flood storage areas and other artificial features together with the
consequences of their failure;
consider the vulnerability of those that could occupy and use the development, taking account of the
Sequential and Exception Tests and the vulnerability classification as per the National Planning Practice
Guidance (Tables 2 and 3 flood risk vulnerability), including arrangements for ‘safe development’
having regard to the FRA requirements within the Level 2 Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA) for
Redditch (2012) including setting of appropriate Finished Floor Levels, with flood proofing techniques
considered (where appropriate), and safe access;
consider and quantify the different types of flooding (whether from natural or human sources and including
joint and cumulative effects) and identify flood risk reduction measures, so that assessments are fit for the
purpose of the decisions being made;
consider the effects of a range of flooding events including extreme events on people, property, the natural
and historic environment and river processes;
include the assessment of the residual risk after risk reduction measures have been taken into account and
demonstrate that this is acceptable for the particular development or land use;
consider how the development will modify run-off and promote the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems
(SuDS) to mitigate that impact;
be supported by appropriate data and information, including historical information on previous events; and
applicants should refer to Tables 1 and 2 of the Government’s Climate Change Allowances guidance and
seek contact with the Environment Agency for any detailed river catchment climate change data.45
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
17.8
It may be necessary in exceptional cases to employ flood defences where a particular development
may occur irrespective of the flood defences following application of the sequential test and exception test
(where necessary) and consideration of safe development requirements. Such flood defences would need to
be designed to an appropriate standard of protection (including freeboard allowance) and be fit for purpose,
including an assessment of structural integrity, for the lifetime of the development. Flood defences should
only be permitted where there are significant wider sustainability benefits and the Flood Risk Assessment
demonstrates no adverse impact on the flood regime (flows and storage) and considers a reduction
(betterment) in flood risk in line with the policy aims of the NPPF (technical guidance). An assessment of
defence breach and overtopping risk would also be necessary. These defences will be expected to be provided
and financed by the developer of the site; any future maintenance costs are also to be met by the site’s
developers.
17.9
Multiple benefits can be achieved when managing flood risk, for example by restoring a flood plain to
improve ecological quality, deculverting watercourses not only as a flood risk measure but also to provide
amenity benefit and ensuring an appropriate distance is left undeveloped along the length of a watercourse
to allow migration of the stream/river and to provide green corridors. Such measures can contribute to the
Borough’s multifunctional Green Infrastructure Network (see Policy 11 Green Infrastructure) but will be
subject to local byelaws and functional floodplain extents.
17.10
Worcestershire County Council as Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) needs to ‘develop, maintain, apply
and monitor’ a Local Flood Risk Management Strategy (LFRMS). The Strategy is a statutory document and
will focus on management of local flood risk due to flooding from surface water, groundwater and ordinary
watercourses in Worcestershire. The Strategy was adopted in March 2016. Development Proposals should
have appropriate regard for the Strategy.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)46
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 18
Sustainable Water Management
18.1
Successful water management contributes to the quality of the landscape and townscape in some
locations and also provides beneficial effects for important habitats or species. It can also provide enhanced
recreational facilities, offer opportunities for education, and often provide an attractive interest point which is
valuable in the creation of new sustainable developments.
Policy 18
18.2
The Outline Water Cycle Study (2012) identifies a need for sustainable water demand
management techniques to be employed in Redditch Borough. Therefore, all development proposals,
including changes to existing buildings will require the inclusion of Sustainable Drainage Systems to
manage surface water and will be required to treat all surface runoff on site.
Sites of one hectare or more will be required to:
i.
allocate suitable land and incorporate SuDS techniques within the drainage design for the
development;
ii.
ensure that discharge rates from the development do not exceed and, if possible, improve upon
existing runoff rates; and
iii.
provide on-site attenuation for the 1% annual probability of flooding or 1 in 100 chance in any year
plus an allowance for climate change.
18.3
Sites of less than one hectare will be expected to apply the same criteria, as appropriate.
18.4
The development of any site should not lead to deterioration of EU Water Framework Directive
(WFD) water body status nor have a negative impact on water quality, either directly through the
pollution of surface or ground water or indirectly through overloading of sewage treatment works.
Development should, where necessary and feasible, help to conserve and enhance watercourses
and riverside habitats.
18.5
Applications for development within an area of waste water collection or treatment
infrastructure capacity constraint, as identified by the Water Cycle Study, must demonstrate that the
necessary infrastructure is in place to serve the development and that appropriate consultations have
been conducted with the sewerage undertakers, the Borough Council and any other relevant bodies.
18.6
With regard to foul water disposal, developments should first look to connect to the main foul
sewer as the preferred most sustainable option. Only once it has been demonstrated that it is not
feasible to connect to the mains sewer should the developer consider non-mains foul drainage
options.
18.7
Any major residential development (as defined in the Town and Country Planning (Development
Management Procedure) (England) Order 2015 or any subsequent replacement) within the Bow Brook
and Batchley Brook catchments should meet a water efficiency target of 110 litres per person per day.
Reasoned Justification
18.8
This policy should also be read in conjunction with the Water Cycle Strategy (2009) and Outline Water
Cycle Study (WCS) for Redditch Borough (2012) and the Worcestershire Waste Core Strategy, particularly
policies WCS 3 and WCS 6. All new development will require a suitably designed drainage system in order to
mitigate the risk of surface water and overland flooding as well as the risk posed by the overloading of local
sewers and watercourses.18.9
The Water Cycle Study provides more detail on the implementation of greywater recycling, rainwater
harvesting and SuDS. Developers should allow for sufficient land for SuDS to be designed in at the outset;
lack of space is not considered appropriate justification for not accommodating SuDS. A range of SuDS
methods are available, although some will be more suited to some sites than others. SuDS selection should be
specific to a site and should not be limited to one technique per site. Consideration should be given to source
control within the surface water drainage proposals, which can be achieved through a range of techniques.
The Water Cycle Strategy has concluded that Redditch Borough suffers from negligible permeability due to
the underlying geology. It will therefore not be possible to utilise infiltration based SuDS in the Borough and
alternative techniques are required. It is recommended that within the assessment of the feasibility of SuDS
for all development sites, that an infiltration test is conducted.
18.10
There will be a clear presumption in favour of soft-engineered, multi-functional and biodiversity-led
SuDS and sites should be assessed on their merits to determine which SuDS techniques are the most suitable
particularly where contaminated land may be an issue. It is considered that all development sites are able to
incorporate some form of SuDS; the scale of these techniques should be proportionate to the scale of
development proposed. All surface water run-off should be properly treated i.e. reused or incorporated back
into the water cycle system.
18.11
Through the use of SuDS techniques and the requirement for new developments to be assessed against
the new national technical standards or BREEAM (for non-domestic developments), water demand will be
significantly lowered.  The Level 2 SFRA contains more guidance on the appropriate application of SuDS.
18.12
The Outline Water Cycle Study (2012) identifies constraints to the existing capacity of waste water
treatment infrastructure serving the Borough. Consultation should be carried out at the earliest possible stage
of site planning with the Borough Council, sewerage undertakers and other relevant bodies to ensure that
necessary infrastructure is in place at the appropriate time to enable development.
18.13
New development must not create adverse pressures on the water environment that could compromise
Redditch’s ability to meet the Water Framework Directive (WFD) objectives. Development can help to conserve
and enhance watercourses and riverside habitats where necessary and feasible, through management and
mitigation measures for the improvement and/or enhancement of water quality and habitat of any aquatic
environment in or adjoining the development site. It is also important for applicants to bear in the mind the
importance of the River Basin Management Plan and the Surface Water Management Plan when putting
together proposals.
18.14
The Lead Local Flood Authority (LLFA) is required to establish a SuDS Approval Body (SAB) with
responsibility for approval of all drainage plans and the adoption and maintenance of SuDS that serve more
than one property in new developments.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)47
Creating and Sustaining a Green EnvironmentBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)48
Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 19
Sustainable Travel and Accessibility
19.1
As a former New Town, Redditch has been designed with a focus on private car use, this needs to be
reduced with a shift towards increasing public transport so that emissions from transport in Redditch are
reduced. This policy seeks to contribute towards reducing the causes and impacts of climate change and to
encourage safer, sustainable travel patterns, improve accessibility and reduce the need to travel.
Policy 19
19.2
Transport will be coordinated to improve accessibility and mobility, so that sustainable means of
travel, reducing the need to travel by car and increasing public transport use, cycling and walking are
maximised. This will be achieved by:
i.
meeting development requirements in accessible locations and taking account of interactions
between uses. This includes maximising accessibility to, from and between public transport
modes and interchanges (bus and rail), maximising accessibility to and from the development
sites and increasing access to and from Redditch Railway Station for users, particularly where
access points into the Borough create a gateway;
ii.
delivering a comprehensive network of routes for pedestrians and cyclists that is coherent, direct,
safe, accessible and comfortable to use. Building on, adapting and extending the pedestrian and
cycle network that exists, in particular following ‘desire lines’ of the pedestrian and ensuring that
all members of the community can comfortably move around the Borough;
iii.
ensuring that infrastructure for pedestrians and cyclists that is well designed and safe is
prioritised in residential areas and the Town Centre and facilitates walking, cycling and public
transport use. Proposals should incorporate appropriate, safe, convenient, well over-looked and
well maintained pedestrian and cycle access as an integral feature of the proposed design.
Where appropriate new developments should prioritise cycleways which run adjacent to footpaths.
The provision or improvement of off-site cycle routes, footpath links and related infrastructure will
be sought in appropriate locations. The Green Infrastructure Network should also be fully
integrated into the pedestrian network and cycleways;
iv.
developing the network of cycle routes particularly the National Cycle Network route (wherever an
opportunity exists). Cycleways will be sought that are appropriate to the location;
v.
effectively managing the Primary Route Network (PRN) and prevent new accesses onto the
network;
vi.
ensuring that public transport infrastructure, services and information is provided for users and
operators in order to encourage the use of public transport;
vii.
supporting the provision of coach parking where appropriate; and
viii. providing measures which reduce the impact of the environmental problems (including potential
Air Quality Management Areas) associated with transport growth and bring forward environmental
improvements particularly along major transport routes.
Reasoned Justification
19.3
At the heart of this policy is the importance of improving accessibility and mobility, whilst avoiding past
trends of increased car traffic and longer journeys. The various measures detailed are set out to bring about
behavioural change and create the right conditions for people to choose to live in close proximity to their
workplace and to choose sustainable means of transport.49
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
19.4
Public transport interchanges in Redditch consist of the Redditch Railway Station and Bus Station located
in the Town Centre and the proposed public transport interchange to be located at the front of the Alexandra
Hospital.
19.5
The Borough has a network of footpaths and cycleways but there are deficiencies, and in some areas they
are considered to be threatening and uninviting as they offer refuge for anti-social behaviour. Fundamental to
this approach is the need to view developments through the eyes of pedestrians and cyclists. New footpaths
and cycleways should follow the desire line of the user i.e. the shortest and most easily navigated route
between origin and destination. All measures should promote pedestrian and cycle priority, convenience and
safety, including safer routes to school and cycleways as necessary. In order for these measures to be effective,
pedestrian routes should form an integral part of the development process, generating good quality access and
meaningful links within and between developments. Therefore it is essential to integrate the provision of these
facilities in the design stage of any new development, especially in those developments of significant size or
journey generating capacity.
19.6
All members of the community should be able to move around the Borough in a safe and convenient
manner this includes disabled and visually impaired members of the community. To aid in developing the
above provisions reference should be made to the Designing for Community Safety SPD.
19.7
Proposed access for cyclists in the design of new development should be well connected to the wider
cycle network and be safe and convenient for the user, having due regard to the ‘Secured By Design’ scheme.
The provision of cycle routes and facilities will be expected to be undertaken at the developers’ expense, and
where appropriate, contributions from the developer will be sought towards provision off-site.
19.8
The Borough Council is committed to the protection of the existing cycle network in Redditch Borough,
particularly the National Cycle Network route (see Transport Map overleaf). Where it is considered that a
proposal has an adverse impact on the continued safety and convenience of the network, it will not normally
be allowed.
19.9
The Green Infrastructure Network in the Borough contributes towards cycleways and footpaths being
safer and more attractive to the user.
19.10
The transport network must be maintained and managed in a way that preserves strategic routes,
and supports business efficiency which is critical to Redditch’s competitiveness. The Strategic Road Network
(SRN) and Primary Route Network (PRN) are central to this by providing routes between major settlements and
important destinations. Motorways and trunk roads make up the SRN including the M42 and M5 which lie
outside of the Borough; and other primary routes represent the PRN. In Redditch the PRN is formed only of ‘A’
roads and is taken from the Worcestershire Local Transport Plan No.3 Network Management Plan - Figure 2.1)
and consists of the A441, A4023 and the A448, and is identified on the Transport Map overleaf. New accesses
onto the PRN and SRN will not be encouraged and should not inhibit the strategic function of these routes.
Where development proposals impact upon the PRN or the SRN, a transport assessment must be undertaken
to ensure that the function of the network is maintained.
19.11
Any planning application should consider the need to, and incorporate the recommendations of the
Worcestershire Local Transport Plan No.3 and its supporting policy documents.
19.12
Coach parking within close proximity to the Town Centre would ensure that Redditch Borough is
accessible to visitors that choose to travel in a sustainable manner.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)50
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
19.13
In accordance with the national Air Quality Strategy (DEFRA 2007) the Borough Council supports the
objective of protecting and improving air quality. Proposals for development which would adversely impact upon
air quality will be resisted. The maintenance of air quality will be required and, where possible, an improvement
to air quality will be sought. Reducing the need to travel can contribute to a reduction in air pollution. Currently
there are no Air Quality Management Areas (AQMAs) within the Borough; however, regard should be had for
any impact which may be had on potential AQMAs within the Borough and any current or potential AQMAs in
neighbouring areas.
19.14
The Borough Council supports, where appropriate, the Safer Routes to School initiative, Quiet Lanes
initiative and the development of Greenways (see Glossary for definitions).
Transport Map
Borough Boundary
Primary Route Network
National Cycle Network - Existing
National Cycle Network - Proposed
Public Transport Route
Railway Line
Transport Interchange (Railway Station)
Transport Interchange (Bus Station)
Proposed Public Transport Interchange
Road Reserve
Key51
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 20
Transport Requirements for New Development
Policy 20
20.1
In order to deliver the transport aspirations set out in Policy 19 Sustainable Travel and
Accessibility, proposals for development are required to achieve the following standards and are
required to submit the following information:
i.
a Transport Assessment will be required where it is considered that development will have
significant transport implications. The assessment of traffic impact should be undertaken in line
with the policies in the Plan and other relevant transport policy and guidance;
ii.
a Travel Plan will be required alongside all developments which generate significant amounts of
movement;
iii.
all proposals should incorporate safe and convenient access arrangements in their design for all
potential users (including pedestrians, cyclists, emergency services and waste collection
vehicles). Access arrangements should be designed to reflect the function and character of the
development and its wider surroundings;
iv.
all proposals should discourage unintended through traffic (“rat runs”) within the development
site and/or between sites;
v.
all proposals will be expected to be located accessible to local services (in accordance with the
retail hierarchy this should either be a parade of local shops or a District Centre) and a public
transport link (i.e. bus stop or train station);
vi.
proposals should include parking standards as prescribed by Worcestershire County Council
Local Transport Plan No.3 Highways Design Guide;
vii.
the cumulative effects of development on transport infrastructure must be assessed and
solutions sought in line with the policies in this Plan and other relevant transport policy and
guidance, with particular regard to the cumulative effects of the delivery of the Strategic Sites;
viii.
ensure that development does not have a detrimental effect on land safeguarded for road
development and/or improvement schemes as depicted on the Policies Map;
ix.
ensure that development does not have a detrimental effect on land safeguarded for Public
Transport Routes as depicted on the Policies Map;
x.
the Borough Council will use mechanisms such as planning conditions and planning obligations,
including financial contributions where necessary to secure the timely delivery of any necessary
transport mitigation measures; and
xi.
development of transport infrastructure provision will be coordinated in line with the up to date
Infrastructure Delivery Plan, which will be subject to regular review.
Reasoned Justification
20.2
Transport Assessments should be prepared in line with the Worcestershire Transport Assessment
Guidelines and Worcestershire Highways Design Guidance. These can both be found on the County Council
Website (located under Transport Guidance). A Transport Assessment will be expected where proposals for
developments are larger than the thresholds set in the guidance documents. Some proposals for
development which are under the prescribed thresholds may not require a Transport Assessment but may
still have an impact on the local transport network and may be required to provide a Transport Statement.
Developers are advised to check at an early stage with Worcestershire County Council to establish what level
of information is required (pre application meetings are actively encouraged in order to address any potential
issues).Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)52
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
20.3
A Travel Plan will be expected where proposals generate significant amounts of movement, including
development which exceeds the following thresholds:
20.4
A Travel Plan will also be expected in the following circumstances:
where employment, shopping, leisure and services in, or near to any Air Quality Management Areas that are
introduced to the Borough;
where there are local initiatives for the reduction of road traffic, or the promotion of public transport,
walking or cycling; or
where a Travel Plan would help address a particular local traffic problem associated with the planning
application, which might otherwise have to be refused on local traffic grounds.
20.5
All proposals must have full regard for locational access of the development and external physical
access that considers people’s diverse needs. Access should be designed in such a way as to break down
unnecessary barriers and exclusions in a manner that benefits the entire community.
20.6
Parking standards can be found in Worcestershire Highways Design Guidance. This document can be
found on the County Council Website (located under Transport Guidance).
20.7
With regard to assessing the transport infrastructure required to support proposed development,
the full development site must be considered at the first stage of delivery. Transport evidence prepared in
support of a planning application must be prepared to the satisfaction of the Borough Council and
Worcestershire County Council (WCC) Highways Department and where appropriate Highways England.
Worcestershire County Council owns and maintains a range of transport models and information, which it
makes available for use by developers to test the impacts of proposed developments on Worcestershire’s
transport networks. Please see ‘Redditch Development Traffic Model Protocol for use of the model’ and
contact WCC Highways Department for more information.
20.8
The Borough Council will safeguard areas within the Borough for the development of road schemes.
These areas will be protected from development likely to obstruct the route or hinder the future building of
the road.
Use
Threshold from and above which a Travel Plan will be required
(gross floorspace)
Shopping, leisure and service facilities
1000 sq m
Employment facilities
2500 sq m
Stadia
Seating capacity of 500 or more53
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 21
Alexandra Hospital Public Transport Interchange
Policy 21
21.1
A public transport multi-modal interchange is required on the site of the Alexandra Hospital.
When developing the public transport interchange facility the following principles should be applied:
i.
the interchange facility will serve to connect a number of bus routes in the area and improve the
level of bus service to and from the hospital;
ii.
the interchange facility could include improved waiting facilities and information systems for taxi,
bus or community transport users and car pick up and drop off facilities at the Alexandra
Hospital;
iii.
the interchange facility scheme has the potential to include measures to improve access to/from
the hospital for taxis, buses and community transport;
iv.
the interchange facility must link important facilities and services within the Borough;
v.
the design, layout and access arrangements of surrounding developments relative to the
interchange must be safe and convenient so as to maximise the walking and cycling catchment
population for public transport services; and
vi.
have regard to the impact on the environment, safety, the economy and accessibility.
21.2
Development will not normally be permitted where it might prove detrimental to the proposed
interchange. Where appropriate, provision should be made by developers for improvements to and/
or the development of interchange facilities.
Reasoned Justification
21.3
A multi-modal public transport interchange is required at the front of the Alexandra Hospital and may be
necessary to support development at the Strategic Site to the rear of the hospital; further detailed work will be
required to assess the specific measures that are to be implemented along with funding requirements. Further
detail on the delivery of the Alexandra Hospital Public Transport Interchange (costs and timescales) can be
found in the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (IDP). The Alexandra Hospital Public Transport Interchange is further
detailed in the Worcestershire Local Transport Plan.
21.4
Transport interchange facilities are defined as the infrastructure enabling the transfer between different
modes of transport for quick, easy and safe interchange. They are important to the integration between
different modes of transport and to the competitiveness of public transport against the private car, as
improvements to the connections between cars, taxis, buses, trains, pedestrians and cyclists can greatly
enhance the flexibility and convenience of existing public transport services.
21.5
This improved access would be made available to emergency service vehicles, ensuring that ambulances
would be able to avoid congestion en route to and from the hospital.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)54
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
Policy 22
Road Hierarchy
Policy 22
22.1
The Borough Council will continue to endorse and pursue the principles of a structured road
hierarchy and will seek to extend such principles to any new development. Due regard will be given,
in the assessment of development proposals, to the traffic management objectives and design
philosophy of the road hierarchy. Development proposals which do not accord with these objectives
and philosophy will not normally be allowed.
Reasoned Justification
22.2
The current pattern of roads in the Borough has been inherited from two previous distinct phases of
development. Despite their interdependence, both systems retain many of their individual features.
The adopted hierarchy of this policy is that inherited from the Redditch Development Corporation and the ‘New
Town Master Plan’. It is a structured hierarchy of highways with each level serving a well-defined role. However,
this hierarchy exists side by side with the roads within the older areas of Redditch which display no such clarity
of purpose. While these roads have been continually maintained and upgraded by the Highways Authority, they
remain noticeably different in style, structure and purpose to that of the New Town hierarchy.
22.3
The principle of the New Town road hierarchy remains an effective and efficient system. While the
difficulties in attempting to apply such a hierarchy to the older areas of the Borough are recognised, the
Borough Council nevertheless wishes to continue to adopt the principles of this hierarchy and to extend
these principles to all new development in the Borough.
22.4
The roads in the hierarchy are shown on the Policies Map down to Local Distributor level and are
designated according to their intended use and design standard. The main principle of the Redditch road
system is to create areas of high environmental quality and high pedestrian and cycle safety, within which there
will be no vehicular traffic which is not servicing destinations within that area. Frontage development will be
passed only by vehicles which are close to their origin or destination, so that there will be few of them and
their speed will be low. As traffic volumes and speeds rise, so the traffic is kept further away from the places
in which pedestrians will need or wish to be.
22.5
Roads in the urban area are divided into four classes: Primary Distributors, District Distributors, Local
Distributors and Access Roads.
22.6
Primary Distributors convey traffic between separate districts of the town, and also serve as internal by
-
passes keeping through traffic clear of environmental areas. They will be free flowing so far as is economically
possible, dual carriage-way where the traffic warrants this, and designed for a 70 mph speed limit wherever
possible. No individual development, except on the largest scale, will be accessed directly from these and any
such access will be by way of a junction of no lower standard than an at-grade roundabout.
22.7
District Distributors convey traffic between environmental areas and the Primary Distributors, with which
they connect at high-capacity junctions. They will normally be at least 7.3 metres wide and designed for a 40
mph speed limit. Their alignment will be such as to discourage their use by traffic not originating or terminating
in the area which they serve. There will be no frontage development on them, and the only junctions into them
will be from Local Distributor Roads. Exceptionally, permission may be granted for a major development site to
access a District Distributor. An at-grade roundabout will need to be provided in such circumstances.55
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating and Sustaining a Green Environment
22.8
The Primary and District Distributor Roads are intended to provide convenient routes of high speed and
capacity, with little conflict with junction or turning movements, or with pedestrians. In this way, the maximum
capacity can be obtained from a given width of road, with minimum delay, danger or environmental impact.
Individual developers may wish to tap directly into this system, for their own convenience, but the preservation
of its efficiency depends upon such attempts being resisted.
22.9
Local Distributors distribute traffic within environmental and residential areas, connecting into the District
Distributors. They will be designed for 30 mph speed limits and will have no frontage development except on
sections which, in total, serve no more than 150 dwellings or their equivalent.
22.10
Housing Access Roads service frontage residential developments. They will never serve more than 300
dwellings and will normally serve no more than 150 dwellings. Other than in exceptional circumstances, where
they serve more than 100 units an emergency access will be required and a second point of access if more
than 200 units otherwise they will be cul-de-sac and they will be appropriately designed for speed of 30 mph or
less. Measures to give pedestrians priority will be appropriate in these roads, as will appropriate traffic calming
measures.
22.11
Industrial Access Roads service industrial and commercial users, connecting into District Distributor
Roads. They may be cul-de-sac or loops and will be designed for speed limits of 30 mph. They will serve
industrial and commercial development directly, and will be so laid out as to discourage through traffic.
Their character will be a combination of that of the Local Distributors and the Access Roads in residential
areas, as appropriate.
22.12
The standards to be adopted for the dimensions of roads, junctions and other features, in respect of
each of these classes of road, will be those laid down by, or agreed by the Highway Authority.
22.13
The Borough has a number of unmade roads within it, many of which are private roads. The Borough
Council will encourage frontagers and others to undertake the necessary surfacing work to bring it up to an
adopted road standard.
Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
The policies in this chapter will deliver the Objectives:
“To have a strong, attractive, diverse and enterprising economic base with sufficient employment
land, including Strategic Sites and employees with higher skills levels”
“To have demonstrated compliance with the “Duty to Cooperate” by providing for Redditch’s growth
across Local Authority boundaries”
This chapter identifies the level of employment provision required to support the planned housing
development for Redditch, and identifies where employment provision should best be located
in order that conflicting land uses can be developed harmoniously. There are policies which
support the changing business practices of the 21st century in both the urban and rural areas
of the Borough, whilst recognising the need to improve the quality of the skills base to ensure a
brighter economic future for Redditch.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
5657
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
Policy 23
Employment Land Provision
23.1
The NPPF commits to securing and supporting sustainable economic growth in order to create jobs and
prosperity. Therefore the availability of suitable land is crucial to the economic well-being and development of
Redditch Borough. It is important to maintain a balance between residential and economic development in
order for Redditch to thrive as a place to live and work. This policy seeks to strategically guide the location and
development of employment land, whilst aiming to remain flexible in a changing economic climate.
Policy 23
23.2
Provision is made for the identification of around 55 hectares of land which are available for
employment uses for the period up to 2030. Around 27.5 hectares will be accommodated within
Redditch Borough and around 5.5 hectares will be accommodated within Bromsgrove District at the
north western section of the existing Ravensbank business park. Within this provision, an allowance
has been made to accommodate waste management facilities, within Redditch Borough, as identified
in the Waste Core Strategy for Worcestershire (November 2012), see Policy 24 Development within
Primarily Employment Areas.
23.3
The Redditch Eastern Gateway has been identified as a key initiative for employment provision to
meet Redditch related employment needs. Around 10 hectares will be accommodated in Bromsgrove
District at the former Ravensbank ADR, adjacent to the south eastern boundary of the existing
Ravensbank business park and further employment provision will be accommodated within Stratford
-
on-Avon District at Gorcott (around 7 hectares) and Winyates Green Triangle (around 12 hectares).
23.4
The Redditch Eastern Gateway aims to provide a significant enhancement to the employment
land supply through the creation of a high-profile and accessible employment scheme to take
advantage of the demand of the M40/M42 corridor to support both existing businesses and to
provide the opportunity to diversify the employment base of Redditch and the surrounding areas.
Comprehensive development of the three areas that comprise this initiative should:
establish a phased master plan for the scheme, providing for a mix of high quality employment
uses in an attractive landscaped setting; and
take a coordinated and master planned approach for delivery of a new primary access for all three
areas to increase their prominence, and provide a gateway to Redditch’s wider opportunities.
23.5
Details of the sites expected to contribute to meeting the Borough’s employment needs can be
found in Appendix 3 and are shown on the Policies Map. The cross boundary sites are shown on the
Key Diagram.
Reasoned Justification
23.6
The Employment Land Review (ELR) provides a robust evidence base to inform the economic objectives
of the Plan. It provides a complete picture with regard to demand and supply of employment land in Redditch.
The ELR assessed numerous sites to meet projected growth needs in the Borough. These sites were assessed
against a set of criteria to determine their appropriateness and to ensure that there is a balanced portfolio of
employment sites to meet a diverse range of employment uses within Classes B1, B2 and B8 of the Town and
Country Planning (Use Classes) Order 1987 (as amended).
23.7
The ELR indicates that it is not possible to meet the Borough’s employment needs within Redditch’s
administrative boundary. Therefore it has been necessary to collaborate with neighbouring Local Authorities
to identify land within their Districts, in the vicinity of Redditch, which is capable of accommodating Redditch’s
land supply shortfall.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)58
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
23.8
The Redditch Eastern Gateway has the characteristics in terms of scale, location, accessibility and
environment to create a high quality business park which would enable Redditch and the surrounding areas
to retain key businesses as well as to diversify the employment land supply and compete more effectively in
attracting investment from companies within key growth areas of the local and national economy, whilst
offering the potential to function within the wider M42 Economic Gateway.
23.9
The Waste Core Strategy for Worcestershire has identified a need for new waste management facilities
in the County. Redditch falls within Level 1 of the Strategy’s geographical hierarchy, alongside Kidderminster
and Worcester and it is expected that the majority of waste management facilities will come forward within
these areas. Therefore, Redditch needs to plan for approximately one third of the expected total land
requirements. No specific employment sites are designated for waste management provision, although a
flexible approach should be taken if proposals for waste management facilities come forward during this Plan
period, in accordance with guidance in the Waste Core Strategy for Worcestershire, specifically Policy WCS 6:
Compatible land uses and Annex A: Areas of Search.
59
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
Policy 24
24.2
Development will not be permitted where it would restrict the current or future use or
development of Primarily Employment Areas (as defined on the Policies Map) for employment
purposes.
24.3
Non employment development will only be permitted when:
i.
such development would not cause or accentuate a significant shortage of land for employment
use in the Borough or area concerned; and
ii.
it is no longer viable as an employment area either following a period of unsuccessful marketing
or undertaking a viability assessment. Consultation must be undertaken with the Economic
Development and Regeneration Service by the applicant to ascertain this; or
iii.
the site is no longer appropriate for employment use because of at least one of the following
reasons and these problems are incapable of resolution in the foreseeable future:
it impinges upon residential amenity;
it causes substantial transport network, highway or traffic problems;
it creates other adverse environmental effects; or
technical reasons such as land stability or fundamental infrastructure problems.
24.4
Primarily Employment Areas are appropriate locations for waste management facilities, subject
to other relevant material planning considerations.
Policy 24
Development within Primarily Employment Areas
24.1
Existing Primarily Employment Areas are identified on the Policies Map. Employment land is described as
B1 (Business), B2 (General Industrial) and B8 (Storage and Distribution). The purpose of this policy is to
ensure that there is an available supply of employment land and to protect employment land from
inappropriate development.
Reasoned Justification
24.5
Land designated as Primarily Employment Areas are identified on the Policies Map. In addition, the
Employment Land Review identifies sites considered suitable to meet the Borough’s employment need and this
is reviewed annually. Having an available supply of employment land is essential to the economic well-being
and development of Redditch. The purpose of this policy is to ensure that employment land in the Primarily
Employment Areas is protected from inappropriate development in order to support the functioning of the
areas and businesses within them. The policy aims to ensure that the Borough’s employment land supply
remains available so that significant areas of new employment land are not required in the next Plan period.
For the purposes of this policy employment land is defined as Use Classes B1 (Business), B2 (General Industry)
or B8 (Storage and Distribution).
24.6
It may be the case that Primarily Employment Areas or a site specifically identified for employment
development is no longer needed if all employment needs are met or because that type of employment land is
no longer suitable or viable. Where the applicant can identify that the loss of a piece of Primarily Employment
Land would not constrain the future supply of employment land, and the land being lost is demonstrated by the
applicant as not suitable for employment purposes, it is then possible that the land could be developed for an
alternative use.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)60
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
24.7
In considering the impact of the loss of the site on the employment land supply, regard will be had to
the individual and cumulative impact of the loss and the qualitative nature of the supply of land. The Borough
Council will assess whether the loss of an employment site would have a detrimental impact on the supply of
employment land. In some instances it is feasible that a site cannot be developed for employment purposes
due to site constraints and/or other issues. In these cases an alternative use may be sought if this can be
demonstrated by the applicant.
24.8
The Waste Core Strategy for Worcestershire has identified a need for new waste management facilities
in the County, a proportion of which will need to be located in Redditch Borough. No specific employment sites
are designated for waste management provision, although a flexible approach should be taken if proposals for
waste management facilities come forward during this Plan period, in accordance with guidance in the Waste
Core Strategy for Worcestershire.
24.9
Employment land will be monitored annually and any land which does not have a reasonable prospect of
being used for employment uses will have the designation removed.
61
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
Policy 25
Development outside of Primarily
Employment Areas
25.1
Land not designated as a Primarily Employment Area can also contribute to the Borough’s employment
land need where it does not have a negative impact on the surrounding area.
Policy 25
25.2
Sites within the urban area other than those within designated Primarily Employment Areas may
be suitable for economic development, redevelopment or change of use. Within the Redditch urban
area the economic development proposals should:
i. be in close proximity to suitable transport routes and services;
ii. have regard to the scale and nature of the travel demand across all modes likely to be generated;
iii. be accessible from existing residential areas by all appropriate modes of transport and are not
dependant upon access by private transport, where amenity is not negatively affected;
iv. be acceptable in terms of impact on the wider environment; and
v.
demonstrate the provision of adequate infrastructure including Green Infrastructure required to
support the proposal.
Reasoned Justification
25.3
Economic development, redevelopment or change to employment use in locations that are not
designated Primarily Employment Areas as identified on the Policies Map, may be appropriate where it does
not have an adverse impact on the surrounding area. Economic development includes Use Classes B1
(Business), B2 (General Industry) or B8 (Storage and Distribution).
25.4
Reducing the need to travel by private car and increasing the use of more sustainable modes of
transport is a key requirement for development in Redditch, in accordance with Policy 19 Sustainable Travel
and Accessibility. Proposals must be supported by a Transport Assessment and/or a Travel Plan in line with
the requirements of Policy 20 Transport Requirements for New Development. Access, parking and any other
highways infrastructure provision provided with an application will also be judged against Policy 20 Transport
Requirements for New Development.
25.5
Wherever possible development sites should make a contribution to the Borough’s Green Infrastructure
Network (see Policy 11 Green Infrastructure); this should be considered during the design and layout of any
proposal.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)62
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
Policy 26
Office Development
26.1
The Borough Council aims to create a Borough where businesses have the opportunity to thrive and the
Office Development policy offers a strategy towards meeting this aspiration. Whist Town Centres are ideal
locations for office development; Redditch Town Centre may not offer the most appropriate location for all
office-based businesses to thrive in Redditch. Different businesses have different needs and priorities;
therefore this policy provides some flexibility in order that business opportunities elsewhere in the Borough
are not stifled.
26.2
Furthermore, existing office space which is not responding to market demand and remains empty can
have a detrimental impact on the overall prosperity of the Town Centre as a desirable business destination.
This policy offers some flexibility to encourage other business uses into Redditch’s Town Centre environment
in order to contribute towards its vitality and viability.
Policy 26
26.3
Provision has been made for around 14,500 sq m (5.3 hectares) of office development up to
2030, which forms part of the total employment land provision identified in Policy 23 Employment
Land Provision.
26.4
Office development (Use Class B1a) will be considered favourably in Primarily Employment
Areas, provided the total floorspace in any one location does not exceed 5,000 sq m. Strategic Sites
(Policy 46 Brockhill East and Policy 47 Land to the rear of the Alexandra Hospital) also contain
locations suitable to accommodate office development (IN67 and IN69).
26.5
Within Redditch Town Centre, proposals for new office development or redevelopment of
existing office premises into modern office accommodation fit for 21st century business practices is
encouraged. In the short term, all proposals for office developments will not only need to contribute
towards increasing Town Centre vitality, they will need to remedy detrimental issues currently
associated with some Town Centre office stock, such as high vacancy rates and the appropriateness
of the accommodation on offer.
26.6
Where vacant office space within the Town Centre fails to address the detrimental issues
identified in the Retail and Office Needs Assessment and remains empty and unfit for purpose,
changes of use to other appropriate Town Centre uses will be considered favourably.
Reasoned Justification
26.7
Whilst the NPPF directs office development towards Town Centres in the first instance, the Borough
Council is mindful of the land availability issues within Redditch Town Centre to accommodate its development
requirements. The Borough Council will strive to promote the Town Centre as the most desirable destination for
a range of uses, including its office provision, but considers that its approach to office provision elsewhere in
the Borough, within Primarily Employment Areas, needs to be flexible in order to encourage businesses to
locate to the Borough to support Redditch’s overall prosperity as a thriving town. A flexible approach to
locations for office development offers potential occupiers a range of office accommodation to meet a range
of business needs.63
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
26.8
The Retail and Office Needs Assessment (RONA) update identifies a high level of vacant marketed office
stock in the Town Centre, which is largely due to the quality of available premises and their location. Redditch
Town Centre office stock is not meeting the needs of potential occupiers, partly due to inadequate car parking,
shortage of prime office stock, and good access to the infrastructure network. Some larger office spaces have
undergone substantial refurbishment and remain unoccupied, which supports issues such as poor parking
provision. If proposals come forward for redevelopment of existing office space or for new office developments
within the Town Centre, they will be considered favourably if their design and location offers a solution to
resolve some of the issues currently deterring take up of existing Town Centre office space. The Borough
Council would not wish to encourage developments which may compound existing issues further, thus
compromising the vitality and prosperity of the Town Centre.
26.9
Although vacant Town Centre office premises offer some scope for churn in a buoyant economic climate,
the units which remain vacant for long periods of time can have a detrimental impact on the Town Centre’s
vitality and viability. There is an opportunity identified in the NPPF for alternative appropriate uses of
commercial properties. The Borough Council considers that if demand for Town Centre office space is low,
then supporting alternative appropriate uses could benefit the Town Centre’s prosperity and contribute towards
meeting other development targets identified within the Local Plan.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)64
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
Policy 27
27.2
Sustainable rural economic development within the Borough will be promoted especially any
proposals which deliver economic, social and environmental benefits for local communities.
27.3
The sequential test approach required for planning applications for main Town Centre uses
that are not in an existing centre and are not in accordance with an up-to-date Local Plan should not
be applied to applications for small scale rural offices or other small scale rural development.
Applications for small scale rural development will be considered on a site by site basis and will need
to demonstrate that the proposed use is of a type and scale that is appropriate to the rural character
of the area.  Proposed development should be accessible via sustainable transport and not generate
traffic levels unsuitable for the rural road network.
27.4
When considering a proposal for the change of use, reuse or conversion of a building, or historic
farmstead in a rural area, priority will be given for employment purposes.  In some circumstances an
element of new build may be appropriate. All applications must consider wider implications such as
impact on character of the area and farmstead character, the natural and historic environment,
vitality of local surroundings and impact on the road network. Applications for economic uses could
also involve an element of residential development where there is justification.  Proposals for
conversion or change of use to residential use will be examined with particular care to ensure that it
would not have an adverse impact on local economic activity and where this is likely the proposal will
not be permitted.
Policy 27
Rural Economic Development
27.1
In line with the NPPF, there is a need for a positive approach to sustainable new development in rural
areas.  As the rural area accounts for approximately 50% of the area of the Borough, rural economic
development plays an important role in the Borough’s economy and assists in achieving the Borough Council’s
Vision of Creating a Borough Where Businesses can Thrive.
Reasoned Justification
27.5
The sequential approach detailed in paragraph 24 of the NPPF should not be applied to applications
for small scale rural offices or other small scale rural development.  However, any proposed development,
(including the change of use, reuse or conversion of buildings) will be scrutinised to ensure that it is
acceptable in terms of its scale and impact, that it does not undermine the sustainability objectives of the
Local Plan, that there are no harmful effects on town and village vitality, and that it does not undermine any
other aspects of the rural economy.  Proposals which are likely to result in a significant increase in transport
journeys or length of journeys to work by car are unlikely to be acceptable since they would conflict with the
aim of moving towards a sustainable pattern of development.  Where there are sensitivities of a historic
farmstead and its landscape, elements of new build may be appropriate.
27.6
The Worcestershire Historic Farmstead Characterisation Project highlighted the high loss and conversion
of traditional farm buildings in the Borough to residential use. However, the rate of overall farmstead survival in
the Borough is high with 82.5% of historic farmstead sites retaining some working buildings. 52% of sites have
high heritage potential as traditional farmsteads and 10% have some heritage potential.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)65
Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
27.7
When considering a proposal for a change of use, reuse or conversion of a building or historic farmstead,
priority will be given to employment uses in order to support sustainable rural economic development.
Examples of buildings which may be suitable for conversion under this policy include barns and other farm
buildings.
27.8
With regard to impact on the surrounding natural environment consideration should be had to the
potential for protected species (such as bats and barn owls).  Consideration should also be given to the impact
of a proposal on the surrounding historic environment and all heritage assets, including historic farmsteads
and their setting. The suite of Worcestershire Farmsteads Guidance documents should be used to assess the
significance, sensitivity and capacity for change of farmsteads and their setting within the Borough.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)66
Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
Policy 28
Supporting Education, Training and Skills
28.1
A key objective of this Plan is to have employees with higher skills levels. Research carried out by the
Redditch Business Leaders Group has found that young people in particular lack essential employability skills.
In order for local people to take up new employment opportunities and support the economy of the Borough
they must have the appropriate skills. This is particularly important for young people as they are the future
workforce, but opportunities to improve the skills of all ages will be encouraged.
Policy 28
28.2
Developers of all major applications will be required to provide education and training or funding
towards the provision of education and training for local residents in order for them to have the
necessary skills to access employment opportunities.
28.3
If the economic viability of meeting these requirements is questionable and this can be
demonstrated, the Borough Council will enter negotiations with the developer regarding the
appropriate level of provision.
Reasoned Justification
28.4
This Plan makes provision for the creation of 55 hectares of new employment land to meet the Borough’s
need. This will, in turn, create new employment opportunities for residents of Redditch Borough and the
surrounding area. In order for local residents to have the necessary skills to take up these new employment
opportunities they need to receive the appropriate training and education. This can be achieved through
apprenticeship or other work-based learning schemes. The Borough Council will secure the provision of
education and training or financial contributions through Planning Obligations related to major applications.
Major applications include developments of 10 or more dwellings, sites of more than one hectare or more
than 1,000 sq m floorspace.
28.5
The Borough Council will produce a Supplementary Planning Document to provide guidance on the
implementation of this policy.
67
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
Policy 29
Broadband and Telecommunications
29.1
The Government considers advanced, high quality communications infrastructure to be essential for
sustainable economic growth. Its role in enhancing the provision of local community facilities and services is
also recognised.
29.2
The Borough Council recognises the benefits of having good quality communications and high speed
broadband in the Borough.  High quality communications infrastructure can attract business to an area and
help firms remain competitive and assist in achieving the Borough Council’s key theme of Creating a Borough
where Businesses can Thrive.  There are a number of other benefits including: promoting more flexible ways of
working, facilitating learning and skills development at home and improving educational attainment.
Policy 29
29.3
In order to support the expansion of electronic communications networks, (including
telecommunications and high speed broadband) all developments should make provision for the
service infrastructure required at the design stage of any proposal suitable for occupiers of all
development. For the provision of broadband, developers should work with a recognised network
carrier to design a bespoke duct network, wherever practicable, for the development. Developers
should also consider the inclusion of other forms of infrastructure, such as facilities necessary to
support mobile broadband where possible and where it is viable to do so.
29.4
All service infrastructure should be designed to ensure minimal disruption, should the need for
maintenance, adaption or upgrades arise.
29.5
Applications for telecommunication development (including notifications and for prior approval
applications) will be required to demonstrate:
i.
less-intrusive sites or practical technical solutions have been explored;
ii.
the potential for sharing sites has been explored and it is not possible to combine the proposal
with existing or committed masts/installations;
iii.
they meet the International Commission guidelines on non-ionising radiation protection (ICNIRP)
taking account of the cumulative effect; and
iv.
the development has been sympathetically designed, sited, landscaped and camouflaged where
appropriate to minimise its visual impact on the building/structure, the character and appearance
of the surrounding area and impact on residential amenity.
Reasoned Justification
29.6
Telecommunications infrastructure includes a range of equipment including masts and towers,
base stations, antennas, cabinets, fibre optic cables, poles and overhead wires. The rapid growth of the
communications sector and the increasing demand for better and faster broadband and mobile
communications means that service operators and infrastructure providers are continually expanding and
having to upgrade equipment and services. The provision of suitable infrastructure is crucial as the type of
infrastructure in place will determine the level of service (for example broadband speed) people and
businesses can achieve now and in the future.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)68
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating a Borough where Businesses can Thrive
29.7
In line with the NPPF, the Borough Council will support new telecommunications development, but will
aim to keep the number of radio and telecommunications masts and sites to a minimum. Applications should
be accompanied by a plan showing existing coverage, coverage from proposed installation and complete
coverage projected once the proposed installation is in place.
29.8
Thought should be given to the siting and design of any development to minimise its visual impact,
particularly when the proposal is located within a Conservation Area or close to any other heritage asset.
The Borough Council is working with the other Councils in Worcestershire to deliver the Worcestershire Local
Broadband Plan: Connecting Worcestershire.
Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre
and District Centres
The policies in this chapter will deliver the Objectives:
“To enhance the visitor economy and Redditch’s cultural and leisure opportunities including Abbey
Stadium”
“Reduce crime and anti-social behaviour and the fear of crime through high quality design, with
regeneration achieved at Matchborough, Winyates and Woodrow District Centres”
“To improve the vitality and viability of Town and District Centres in the Borough by day and night by
promoting a vibrant mix if uses including residential”
These policies aim to protect and strengthen the retail role of Redditch Town Centre whilst
encouraging a wider range of services and facilities including employment, leisure, entertainment
and housing. They also aim to improve the Town Centre evening economy to boost prosperity and
raise Redditch’s profile as an attractive evening destination. Furthermore, there is a focus on
regeneration initiatives which aim to improve the quality and attractiveness of Redditch Town
Centre and the District Centres. These initiatives will contribute towards secure and attractive
environments which, in turn will improve the quality of the local retail and Town Centre experiences
for local residents and visitors alike.
69
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District CentresBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)70
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Policy 30
Town Centre and Retail Hierarchy
30.1
Government policy recognises the role of planning in promoting sustainable patterns of development.
A key element of this is the shaping of development patterns to reduce the need to travel. This is particularly
important for activities such as shopping and leisure, which are undertaken regularly and form an essential
part of our lives.
30.2
Planning policy aims to locate uses that attract large numbers of people, such as shopping, in existing
Town Centres. The scale of development must be appropriate to the size of the centre and the geographical
area it serves.
30.3
National and regional policy recognises a shopping ‘hierarchy’. The larger centres provide the largest
number of shops and contain the larger shop units (both food and non food), drawing in trade from the larger
geographical and population areas. The range of centres within the hierarchy is aimed at promoting
accessibility without needing to travel too far for retail needs.
Policy 30
30.4
This retail hierarchy helps to concentrate on providing for retail growth in tandem with the needs
generated by economic and population growth and relative to the role and function of the centres in
the retail hierarchy.
30.5
In order to achieve this, prior to commitments, Redditch Borough Council will seek to plan for
approximately 30,000 sq m of comparison floorspace and 10,000 sq m of convenience retail for the
period up until 2030. This will meet the needs of Redditch Borough and will incorporate regeneration
opportunities.
30.6
The maintenance of the vitality and viability of the Town Centre can be assured if the following
principles are applied to development within the Town Centre or to development for Town Centre uses:
i.
promoting the redevelopment and diversification of the Town Centre by providing vibrant mixed use
areas and enhanced public realm;
ii.
promoting the appropriate reuse and redevelopment of land and existing floorspace within or
immediately adjacent to the Town Centre;
iii.
promoting a vibrant and safe, high quality, evening economy comprising a mix of leisure and
entertainment uses suitable and accessible for all members of the public;
iv.
include new retail comparison and convenience provision where possible;
v.
encourage appropriate small specialist shops;
vi.
provide a regular outdoor market;
vii.
development in accordance with the retail hierarchy detailed below:
Tier 1 Town Centre - Redditch Town Centre should:
i.
be the preferred location for major retail developments, large scale leisure, tourist and cultural
activities, social and community venues and entertainment and large scale office uses (Class B1a),
and other uses that attract large numbers of people.71
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Policy 30
continued
Tier 2 District Centres - Matchborough, Winyates, Woodrow, Church Hill, Headless
Cross, Crabbs
Cross, Batchley, Lodge Park and Astwood Bank should:
i.
provide day to day needs, supported by a limited range of other shops and non-retail services
serving their local communities;
ii.
be appropriate for environmental enhancements.
Tier 3 Local Shops/Parades which are individual shops or small groupings of shops should:
i.
provide essential day to day services for local communities.
30.7
This policy sets out a hierarchy of centres where investment in retail and other development of
an appropriate scale and nature will be promoted, and existing provision enhanced to facilitate
sustainable development.
Reasoned Justification
30.8
The hierarchy of centres directs proposals for Town Centre uses to the most appropriate centre reflecting
the need to maintain the centre’s role and function. The vitality and viability of these centres will be maintained
and where appropriate enhanced.
30.9
The delivery of 30,000 sq m of comparison retail floorspace is evidenced by a proportionate evidence
base in the Borough Council’s Retail Needs Assessments. The site specific allocations for retail will need to be
evidenced in the future with more specific quantative retail data because retail evidence can only ever provide
a snapshot in time before the adoption of BORLP4 and can become out of date quickly.
30.10
The Borough Council has identified specific roles for each of the centres and will use planning policies
to maintain and, where necessary and appropriate having regard to national guidance, improve the shopping
function and environment of these centres.  Whilst in many instances this will serve to maintain their
position within the retail hierarchy, it is recognised that the role, function and relative importance of centres
may change over time in pursuit of this Objective. District Centres are the equivalent to the definition of
‘Local Centres’ in the NPPF by virtue of the types of facilities they provide.
30.11
For the purposes of this policy, major retail developments are those where the comparison retail
element exceeds 10,000 sq m gross floorspace. Large scale office developments are considered to be those
greater than 5,000 sq m gross floorspace and large scale leisure developments are those greater than 10,000
sq m gross floorspace. The retail hierarchy will also apply to any newly constructed District Centre’s built within
this Plan period.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)72
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Policy 31
Regeneration for the Town Centre
31.1
It is perceived by many that the Kingfisher Shopping Centre is seen to be central to Redditch Town Centre.
If perceptions are to be shifted to encompass the whole centre, then this is an issue which must be tackled.
In order to put Redditch Town Centre ‘on the map’ and encourage additional niche/specialist retailing, the
dominance of the Centre as merely a mall/retail destination must be addressed. This will increase the
attractiveness of the town to new occupiers. The Town Centre emphasis should be on creating a distinctive
environment that compliments rather than conflicts with the strong offer presented by the Kingfisher Shopping
Centre. It should seek to strengthen the linkages of the Kingfisher Shopping Centre to the rest of the Town
Centre.
31.2
There are a number of current development opportunities that have great potential to reinforce and
strengthen the role of the Town Centre, creating confidence in Redditch as a place to invest in. In addition,
the redevelopment of the area around the railway station could create a new gateway to the centre and
improve its image and impression. There are also a number of other locations across the Town Centre where
redevelopment could contribute to a strong and viable future.
31.3
In order to support the regeneration of Redditch Town Centre and to resolve accessibility concerns in and
around the Town Centre, three parcels of land within and on the periphery of Redditch Town Centre have been
identified and amalgamated for consideration as one Strategic Site. Three of the parcels of land including land
at Prospect Hill, Edward Street and Church Road have each been the subject of a Supplementary Planning
Document as individual sites. Due to the opportunities to create linkages between these sites, they have been
amalgamated to form one Strategic Site (see Town Centre Inset Map).
31.4
This policy sets out principles which could be expanded during any detailed masterplanning or future
SPDs. Flexibility has been incorporated into the policy to enable any of the three parcels of land to come
forward for development in advance of others, so that progress towards achieving this policy is not held up.
Policy 31
31.5
The extent of Redditch Town Centre is shown on the Policies Map. The Town Centre boundary
has been extended.
31.6
In order to secure the regeneration and future of Redditch Town Centre, regard should be had
to both the retail vision within BORLP4 and the Redditch Town Centre Strategy. This Strategy contains
a vision and five key guiding principles in order to shape the town up to 2030. These guiding
principles are interrelated and in combination they will contribute to realising the vision for Redditch
Town Centre;
Realise the Potential Development Opportunities
Improve and Diversify the Town Centre Offer
Improve the Physical Environment
Expand on the Business and Cultural Offer of the Town Centre
Increase Residential Accommodation73
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Policy 31
continued
31.7
In addition, the Strategy identifies the following as priority projects:
Tackling the Ringway
Improving Public Spaces and Car Parking
Sense of Arrival and Signage
Improving the Café and Restaurant Offer
Enhancing the evening and night time economy
Enhancements to Church Green
Tackling the Train Station
Rejuvenation of Silver Street/Royal Square
Improved Lighting, Safety and Security in the Town Centre
Public Art Programme
Encouraging Town Centre Living
31.8
The above projects are considered as priorities in terms of delivering the changes needed to
ensure the future of Redditch as a sustainable Town Centre. Their importance lies in the role they
have to play in realising the potential of the Town Centre, where appropriate financial contributions will
be sought to ensure the delivery of these priority projects.
31.9
To deliver significant amounts of the Borough Council’s residential, retail and office
requirements, development within the Town Centre should not compromise the above projects and
should achieve the following principles:
i.
incorporate a mix of uses including residential, employment (B1), retail and leisure;
ii.
promote excellent accessibility by a range of sustainable transport modes, incorporating any
necessary infrastructure improvements;
iii.
include safe and well designed buildings and places, incorporate any relevant guidance contained
within Supplementary Planning Documents, for example Designing for Community Safety and
Encouraging Good Design; and
iv.
Supporting heritage-led regeneration in the Town Centre that enhances the existing historic
environment through high quality development that is sensitive to its context.
31.10
The following mix of uses should be applied to individual proposals:
i.
Church Road/ North West Quadrant is the preferred location for convenience and comparison
retail as part of a mixed-use development also incorporating food and drink and leisure
developments;
ii.
Edward Street is appropriate for any Town Centre use. Convenience retail uses are also appropriate
if it can be demonstrated that convenience retail cannot be accommodated at Church Road/ North
West Quadrant;
iii.
Prospect Hill should provide a mixed-use development of Offices (B1) and residential uses.
31.11
The Borough Council would not insist that all three parcels be redeveloped together. However
individual proposals for each parcel should ensure that appropriate considerations have been made
to the potential linkages between the sites and increased accessibility within the Town Centre and the
Kingfisher Shopping Centre.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)74
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Reasoned Justification
31.12
The Town Centre is currently dominated by the Kingfisher Shopping Centre, which is a major attraction
and synonymous with the image of Redditch. However the Centre has much more to offer to residents and
visitors alike. The layout and disposition of buildings in parts of the Centre interferes with connectivity and
works against improving the balance between the Kingfisher Shopping Centre and the remainder of the Town.
In addition, there is a perception that the Centre has a limited café and restaurant offer and night time
activities, which in turn can be linked with the feeling of the Centre being unsafe after dark. The introduction
of a mix of uses beyond the offer of the existing Kingfisher Shopping Centre and the opportunities created
through the redevelopment and introduction of new residential units within the central area should assist in
the re-balancing of the Town Centre, through raising activity levels and providing natural surveillance which will
improve the ‘feel’ of the Centre. Diversifying the mix of uses on Church Green would improve the Town Centre
offer and its image. The regeneration of St Stephen’s Church, introducing complementary uses to support its
role as the ‘traditional heart’ of the Centre will add to the vibrancy and activity which flows to and from this
area. Improvements to night time activities and economy can add to the quality and mix of uses in the area.
31.13
The Church Green Conservation Area located within the Town Centre is centered around St Stephen’s
Church and includes a wide range of buildings that date from the late eighteenth century. Whilst the
conservation of the historic qualities of the built and natural environment are the principle objectives of the
Conservation Area designation, the opportunity for new development to enhance and contribute towards the
life and character of these areas is welcomed by the Borough Council where this accords with the special
architectural and historic interest. The Historic Environment Assessment (HEA) for Redditch highlighted the loss
of many historic buildings in the Borough, particularly during the construction of the New Town.  The Town
Centre saw many changes around this time with the construction of the Kingfisher Shopping Centre and ring
road, but there are new opportunities to support and enhance the character and appearance of the Town
Centre through heritage-led regeneration.
31.14
In addition to the above, this policy is to be applied to three parcels of land known as ‘Prospect Hill’,
‘Edward Street’ and ‘Church Road/ North West Quadrant’ with the purpose of regenerating these locations in
order to support the role and function of the Town Centre.
31.15
The Church Road / North West Quadrant site measures approximately 5.35 hectares in area. The site
is located in the Abbey ward of Redditch and is bounded by Unicorn Hill to the south, the Ringway to the north
and west and Church Green West to the east. The site includes car park number 7, Smallwood Health Centre
and the former bus depot which are all in need of redevelopment. This site is the preferred location for
convenience retailing, however not in the form of a new shopping centre as it is considered that the town is
unlikely to be able to support two major shopping centres in the short to medium term in terms of retailer
demand. Due to the overriding need for convenience goods floor space it is recommended that redevelopment
of this site provides a food store as part of a mixed-use development incorporating food and drink and leisure
needs. Proposals incorporating non-food retail units of varying sizes in order to meet the need for comparison
floorspace would also be supported. Proposals should ensure that strong pedestrian links are created
throughout the site and these should link to other parts of the Town Centre and adjacent sites.
31.16
The Edward Street site is approximately 0.48 hectares in area and located adjacent to Redditch Railway
Station near to the western fringe of the Town Centre. It is bounded by the railway station and car parking to
the east, residential units on the opposite side to Bromsgrove Road to the south and modern industrial units to
the west and north. The site runs parallel to the railway line and consequently provides the first impression of
Redditch for visitors arriving by train.
31.17
The site at Prospect Hill is located directly adjacent to the Town Centre on the northern side of the
Redditch Ringway. It is some 1.3 hectares in area and provides car parking provision for Grosvenor House and
St Stephen’s House office units situated on the opposite side of the Redditch Ringway. At present the site is not
used to its full capacity for car parking due to the steep gradient across the site and poor quality of surfacing
material. As this site is surrounded by both residential and office-based developments a mix of B1 and
residential development are the preferred uses.75
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
31.18
In order to meet the requirements of this policy, proposals should incorporate the guidance presented
within the Supplementary Planning Documents such as Designing for Community Safety and Encouraging
Good Design. Early consultation between developers and the Council is encouraged to ensure effective
consideration of community safety issues during the design of the development.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)76
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Policy 32
Protection of the Retail Core
32.1
The NPPF advocates the vitality of Town Centres, and whilst Town Centres cater for a range of uses,
it is important to identify and protect their primary function as a retail destination. Other uses complement the
retail offer and enhance vitality; however, there is a need to ensure that these uses do not stifle thriving
shopping areas.
Policy 32
32.2
The Retail Core of the Town Centre, as defined on the Policies Map, is an area of Primary
Shopping Frontage. Within the Retail Core planning permission for change of use from Class A1 to A2,
A3, A4 or A5 or any other use considered appropriate to a shopping centre will only be acceptable if
the proposed use does not result in a continuous frontage of more than two non-retail units; (units are
defined as shopfront width of about 6 metres; larger units will be assessed in terms of unit lengths).
Proposals for non A1 uses that demonstrably contribute to the vitality and viability of the Centre will
be assessed on their own merits.
Reasoned Justification
32.3
The Retail Core is defined on the Policies Map; however the following exception to this is to be noted as it
cannot be defined clearly on the Policies Map.  The top floor level of the Kingfisher Shopping Centre currently
accommodating the cinema is to be excluded from the Retail Core.
32.4
The identification of a Retail Core and guiding new shopping development to it is intended to prevent the
dispersal of facilities. However, because the main Retail Core of the Town Centre is a focus of activity and is
well located in terms of catchment area and road access, it is inevitably attractive to other businesses as a
trading location.
32.5
This policy aims to protect the primary shopping frontage of the Retail Core and to prevent its
unacceptable erosion by the introduction of inappropriate uses. One possible damaging trend in Town Centres
generally is the growth of non-retail uses in shopping streets. Allowing too much non-retail use can bring about
a number of disadvantages. Firstly each non-retail use represents the loss of one retail unit for comparison
shopping thereby reducing provision. Secondly such uses tend to create a ‘dead’ retail frontage. Loss of shop
units can fragment and disrupt the appearance of a shopping centre and can result in further distances to
walk between shops. The gradual disintegration of a prime shopping frontage, as retail units are lost, can make
an area less attractive to shoppers and potential investors. Where the existing balance exceeds the threshold
outlined above, applications for non-retail uses will not normally be permitted.
32.6
If a proposal for a non A1 use is sought within the retail core, and the applicant can demonstrate that the
vitality and viability of the retail core can be enhanced by that proposal, then it may be appropriate to consider
this proposal acceptable.77
Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 33
Use of Upper Floors
33.1
The use of upper floors in retail centres can add to the viability of an area by encouraging footfall beyond
retail hours, and offering added natural surveillance. Furthermore, full and comprehensive building use
ensures that buildings are well maintained, which in turn contributes to vitality and overall perception of a
place.
Policy 33
33.2
Proposals which bring into use the vacant upper floors of buildings within the Town Centre and
District Centres will be encouraged providing that the existing use of the ground floor is safeguarded.
Furthermore, the works needed to secure access to the upper floors should not detrimentally affect
the appearance of the building. Planning permission will not normally be granted for alterations to
premises that would prejudice access to, or the reuse of, upper floors.
Reasoned Justification
33.3
The under use of the upper floors of shops or offices can cause a number of problems. Deterioration of
the fabric of the building can remain undetected until the floors become unusable. This decay is detrimental
to the overall appearance of the area. Vacant floors also represent a waste of resources which could have
potential for retail use or another use such as residential accommodation. Proposals for extensions to retail or
other service units in the Town Centre or District Centres will be resisted where they prevent the use of upper
floors.
33.4
The Borough Council wishes to ensure that the valuable space above shops which is underused or vacant
is capable of beneficial use. Many upper floors were originally intended for residential use and in most cases
this will continue to be the preferred use. Encouraging residential use in the Town Centre can promote vitality
and viability.78
Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Policy 34
34.2
District Centres play an important role as foci for local needs shopping, community and health
facilities. This policy relates to Matchborough, Winyates and Woodrow District Centres. To achieve the
Vision, the promotion of the vitality, viability and sustainability of these District Centres will be sought,
therefore the following principles will apply when considering proposals for redevelopment:
i.
be consistent in scale and function with its role as a District Centre;
ii.
not result in the unacceptable loss of retail floorspace, recognising its primarily retailing role;
iii.
propose a scheme where the uses are compatible with one another;
iv.
have well designed buildings and spaces with provision for green infrastructure. Special
consideration should also be given to how to clearly define public and private spaces;
v.
propose a scheme that takes opportunities to design out crime and make the District Centre feel
safer incorporating any relevant guidance contained within Supplementary Planning Documents,
for example Designing for Community Safety and Encouraging Good Design.
vi.
propose a scheme with good accessibility to and from the neighbouring residential areas
particularly in terms of walking and cycling and from the wider areas by public transport; and
vii.
consider reusing vacant upper floors.
34.3
Proposals for a mixed use redevelopment at a District Centre must ensure that the uses on the
site are compatible with one another and that the development minimises any disruptive effects that
may arise due to a mix of uses.
34.4
The Borough Council will issue Development Briefs to guide the development of the District
Centres.
Reasoned Justification
34.5
The Borough Council will look favourably on development proposals that will help revitalise and improve
the shopping and community facilities of District Centres providing they are in keeping with their primarily
retailing role and actively support the redevelopment of, Matchborough, Winyates and Woodrow District
Centres and their status as Strategic Sites. In relation to the types of facilities they provide, District Centres
are the equivalent to the definition of ‘Local Centres’ in the NPPF.
34.6
Proposals for a mixed use redevelopment at a District Centre must ensure that the uses on the site are
compatible with one another and that the development minimises any disruptive effects that may arise due
to a mix of uses. The ultimate scale of the redevelopment of any of the District Centres must have a retail
floorspace comparable with the existing centre; unless any significantly higher retail floorspace thresholds
can be justified.
Policy 34
District Centre Redevelopment
34.1
The District Centres in Redditch Borough were identified as a significant issue for the Plan to consider,
particularly in relation to the District Centres at Matchborough, Winyates and Woodrow, because of their poor
image, issues of anti-social behaviour and inappropriate design which is making them suffer. It is important
to ensure that new facilities and services are provided at an early stage of development to ensure sustainable
communities are supported and that the Centres maintain their local retailing role. All District Centres have an
important role to play in providing shopping and other facilities for their local population.79
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Policy 35
35.2
District Centres are primarily designed to fulfil a retailing role. Significant groupings of non-retail
uses can be detrimental to the role of a District Centre.
35.3
Proposals for new or a change of use to Class A5 Uses in District Centres will only be permitted
where it will not result in the overall proportion of A5 uses exceeding 25% of the total percentage of
units within that Centre. Where this figure has been exceeded already in some District Centres, new
proposals will be resisted. To ensure that retailing needs of communities is maintained, A5 uses
within parades of shops will only be considered where the intensity of the non-retail uses has not
become too great and where there are no negative effects on the environment.
Reasoned Justification
35.4
Whilst other uses play a valuable role, there should not be an over-concentration of non-retail uses.
There has been an increase in the number of hot food takeaways in many Centres in the Borough over recent
years, many of which are only open during the evenings and serve the night time economy. This has led to an
increase in closed and shuttered units during the day time. There has also been an increase in associated
problems particularly of litter and anti social behaviour. The Centres are at risk of not maintaining their
primarily retailing role for local communities; however this policy seeks to maintain the health of the retailing
role of Redditch’s District Centres and also goes some way towards contributing to the health of Redditch
residents by seeking to control hot food takeaway establishments being concentrated in any centre.
35.5
A 25% threshold for the A5 uses is appropriate for all of Redditch’s District Centres; however in
Redditch’s Town Centre and parades of shops no threshold applies. At the time of any proposal for the creation
of a new A5 use within the local parade of shops, consideration will be given to the intensity of the non-retailing
uses present at that parade of shops at that time. If the intensity of non-retailing uses is too great, or where
there are other detrimental environmental effects, the proposal would not generally be supported. Where the
intensity of A5 uses within the Town Centre has become too great or resulted in a cluster of A5 uses the
creation of a new A5 use will be resisted.
Policy 35
Health of District Centres
35.1
It is important to maintain the appropriate balance of uses in the Town and District Centres to maintain
their vitality and viability, particularly during the day so that centres continue to serve the retail and other
needs of local communities. The policy will apply to proposals for hot food takeaways and for restaurants and
drinking establishments where the hot food takeaway is more than an ancillary element of the business.
Limiting the number of hot food takeaways will support individuals to make healthy food choices.Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
The policies in this chapter will deliver the Objectives:
“To maintain and provide a high quality natural, rural and historic environment with a Green
Infrastructure network which maximises opportunities for biodiversity value, wildlife and ecological
connectivity”
“To protect, promote and where possible enhance the quality of the Borough’s landscape and
Redditch Borough’s other distinctive features”
“To enhance the visitor economy and Redditch’s cultural and leisure opportunities including Abbey
Stadium”
The historic environment contributes to the Borough’s local character and distinctiveness and
consists of, but is not limited to, archaeological sites, statutorily and locally listed buildings,
Scheduled Monuments and Conservation Areas. These assets must be protected and, where
possible, enhanced to ensure the heritage of Redditch Borough is conserved for future
generations.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
8081
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
Policy 36
36.2
Designated heritage assets including listed buildings, structures and their settings; conservation
areas; and scheduled monuments, will be given the highest level of protection and should be
conserved and enhanced. Non-designated heritage assets, nationally important archaeological
remains and locally listed heritage assets, and their settings will also need to be conserved and
enhanced in a manner appropriate to their significance and contribution to the historic environment.
36.3
Heritage assets are an irreplaceable resource and those at risk should be protected.
The sensitive adaptive reuse of buildings at risk will be encouraged where they may secure the future
of a heritage asset. Proposals that will lead to substantial harm to or loss of significant heritage assets
will not be permitted. Where there is to be a loss of a heritage asset that has been agreed, developers
are required to record, archive and make information about the asset publicly accessible.
36.4
Heritage-led regeneration will be encouraged, particularly when related to the Town Centre
Strategic Site, but also at any other site of historic value. Proposals which aim to realise the leisure
and tourism potential of the historic environment will also be encouraged where these will result in
enhancements to heritage assets and/ or enhancement of the wider historic environment.
36.5
Applications for development affecting any heritage asset or its setting must be accompanied
by a heritage statement. The level of detail should be proportionate to the significance of the heritage
asset and the likely level of impact. Where a development site includes or has the potential to include
heritage assets with archaeological interest, developers must submit an appropriate desk-based
assessment and, where necessary, a field evaluation. Where appropriate, development proposals will
be expected to have regard to the Historic Environment Assessment for Redditch Borough.
Reasoned Justification
36.6
Heritage assets, both designated and non-designated, are parts of the historic environment.
A heritage
asset could be a building, monument, site, place, area or landscape identified as having a degree of significance
because of their archaeological, architectural, artistic or historic interest.  Heritage assets are a finite and
irreplaceable resource and great weight should be given to their conservation and enhancement. The Borough
contains a wide range of heritage assets, but includes those that give the area its distinctive character. These
include the post medieval industrial buildings relating to the needle and fish hook industry and multi-period
historic assets that were integrated into the New Town plan.
Policy 36
Historic Environment
36.1
The historic environment is defined in the NPPF as “all aspects of the environment resulting from the
interaction between people and places through time, including all surviving physical remains of past human
activity, whether visible, buried or submerged, and landscaped and planted or managed flora.”  The historic
environment plays an important role in the Borough’s economy and is central in achieving the Borough
Council’s Vision of Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment, as well as helping to deliver
wider economic, social and environmental objectives for the Plan area.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)82
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
36.7
The landscape setting of Redditch and, particularly, the southern rural part of the Borough is distinctive
for its inherited character derived from the medieval and post-medieval Forest of Feckenham landscape.
This is expressed in a diverse historic environment that includes multi-period field patterns; areas of relic
parkland; medieval and post-medieval earthworks and dispersed wayside settlement associated with former
woodland and unenclosed common landscapes. Applications for development that will harm or result in the
loss of a heritage asset of greatest significant will be resisted. Developers are required to record and enhance
understanding of any heritage assets to be lost (wholly or in part) in a manner proportionate to their
importance. The information and understanding gained should be made publicly available, as a minimum
through the relevant Historic Environment Record, and where appropriate at the asset itself through on-site
interpretation.
36.8
The Borough Council realises the regeneration potential of the Borough’s historic environment. The Edward
Street and Church Road Sites within the Town Centre have been identified as in need of regeneration. The sites
contain both statutorily listed and locally listed heritage assets which the Borough Council considers make a
valuable contribution to the historic environment. Policy 31 Regeneration for the Town Centre provides the
principles for development on individual Town Centre sites that have been identified for redevelopment.
The Church Green Conservation Area located within the Town Centre is centered around St Stephen’s Church
and includes a wide range of buildings that date from the late eighteenth century. Whilst the conservation of
the historic qualities of the built and natural environment are the principle objectives of the Conservation Area
designation, the opportunity for new development to enhance and contribute towards the life and character of
these areas is welcomed by the Borough Council where this accords with the special architectural and historic
interest.
36.9
The historic environment holds significant potential for leisure and tourism activity which can lead to
improvements to heritage assets and the wider historic environment. Proposals for leisure and tourism uses
that would have a positive effect on the historic environment and are in accordance with Policy 43 Leisure,
Tourism and Abbey Stadium will be encouraged and considered favourably.
36.10
A Heritage Statement describing the significance and contribution of any heritage assets and their
setting affected by a development proposal should be submitted by applicants. The level of detail should be
proportionate to the importance of the asset and the level of impact presented by the proposal, in accordance
with the Borough Council’s validation requirements. Where a site does not contain any known heritage assets,
but has the potential to do so, then development proposals must include an appropriate assessment of this
potential.  For larger schemes this should include a field evaluation. A Design and Access Statement may also
be required, particularly where the proposal has the potential to substantially change the character or
appearance of a heritage asset or its setting.
36.11
The Historic Environment Assessment (HEA) for the Borough combines county landscape character
mapping with Historic Environment Record (HER) data and an outline Historic Landscape Character
Assessment to produce 20 distinctive Historic Environment Character Zones (HECZ). The HECZ will inform
the determination of development proposals together with the County’s HER and Historic Landscape
Characterisation (HLC). The Worcestershire Historic Environment Record should be consulted at the earliest
stage during the formulation of development proposals. Any proposal that would have a detrimental impact
on a heritage asset or the wider historic environment will not be considered favourably.83
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
Policy 37
37.2
Built heritage is key to preserving the distinct local identity of the Borough and all historic
buildings and structures should be conserved and enhanced in a manner appropriate to their
significance. The Borough Council will conserve and enhance its historic buildings and structures by:
i.
supporting applications for development that conserve and enhance a building/structure,
its setting and any features of special architectural or historic interest;
ii.
supporting heritage-led regeneration in the Town Centre that enhances the existing historic
environment through high quality development that is sensitive to its context;
iii.
recognising the international significance of Redditch’s metal–based industries, particularly
needle making and its contribution to the development of the Borough.  Buildings and structures
associated with the Borough’s industrial heritage have been given the highest level of protection
and where there are opportunities to better reveal their significance, proposals will be expected to
do so;
iv.
encouraging use of the Worcestershire Farmsteads Guidance where proposals relate to a Historic
Farmstead;
v.
working with owners of historic buildings and structures to increase understanding of the heritage
asset and where appropriate provide support in developing proposals that are sensitive to the
historic building or structure; and
vi.
maintaining a Schedule of Locally Listed Heritage Assets (the Local List), and encouraging local
communities to identify local features, buildings or structures of historic interest that may be
included on the Local List.
37.3
The Borough Council will implement strict controls over the use, extension or alteration of a
historic building, structure or its setting. The sensitive adaptive reuse of buildings or structures at risk
will be encouraged, particularly where they may secure the future of a heritage asset.
37.4
Applications for development that will harm or result in the loss of a historic building or structure
will not be permitted unless there is a clear and convincing justification demonstrating that the harm
or loss is necessary to deliver substantial public benefits that cannot be achieved through an
alternative design or location or that all of the criteria in paragraph 133 of the National Planning
Policy Framework have been met.
Reasoned Justification
37.5
The Borough’s built heritage plays a major role in defining sense of place and local distinctiveness.
Historic buildings and structures reflect the local building characteristics in their style, materials or layout
amongst other factors as well as giving an insight in to past lifestyles.
Policy 37
Historic Buildings and Structures
37.1
Redditch has a rich and varied built heritage, ranging from the medieval remains of Bordesley Abbey,
the industrial buildings through to Historic Farmsteads in the rural parts of the Borough. This policy covers all
historic buildings and structures that are statutorily listed, locally listed, or have been highlighted to the
Borough Council for possible inclusion on the Local List.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)84
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
37.6
The Historic Environment Assessment (HEA) for Redditch highlighted the loss of many historic buildings
in the Borough, particularly during the construction of the New Town.  The Town Centre saw many changes
around this time with the construction of the Kingfisher Shopping Centre and ring road, but there are new
opportunities to support and enhance the character and appearance of the Town Centre through heritage-led
regeneration of the Town Centre Strategic Site (see Policy 31 Regeneration of the Town Centre).
37.7
The HEA also picked up the rapidly disappearing evidence of the needle industry that characterised the
area.  As well as needles, Redditch is known for the development of other metal-based trades including
fishing tackle, springs, motor cycles and batteries.  Many of the surviving buildings and structures relating
these trades make an important contribution to the Borough’s heritage, both in terms of their individual
histories and their architectural significance.  Buildings of note include Forge Mill, British Mills, Ashleigh Works,
Millsborough House, Anchor Works and Prospect Works.
37.8
The Worcestershire Historic Farmstead Characterisation Project highlighted the high loss and
conversion of traditional farm buildings in the Borough to residential use.  Within the Borough, 52% of sites
have high heritage potential as traditional farmsteads and 10% have some heritage potential. The suite of
Worcestershire Farmsteads Guidance documents should be used to assess the significance, sensitivity
and capacity for change of farmsteads and their setting within the Borough.  Policy 27 Rural Economic
Development is relevant to applications proposing the change of use of a historic farmstead.
37.9
Some buildings and structures are of local architectural and historic interest but do not benefit from
protection under statutory controls.  These heritage assets have been formally identified by the Borough
Council on a list of local heritage assets.  There have been losses from the Local List in recent years through
demolition and major alteration to buildings. Future losses should be avoided in order to deliver Objective 1
‘To maintain and provide a high quality natural, rural and historic environment with a Green Infrastructure
network which maximises opportunities for biodiversity value, wildlife and ecological connectivity’.
37.10
Applications for the demolition of Locally Listed buildings or structures will be resisted unless it can be
demonstrated that efforts have been made to find an alternative use or owner for the building, where the cost
of repairing or maintaining the building outweighs the importance and value derived from the building and its
existing use, and that all attempts to access additional sources of funding have failed. Should demolition of
a locally listed building be approved, appropriate recording of the property must be provided to a recognised
standard, prior to development taking place.
37.11
In order to maintain historic buildings in a good condition it is important to ensure that they are in
active use. The most appropriate use for such a building will almost always be that for which it was designed.
However, there may be instances where that use is no longer appropriate or viable. In such cases the Borough
Council will endeavour to support alternative suitable uses. In considering alternative uses the Borough
Council will require the applicant to provide sufficient information to enable an informed assessment of the
effect of any changes that may alter the building’s special historic or architectural character, as well as
consider the other relevant policies set out in the Local Plan.
37.12
The alteration or extension of a historic building will be expected to reflect the special characteristics of
the existing building and be designed either to merge unobtrusively with it or appear as a separate entity.
Materials used in the construction of extensions or alterations must strive to achieve as close a match as
possible with the original in their selection and application.
37.13
Unsuitable and inappropriate materials such as plastic and UPVC will not be approved where their use
may detract from the character of the building or its setting. Proposals for the erection of satellite antennae
on listed buildings will only be allowed where the siting and appearance of the antennae does not harm the
special historic or architectural interest of the building or its setting.
37.14
The Borough Council will encourage where appropriate, proposals that demonstrate a creative design
solution that complements the existing building and respects its historic character and setting. A full justification
of the proposed works will be required as part of any application and should form part of the heritage
statement.85
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
Policy 38
A.
Conservation Areas
38.2
Proposals for development within Conservation Areas will be required to conserve and enhance
the character or appearance of the area. All development proposals, including extensions and
alterations to existing buildings and structures will be expected to:
i.
demonstrate a creative design solution, specific to the site in question and the use to be
accommodated;
ii.
ensure the siting of any development respects the pattern of buildings, historic layout, existing
open spaces, trees and boundary treatments;
iii.
demonstrate attention to the proportion, form, massing and scale of the development and
buildings that surround it;
iv.
demonstrate attention to the quality, sourcing and application of materials, finishes and detail,
reflecting but not necessarily copying the elements of existing buildings within the area; and
v.
ensure that views into or out of a Conservation Area are protected and enhanced.
38.3
Proposals which ensure the sensitive adaptive reuse of vacant buildings or encourage
investment into the area, particularly in the Church Green Conservation Area will be looked at more
favourably.
38.4
Where trees contribute to the character or appearance of Conservation Areas then their
preservation and protection will be sought. The Borough Council will not allow the loss of trees of high
amenity value or the felling or other works to a tree which would detract from its contribution to the
character or appearance of the area.
38.5
Loss of a building (or other element) which makes a positive contribution to the significance of
a Conservation Area will not be permitted.  Where a loss of a heritage asset has been agreed,
developers are required to record, archive and make information about the asset publicly accessible.
Policy 38
Conservation Areas
38.1
There are two Conservation Areas in Redditch Borough, one of which is located in Redditch Town Centre
(Church Green) and the other in Feckenham village. It is important that development within Conservation Areas
is controlled and the Local Planning Authority have additional powers over demolitions, alterations to buildings
and works to trees. Conservation Area consent is often required for work that would normally be considered
permitted development.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)86
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
Policy 38
continued
B.
Church Green Conservation Area
38.6
The Borough Council will conserve and enhance Church Green Conservation Area by:
i.
recognising the importance of Church Green as focal point for the Town and as a key civic space;
ii.
protecting views in, out and within the area, particularly that of St Stephen’s Church and its spire;
iii.
supporting high quality schemes on sites that currently detract from or make a negative
contribution to the area;
iv.
supporting heritage-led regeneration in line with Policy 31 Regeneration for the Town Centre and
the Redditch Town Centre Strategy;
v.
continuing with improvements to the public realm through new signage, lighting and street
furniture;
vi.
protecting the open space around St Stephen’s Church and seeking opportunities to strengthen its
links with the Borough’s Green Infrastructure Network; and
vii.
supporting applications for shopfronts, signage and other advertisements which are of a
sympathetic design that is complementary to the shopfront, building and its historic context.
38.7
Development proposals should have regard to the Church Green Character Appraisal,
Management Plan and the Redditch Town Centre Strategy.
C.
Feckenham Conservation Area
38.8
The Borough Council will conserve and enhance the Feckenham Conservation Area by
supporting proposals which complement and improve the existing character and appearance of the
area.
38.9
Development proposals should have regard to the Feckenham Conservation Area Character
Appraisal and Management Plan.
Reasoned Justification
38.10
Redditch’s Conservation Areas, as depicted on the Policies Map, are located within the Town Centre
and the village of Feckenham. The Church Green Conservation Area is centred around St Stephen’s Church
and includes a wide range of buildings that date from the late eighteenth century, while the Feckenham
Conservation Area includes many fine timber-framed and Georgian brick buildings that line the narrow streets
and border ‘The Square’ within this historic medieval village.
38.11
Whilst the conservation of the historic qualities of the built and natural environment are the principle
objectives of Conservation Area designation, the opportunity for new development to enhance and contribute
towards the life and character of these areas is welcomed by the Borough Council where this accords with the
areas special architectural and historic interest. Too often there is the temptation to adopt a casual approach
to development in Conservation Areas whereby the existing architecture is copied. It is only through an
understanding of the inherent qualities and character of an area that an informed site specific approach to
new design can be taken.87
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Protecting and Enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
38.12
Each Conservation Area is made up of a diverse range of different elements, such as buildings, spaces,
views, signage, street furniture and lighting, the balance and harmony of which creates a distinctive street
scene or ‘streetscape’. The preservation or enhancement of the streetscapes is therefore fundamental to the
special character and appearance of Conservation Areas. As such the Borough Council will seek to preserve
or enhance the streetscapes of Conservation Areas as far as is practically possible. Proposals for the
replacement or alteration of shopfronts or advertisements in Conservation Areas should consider the
requirements of Policy 41 Shopfronts and Shopfront Security and Policy 42 Advertisements.
38.13
Conservation Area Appraisals and Management Plans have been produced for each of the
Conservation Areas and provide guidance on the design of new buildings, alterations and extensions. Any new
proposals within a Conservation Area should have regard to the appropriate Conservation Area Management
Plan.
38.14
The Church Green Conservation Area lies just outside of the Kingfisher Shopping Centre at the heart of
the old town. Enhancements to Church Green are identified as a priority project within the Town Centre Strategy
and Policy 31 Regeneration for the Town Centre. Proposals to revitalise Church Green, would include the
regeneration of St Stephen’s Church. Introducing complementary uses to support its role as the ‘traditional
heart’ of the centre will add to the vibrancy and activity which flows to and from this area. Thus reinforcing the
‘sense of place’ and image of Redditch, complementing the Kingfisher Shopping Centre and acting as a ‘draw’
between the Kingfisher Shopping Centre and the rest of the Town Centre.
38.15
Trees are an important feature of the Borough and mature trees within Feckenham and Church Green
Conservation Areas contribute substantially to their character and appearance.  Conservation Area consent is
required to undertake works to trees within such areas. Whilst necessary works for the continued retention of
the tree, consistent with good arboricultural practice is likely to be permitted, the outright felling will often be
resisted. In cases where felling of a tree is necessary, the Borough Council may require the planting of a
suitable replacement tree.
38.16
The Town Centre Strategy identified the open space at Church Green as being one of the only green
open spaces in the Town Centre.  Open space and civic open space across the Town Centre is considered
sporadic and not interlinked.  Opportunities to strengthen links with the Borough’s Green infrastructure
Network should be sought in line with Policy 11 Green Infrastructure, especially when considering development
of the Town Centre Strategic Site.
38.17
There is a general presumption in favour of retaining the elements of a Conservation Area which make
a positive contribution to its character or appearance.  When submitting an application for demolition within a
Conservation Area the Borough Council will require a clear and convincing justification demonstrating that the
harm or loss is necessary to deliver substantial public benefits that cannot be achieved through an alternative
design or location.
38.18
Where a building makes little or no contribution to the Conservation Area the Borough Council will
require detailed information about what is proposed for the site after demolition, with acceptable and detailed
plans for redevelopment or reuse. Where such information is not provided, consent for demolition will not be
approved.  Replacement buildings will be expected to make an equal or greater contribution to the character
and appearance of the Conservation Area.Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
The policies in this chapter will deliver the Objectives:
“To protect, promote and where possible enhance the quality of the Borough’s landscape and
Redditch Borough’s other distinctive features”
“Reduce crime and anti social behaviour and the fear of crime through high quality design, with
regeneration achieved at the former New Town District Centres”
Redditch, as a former New Town, has unique design principles, which add to its local distinctiveness.
However, there are elements of the Town that would benefit from design and safety improvements,
whilst new development should embrace these aspirations. These policies encourage good design
which complements and improves the existing built environment. They also seek to improve the
safety and perception of safety within our built environment.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
8889
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
Policy 39
39.2
All development in the Borough should contribute positively to the local character of the area,
responding to and integrating with the distinctive features of the surrounding environment,
particularly if located within a historic setting.
39.3
All development proposals should:
i.
seek to optimise the potential of the site to accommodate sustainable development through
making the most efficient use of the space available;
ii.
be innovative and resilient to the effects of climate change, whilst also protecting and enhancing
locally distinctive and historic features to improve the character and quality of the local
environment; and
iii.
incorporate features of the natural environment including Green Infrastructure into the design to
preserve and continue Redditch’s unique landscape features;
39.4
To ensure character and appearance isn’t compromised, temporary buildings will be approved
for a maximum of 3 years where it is related to an approval for a permanent building. The Borough
Council will not look favourably on applications for renewal of temporary permissions.
39.5
Areas should be designed to ensure they make places better for people and proposals have
demonstrated that community views have been taken into account in the design of the development.
Reasoned Justification
39.6
Redditch Borough has extremely limited development potential, therefore all future development should
seek to ensure that all proposals are designed in such a way as to maximise the use of the space available.
While it is important to make efficient use of land, a balance must be struck between new developments and
protecting and enhancing what is special in the Borough, for example our green spaces.
39.7
Innovative designs can improve the character and quality of an area as well as help to raise the standard
of design in the area. Great weight will be given to appropriate designs that achieve this while protecting and
enhancing the locally distinctive and historic features that help to establish a strong sense of place.
39.8
New developments in the Borough should be constructed in an efficient and sustainable manner in order
to be climate resilient and contribute to reducing carbon emissions.  Applications will be judged against the
criteria set out in Policy 15 Climate Change.
39.9
Redditch is ‘distinctively green’ with an abundance of trees and green space. New development should
seek to continue these features through their design, see Policy 16 Natural Environment for more guidance.
Policy 39
Built Environment
39.1
The Borough consists of the main town of Redditch in the north and the more rural villages of
Astwood Bank and Feckenham and several other hamlets to the south. Redditch Borough has a unique built
environment based upon the town’s transition from a market town with a needle-based industry, through to a
New Town and beyond. There is significant pressure for growth in and around the Borough and it is important
to ensure that all new development contributes towards creating distinctive, sustainable places and assists
in Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)90
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
39.10
The need for a temporary building must be justified by the applicant and accompanied by a business
plan. The approved time limit for temporary buildings will be related to the merits of the case and whatever
time is reasonably demonstrated in the applicant’s business plan. The quality, appearance, durability and
suitability of temporary buildings are usually inferior, and while this may be justified on economic grounds in
the short term, it is not acceptable in the longer term; therefore applications for the renewal of temporary
permissions are not looked upon favourably.
39.11
In line with the core principles of the NPPF, local people should have the opportunity to shape their
surroundings. Applicants will be expected to work closely with members of the community affected by their
proposal and their views should be taken into account in the design of the development.
91
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
Policy 40
40.2
Good design should contribute positively to making the Borough a better place to live, work and
visit. All development, including proposals for individual buildings, public and private spaces and wider
development schemes will be expected to:
i.
be of a high quality design that reflects or complements the local surroundings and materials;
ii.
be of an appropriate siting and layout with distinctive corner buildings, landmarks, gateways and
focal points at key junctions and other important locations;
iii.
protect and enhance key vistas to create visual links between places in the Borough;
iv.
include where appropriate, public art that is well designed, takes into account the risk of crime,
is integrated within the overall design and layout of the development, located where it can be
easily observed, improves public outdoor space and legibility and creates landmarks;
v.
aid movement by ensuring all developments benefit from accessibility, connectivity, permeability
and legibility, particularly aiding sustainable modes of movement such as walking, cycling and
access to public transport;
vi.
encourage community safety and ‘design out’ vulnerability to crime by incorporating the
principles, concepts and physical security standards of the ‘Secured by Design’ award scheme;
providing infrastructure for policing and emergency services; and considering the incorporation of
fire safety measures;
vii.
provide appropriate space for waste and recycling to minimise any adverse visual impact on the
property or the street-scene; and
viii. incorporate any relevant guidance contained within Supplementary Planning Documents, for
example Designing for Community Safety and Encouraging Good Design.
Policy 40
High Quality Design and Safer Communities
40.1
Good design improves the local environment, helps new development to fit in with its wider surroundings
and creates a distinctive sense of place. A well planned environment in which to live and work can help to fight
crime and the fear of crime. By using good design the opportunities to commit crime can be limited and this
can have an effect on the quality of people’s lives.
Reasoned Justification
40.3
Designs that reflect the local surroundings and use local materials help to establish a strong sense of
place. Innovative designs are supported provided that they complement and add to the overall quality of the
surrounding area.
40.4
To meet the criteria on design and layout, proposals should be assessed against the industry standard
for well-designed homes and neighbourhoods – Building for Life. Building for Life 12 is the latest update and
is based on a ‘traffic light’ system (green, amber, red). Proposals should secure as many ‘greens’ as possible,
minimise the number of ‘ambers’ and avoid ‘reds’.
40.5
It is important that places are well connected, easy to navigate and easy to get around, especially via
sustainable modes of transport in line with Policy 19 Sustainable Travel and Accessibility.  Legibility is the
degree to which places can be easily understood. Visual links and landmarks can have a considerable role to
play in improving legibility and aiding orientation.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)92
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
40.6
Public art can assist in improved legibility as well as improving the quality of public outdoor space.
It also has a significant role to play in brightening and enlivening the environment and enhancing local
distinctiveness.  When correctly designed and sited, public art can also make a significant contribution to
reducing crime and promoting community safety. Risks of crime to public art can include theft, deliberate
damage and arson. Designs will need to take these risks into account and mitigate against them.
40.7
The ‘Secured by Design’ award scheme focuses on crime prevention at the design, layout and
construction stages and promotes the use of security standards (
www.securedbydesign.com
). Redditch
Borough Council and North Worcestershire Community Safety Partnership will publicise and promote
developments that achieve Secured by Design Standards. The principles of this scheme or any relevant
scheme at the time are supported in order to encourage community safety and ‘design out’ vulnerability to
crime. New development can put additional pressure on the infrastructure of West Mercia Police and
Hereford & Worcester Fire and Rescue Service. Proposals should make provision for this infrastructure as
identified in the IDP to ensure that Redditch Borough is a safe and attractive place to live and work.
40.8
The presence of dust bins and recycling bins at the front of properties can detract from the character and
visual appearance of properties and the general street-scene. For this reason the Borough Council requires
that all development is designed with appropriate storage for such facilities.
40.9
In order to meet the requirements of this policy, proposals should incorporate the guidance presented
within the Supplementary Planning Documents such as Designing for Community Safety and Encouraging
Good Design.
40.10
Early consultation between developers and the Borough Council is encouraged to ensure effective
consideration of community safety issues during the design of the development.
93
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
Policy 41
41.2
The Borough Council will grant permission for new, replacement or altered shopfronts providing:
i.
that, if the existing shopfront has a design that makes a material contribution to the street scene,
it is not capable of repair;
ii.
its design would be sympathetic in size, architectural style, proportion, material and detailing to the
building upon which it would be fitted;
iv.
that, ground floor uses have an active frontage; and
v.
it would not detract from the character or appearance of the street or area as a whole.
41.3
The Borough Council supports shopfront security measures that are integral to the design of
the shopfront, therefore external roller shutters should only be used in exceptional circumstances.
In considering proposals for the installation of shopfront security measures, the Borough Council will
apply the principles and standards set out in the Borough Council’s Designing for Community Safety
Supplementary Planning Document and the Secured by Design award scheme.
41.4
Where shopfront security measures are proposed for Historic Buildings or within Conservation
Areas, these will only be considered acceptable where they serve to conserve or enhance the special
historic or architectural character of the building or its setting.
Reasoned Justification
41.5
Shopfronts that are considered to be beyond repair or not of sufficient quality to be worthy of retention
should be replaced by either traditional high quality designs or modern high quality designs that relate to the
building upon which they are fitted and to the character and appearance of the street or area in which they are
located.
41.6
Ground floor uses with active frontages (for example frequent doors and windows) provide opportunities
for natural surveillance, increasing the sense of security and adding to the vitality of the public realm.
41.7
Security measures should be integral to the overall design of any new or refurbished shopfront.  Some
shopfront security measures such as external steel roller shutters can undermine the contribution of shop
fronts and project a negative image of the area creating a hostile environment. Shutters also provide a blank
canvas for graffiti which can further degenerate the image of the area.
41.8
Shopfront security measures proposed for historic buildings or for buildings located within a
Conservation Area should be of a sympathetic design that is complementary to the shop front, building and
its historic context.
Policy 41
Shopfronts and Shopfront Security
41.1
Well designed shopfronts can have a positive effect on the character and appearance of an area.
Where
a shopfront falls within the Town or District Centre carefully thought through design can help to improve the
vitality and viability of that Centre. This policy assists in achieving the Borough Council’s Vision of Creating a
Borough where Businesses can Thrive.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)94
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
Policy 42
42.2
In assessing proposals for advertisements, the Borough Council will require that:
i.
they are of a scale and character appropriate to the building or site upon which they are to be
located and with that of the surrounding buildings;
ii.
they are of materials and illumination appropriate to the style and age of the building and its
setting;
iii.
they would not adversely affect the street scene, taking into account the cumulative impact of
advertisements;
iv.
they would not impede natural surveillance, obstruct security surveillance cameras; and
v.
they would not be likely to endanger highway safety.
42.3
In addition to these criteria, applications for advertisements affecting historic buildings, their
setting or for buildings located within a Conservation Area should consider the significance of the
building, be of a traditional design and in a style sympathetic to the building and its historic context.
42.4
All advertisements should be well maintained and kept in a good condition so as not to detract
from the area.
Reasoned Justification
42.5
Poorly placed advertisements, or advertisements that are of an inappropriate scale or character can have
a negative impact on the appearance of a building, streetscene and surrounding area.
42.6
Illuminated signs can be detrimental to the amenity of the surrounding area because of the proposed
hours of illumination, level of brightness or intermittent nature of the illumination.
42.7
Proposals for new advertisements should take into account any existing signs or advertisements on the
building or in the surrounding area as the cumulative impact of advertisements can present a cluttered
appearance and have a negative effect on the streetscene.
42.8
Care should be taken to ensure that the position of advertisements would not obstruct security
surveillance cameras, significantly affect opportunities for natural surveillance, obstruct the highway or traffic
signs and would not be a distraction for drivers.
42.9
New or replacement advertisements proposed for historic buildings or for buildings located within a
Conservation Area should be of a traditional design and in a style sympathetic to the building and its historic
context.
Policy 42
Advertisements
42.1
Well designed and well placed advertisements are essential to commercial activity in a free and diverse
economy and can assist in achieving the Borough Council’s Vision of Creating a Borough where Businesses can
Thrive.  However their control is necessary to ensure they don’t negatively affect the character and appearance
of an area. This policy covers a wide range of advertisements and signs including; fascia signs, hoardings,
traffic signs, estate agents’ boards, posters and banners.  In line with the NPPF, their control should be
efficient, effective and simple in concept and operation.95
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Creating Safe and Attractive Places to Live and Work
42.10
When granting consent for an advertisement of any sort, the Borough Council will, where appropriate,
require that any structure or advert is maintained in a condition that does not impair visual amenity or
endanger the public.
42.11
In Redditch there have been problems with advertisements being placed on Borough Council and
Highway land without permission.  Consent from the landowner is required for any Advertisement, otherwise is
likely that enforcement action will be taken.
Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
The policies in this chapter will deliver the Objectives:
“To enhance the visitor economy and Redditch’s cultural and leisure opportunities including Abbey
Stadium”
“Ensuring there is a range of health facilities that support existing and new communities and to
promote the role of healthy living through good planning”
Improvement and enhancement of the well-being of the Borough’s residents is important.
The policies in this chapter support the provision of new and improved tourism, leisure and health
facilities and recognise the potential for the natural environment to provide opportunities for leisure
and recreation. There is also provision for the identification of additional cemetery space which is
likely to be needed in the Borough before the end of the Plan period.
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)96
Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being97
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
Policy 43
A.
Leisure, tourism and culture
43.2
Leisure, tourism and culture proposals, including new build, extensions or additions to existing
facilities will be promoted and supported where:
i.
the proposal is located in places that are sustainable and accessible by a choice of transport
modes, principally Redditch Town Centre and/or where additional visi
tor numbers can be
accommodated without detriment to the local economy and environment; and
ii.
they support sustainable tourism or leisure developments and benefit the economy of the Borough
and enhance community facilities.
43.3
Consideration should also be given to the potential of the natural environment, including Public
Rights of Way and water corridors to provide opportunities for leisure and recreation activities, whilst
ensuring that this does not place undue pressure on the natural environment. All proposals should
contribute positively to the Green Infrastructure network of the Borough.
43.4
The Borough Council realises the potential for the historic environment to provide opportunities
for leisure and tourism and proposals for such will be encouraged, particularly where they result in the
enhancement of a heritage asset.
B.
Abbey Stadium
43.5
The Borough Council will safeguard land within the curtilage and land adjacent to the Abbey
Stadium Complex for development which is for leisure and leisure-related uses.
Policy 43
Leisure, Tourism and Abbey Stadium
43.1
The Borough has a number of leisure and tourist attractions which include Forge Mill, The Needle
Museum, Bordesley Abbey, Arrow Valley Country Park, Arrow Valley Countryside Centre and the Palace
Theatre. Large scale redevelopment of the Abbey Stadium complex has recently taken place. There is also a
good supply of designated open space and other land which provide for the recreation needs of the Borough.
These include allotments, sports pitches, equipped play areas, school playing fields, community open space
and water courses. The protection and enhancement of this built and natural resource is essential to achieve
the Vision and Objectives of BORLP4 to enhance the visitor economy and cultural and leisure opportunities
in the Borough.
Reasoned Justification
A. Tourism, leisure and culture
43.6
Tourism and culture facilities may include museums, visitor centres and also accommodation such as
hotels or guest houses. Leisure facilities include, but are not limited to intensive sport and recreation uses,
cinemas, night-clubs, casinos, health and fitness centres, indoor bowling centres, and bingo halls. Any relevant
development proposals will be required to demonstrate that appropriate sequential assessments and impact
tests have been carried out in accordance with current guidance. Reference should be made to Policy 30 Town
Centre and Retail Hierarchy and Policy 31 Regeneration for the Town Centre.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)98
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
43.7
In considering new proposals or extensions or additions to existing facilities, regard will be had to any
environmental or transportation impacts that any new facility might create. Such considerations will include,
for example, the means by which people will access and travel to the facility and any impact on nature
conservation or landscapes. Proposals should be formulated in accordance with the requirements of Policy 19
Sustainable Travel and Accessibility. Public Rights of Way provide an important recreational resource; the
improvement of links to existing Public Rights of Way will therefore be encouraged.
43.8
The natural environment is a valuable resource which can also provide leisure and recreation
opportunities. However, a balance must be achieved between providing for leisure and recreation and
protecting and enhancing the natural environment. Leisure, tourism and culture proposals should contribute
positively to the Borough’s Green Infrastructure network in line with Policy 11 Green Infrastructure. A Green
Infrastructure Strategy will be completed for the Borough which will identify opportunities for enhancement of
the GI Network.
43.9
The historic environment holds significant potential for leisure and tourism activity. In particular, the
Bordesley Abbey and its setting have the potential to enhance the existing offer and to create linkages to the
leisure uses at the Abbey Stadium site. Proposals for leisure and tourism uses related to the historic
environment should also be in accordance with Policy 36 Historic Environment.
B. Abbey Stadium
43.10
The Abbey Stadium Complex makes an important contribution to the Borough’s indoor and outdoor
sport and recreation provision. The Borough Council recognises that the land within the curtilage and adjacent
to the Abbey Stadium can also contribute to the Borough’s wider leisure-related need. The land which is
safeguarded by this policy is identified on the Policies Map.
43.11
In this location the River Arrow corridor is a designated Special Wildlife Site (SWS). Appropriate
measures will be required to protect and enhance the River Arrow and ensure that the ecological value of the
wildlife corridor is not undermined (see Policy 16 Natural Environment). Where development proposals affect
the flood plain of the River Arrow, an assessment of flood risk should be made in accordance with national
planning policy, Policy 17 Flood Risk Management and Policy 18 Sustainable Water Management.
99
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
Policy 44
44.2
Support will be given to the principle of the provision of new or improved primary health care
and related activities. These health facilities, should be located where they are accessible and
ideally within Redditch Town Centre or the District Centres in accordance with Policy 30 Town Centre
and Retail Hierarchy. Alternatively, health-related development can be located within the curtilage of
the Alexandra Hospital.
44.3
The Borough Council will continue to safeguard land within the curtilage of the Alexandra
Hospital for development which is intended for genuine health-related purposes. Strategic Site Policy
47 Land to the Rear of Alexandra Hospital sets the requirements for a mixed used development which
aims to assist in the delivery of the Local Plan Vision and Objectives. The policy takes account of the
need to be sensitive to the functioning of the hospital and also the need to set aside land in the
curtilage of the hospital for health-related facilities.
Policy 44
Health Facilities
44.1
To help promote healthy and sustainable living for new and existing communities, new and improved
health facilities should be in the most accessible locations in the Borough; these are defined by Policy 30 Town
Centre and Retail Hierarchy. In addition, the Alexandra Hospital is the main provider of acute medical services
for the Borough and surrounding area so this is also an appropriate location for additional health care facilities.
Reasoned Justification
44.4
The Hierarchy of Centres, as set out in Policy 30 Town Centre and Retail Hierarchy states that Redditch
Town Centre, at Tier 1 of the hierarchy should be the main location for uses that attract large numbers of
people. District Centres, at Tier 2 should serve a community’s day to day needs. The Town and District Centres
also represent areas of the town which are accessible by a range of modes of transport. Consequently these
locations are considered the most suitable and sustainable for the development of new health facilities.
In addition, there is also land within the curtilage of the Alexandra Hospital safeguarded for health related
purposes. A review of healthcare services provided at the Alexandra Hospital may, however, necessitate a more
flexible approach to land use in the curtilage of the hospital where it relates to the functioning of the hospital.
44.5
The Alexandra Hospital is the main provider of acute medical services in the Borough and is governed
by the Worcestershire Acute Hospitals NHS Trust. The hospital is located in the south of the urban area of the
Borough on a site currently dominated by healthcare and health-related facilities. This represents the highest
concentration of key healthcare facilities in the Borough and is widely accessible by public transport making
this an ideal location for increased health related provision.
44.6
Genuine health-related facilities include:
GP premises
Dental practices
Nursing homes
Hospital related facilities directly related to the delivery of healthcare and any necessary supporting uses
that enable the proper functioning of the hospital.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)100
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Promoting Redditch’s Community Well-being
Policy 45
45.2
The Borough Council will continue to ensure that there is sufficient cemetery land to meet the
needs of the Borough. In order to do so, it will be necessary to identify a new cemetery site within the
Plan period. Ideally the identified site should meet all the following criteria. The site should be:
i.
at least 1.7ha in size;
ii.
easily accessible by a range of transport modes including public transport;
iii.
located in an area where a tranquil setting for the cemetery can be achieved with appropriate
mitigating measures if necessary;
iv.
in an area that is not currently prone or likely to become prone to water logging. Burials shall take
place within the unsaturated zone (between the land surface and the water table) and not within
a minimum distance of: 250 metres of any potable supply (including wells and boreholes);
30 metres from any surface watercourse, spring or pond; and 10 metres of any field drain;
v.
supported by an appropriate risk assessment to demonstrate that there is no adverse risk of
pollution to controlled waters including domestic water supplies, or includes appropriate measures,
including monitoring (where necessary) to prevent the risk;
vi.
as near as possible to mains drainage and to other services such as water and electricity; and
vii.
in an area with appropriate surrounding screening and landscaping for a cemetery or where this
can be achieved.
Policy 45
Cemeteries
45.1
There are three cemeteries and one Crematorium in Redditch Borough that are owned and managed by
the Borough Council. The Crematorium and the largest cemetery (Abbey Cemetery) are located at Bordesley
Lane. The other cemeteries in the Borough are smaller in size and burial plots there are no longer generally
available. If the current burial rate at the Abbey Cemetery continues, a new site will be needed within this
Plan period.
Reasoned Justification
45.3
In order to ensure a tranquil setting the site should not be in close proximity to schools, workplaces
or
noise generators such as roads. The exception to this will be if it is possible to create sufficient buffering
measures to offset any detrimental effects that the surrounding area may have on a cemetery. The possibility
of introducing such measures to a site in order to make it an acceptable location for a cemetery will be
investigated if necessary.
45.4
The Environment Agency will be consulted with regard to the protection of ground and surface waters
(‘controlled waters’ as defined under the Water Resources Act 1991). The cemetery will not be developed in a
location where it may have an unacceptably damaging effect on the environment. Regard should be had to the
appropriate Environment Agency guidance including ‘Groundwater Protection: Principles and Practice’ and
‘Assessing the Groundwater Pollution Potential of Cemetery Developments’ when assessing the
appropriateness of potential cemetery sites.
45.5
The new site should be well served by public transport, in line with Policy 19 Sustainable Travel and
Accessibility. In addition to the criteria set out in this policy, proposals for a new cemetery site will be assessed
in accordance with any other relevant policies in this Plan.Strategic Sites
Strategic Sites are those sites which are considered central to the achievement of the Local Plan’s
Vision and Objectives. They relate to the provision of large-scale housing development, employment,
and related community and health facilities. The Strategic Sites each have a specific policy to guide
their development to ensure the comprehensive delivery of sustainable development for Redditch
communities.
There are other Strategic Site policies included within the key theme of ‘Improving the vitality and
viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres’, however these Strategic Sites are Redditch
Town Centre and former New Town District Centres which makes them essential policies to deliver
against that key theme, rather than be grouped with other Strategic Site Policies.
101
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic SitesBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)102
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 46
46.2
A Strategic Site at Brockhill East is appropriate for a high quality mixed use development
comprising around 1,025 dwellings, employment (8.45ha) and relevant community facilities and
services including, a District Centre (including convenience retail store), a first school and a
sustainable public transport network.
46.3
Development of the Brockhill East Strategic Site should ensure that the following principles are
applied:
Development type
i.
incorporate a mix of housing types and provide the Borough Council’s current standard of
affordable housing provision;
ii.
serviced employment land to be delivered concurrently in Phase Two to match housing delivery
within the strategic site. Employment land must be actively marketed;
iii.
the type of employment uses must provide an appropriate and sympathetic buffer between
existing
employment uses to the south of the site and future neighbourhood development to the north;
iv.
deliver a District Centre of a high quality design, avoiding design flaws that contribute to a feeling
of being unsafe which meets local convenience needs;
v.
deliver a school capable of use as a community facility, including playing pitches;
vi.
the inclusion of a portion of mixed use live-work units would be considered favourably in this
location;
Design and the environment
vii.
the whole Strategic Site must be designed to successfully integrate with the existing Brockhill
area. Its design must be appropriate to allow a natural extension to the urban area, and use the
sites features to improve the character and quality of the area and the way it functions;
viii. development must respect and be sympathetic to the topography of the site, in particular design
consideration should be given to the steeper slopes with no development on prominent ridge lines
and any excessive remodelling of land avoided;
ix.
green infrastructure must be provided based on the needs identified in the Green Infrastructure
Concept Statement for Brockhill East, including open spaces (in line with the Open Space
Provision SPD), landscaped areas, the utilisation of the Red Ditch and/or new balancing areas for
biodiversity opportunities;
x.
the quality, diversity and distinctiveness of the landscape character and important natural,
man-made and historic features must be conserved, enhanced and where necessary, restored;
xi.
landscaping should be reflective of the Wooded Estateland landscape type, with sensitive
landscape treatment being applied along the site boundaries;
Policy 46
Brockhill East
46.1
Brockhill East Strategic Site is located on the north west boundary of the Redditch urban area and is
ideally located to support a significant amount of Redditch’s housing, employment and associated
community facilities alongside adjacent development across the Redditch Borough boundary in Bromsgrove
District. This strategic site is currently greenfield and has been previously designated as Green Belt in parts;
however exceptional circumstances exist to allocate this site to meet development needs. Furthermore,
as development of this site progresses, it will positively enable development of a key employment site
(previously referred to as IN67) to come forward to contribute towards the Borough’s employment needs.103
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 46
continued
xii.
appropriate mitigation measures must be implemented to ensure protection of the natural
environment, with benefits from development to biodiversity captured;
xiii.
the Historic Environment Record should be consulted during the formulation of development
proposals to establish the potential for heritage assets and used to inform any necessary
appraisal or evaluation of the site;
xiv.
proposals should consider how they can improve the ecological status of the River Arrow and the
Batchley Brook;
Infrastructure
xv.
proposals should demonstrate that there is no adverse risk of pollution to controlled waters
through the submission of an appropriate risk assessment and if necessary, a site investigation
and mitigation scheme;
xvi.
the Strategic Site must be accessible by a choice of modes of sustainable transport. Investment
in necessary transport infrastructure, service improvements and Smarter Choices measures
should be delivered, including facilitating appropriate pedestrian connectivity;
xvii.
a link road from Brockhill Drive (B4184) to Weights Lane should be implemented which
incorporates any necessary environmental improvements;
xviii.
a Transport Assessment must be provided which demonstrates how the implications of the
development will be mitigated against, also detailing the safe access and egress arrangements
into the site;
xix.
enable the access roundabout that could facilitate the delivery of Bordesley Bypass;
xx.
flood risk measures must be informed by a site specific flood risk assessment and flood
modelling will be required, with all mitigation measures fully implemented and no development
taking place within 8m of the watercourse;
xxi.
appropriate SuDS systems to attenuate and balance any surface water runoff must be
incorporated and balancing areas implemented to adequate safety standards;
xxii.
drainage system upgrades identified in the Water Cycle Strategy must be in place to enable
development; and
xxiii.
drainage proposals for the site should include appropriate pollution prevention measures to
avoid risks to controlled waters.
46.4
The first phase of this Strategic Site development is expected to be delivered within 5 years
following Local Plan adoption. The remainder of the Strategic Site will be expected to be delivered
within 10 years following Local Plan adoption.
46.5
Planning permission will not be granted for any scheme which would restrict the delivery of the
entire Strategic Site, or the achievement of the development principles.
Reasoned Justification
46.6
Development Type - The Brockhill East Strategic Site was previously designated as a combination of Area
of Development Restraint (ADR), Green Belt and an employment site (IN67). Redditch’s housing requirements
and the limited locations for development within Redditch’s urban area necessitate that exceptional
circumstances exist to remove land from the Green Belt to form part of this Strategic Site for development.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)104
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Furthermore, release of the land for housing development enables the former IN67 employment site to be
delivered for employment development concurrently, as this is more feasible than delivery of employment
development alone. A mixed use approach, including the delivery of live/work units in this location is required
to create a more vibrant place. Live/ work units are suitable here due to the sustainable location.
46.7
An appropriate location should be determined in Brockhill East for a District Centre which is needed in
north Redditch, in the Brockhill area. This District Centre should satisfy any convenience needs of the local
community. If proposals for convenience retail to be provided in the Brockhill area exceed the level of retail
provision normally associated with a District Centre location (see Policy 30 Town Centre and Retail Hierarchy),
this will be subject to an impact assessment on surrounding District Centres to ensure there are no negative
impacts.
46.8
The delivery of a first school is required is the north Redditch area, this need must be met in an
appropriate location (the most appropriate location may be cross-boundary in Bromsgrove District). The school
should also be capable to use as a community facility.
46.9
The provision of social infrastructure is required to support any proposed development on the Strategic
Site, in addition this has the added benefit of creating new opportunities for the people living in the Brockhill
community. The type of community facility developed should be determined by evidence based on the
community’s requirements in line with the identified infrastructure need.
46.10
Design and the environment - Given the topography of the site, open space provision should be a
useable and beneficial space which is easily maintained. A Green Infrastructure Concept Statement will be
produced by Worcestershire Green Infrastructure Partnership in conjunction with the Borough Council. Green
Infrastructure must be provided based on the needs identified within this statement and must guide the
provision of green infrastructure. Consideration should be given to the incorporation of balancing areas into
the Green Infrastructure Network. The watercourse and mature trees that exist are important features of the
site and should be retained and improved due to their value and contribution to the landscape. The landscape
character and historic features within the site also contribute to the character of the landscape and townscape
and local distinctiveness of the area. Applicants should refer to the Worcestershire Landscape Character
Assessment and Worcestershire Historic Environment Record to inform proposals.
46.11
The Worcestershire Landscape Character Assessment designates the area as Wooded Estatelands.
The principles of the Wooded Estateland Management Strategy include that of conservation with elements of
enhancement and restoration. Design proposals should seek to conserve the large scale structure and wooded
character of the landscape, whilst seeking to restore parkland areas and enhance the overall landscape by
encouraging an increase in woodland cover as part of the development.
46.12
This site falls within Historic Environment Character Zone (HECZ) 148 of the Historic Environment
Assessment (HEA) which has been identified as having high potential for unknown archaeology; therefore an
appraisal of the site will be required prior to any development. Please see Policy 36 Historic Environment for
more information.
46.13
Proposals should consider how they can improve the ecological status of the River Arrow and the
Batchley Brook through consultation with the Environment Agency.
46.14
The site is underlain by the Mercia Mudstone Group, which is classified as a secondary aquifer.
Development proposals must demonstrate that there is no adverse pollution risk to the aquifer through the
submission of an appropriate risk assessment and if necessary, a site investigation and mitigation scheme.105
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
46.15
Infrastructure - The delivery of supporting infrastructure is required to enable development at Brockhill
East Strategic Site (including road and drainage infrastructure). This supporting infrastructure may need to be
located outside of Redditch Borough’s administrative boundary in Bromsgrove District to enable this site to be
sustainably developed.
46.16
Accessibility - A modal shift must be sought to reduce car dependency and promote the use of public
transport in this area. The accessibility of this site is generally good as this site is located in fairly close
proximity to Redditch Town Centre. However, access to the local bus network is restricted in some parts of the
site. Therefore, consideration should be given to extending the 50 and 51 services into the site to ensure good
access by public transport to/from all parts of the site.
46.17
Early consultation with Worcestershire County Councils Sustainable Transport Team is recommended.
46.18
Smarter Choices Measures refers to the use of marketing and information measures which seek to
encourage and enable the use of sustainable travel modes. Examples include improved information provision,
innovative marketing and media and awareness-raising campaigns.
46.19
Transport Infrastructure - Improvements necessary for the Strategic Site as a whole should be identified
in a Transport Assessment. Within the Transport Assessment, details of the installation of an appropriate link
road from Weights Lane will need to identify any impacts on Dagnell End junction and the Riverside roundabout
in particular. The Bordesley Bypass is not required for the delivery of this Strategic Site but may be delivered as
it is detailed within the Worcestershire County Council Local Transport Plan (LTP 3).
46.20
Flood risk - The Red Ditch runs through part of the site, the flood extent is limited to a short distance
either side it. A small portion of this site is in Flood Zone 3 where built development should be avoided, and
directed to areas at lower risk of flooding within the site. A precautionary approach should be adopted to
flood risk for the entire site.  Opportunities should be explored for reducing the existing downstream flood risk
through appropriate design and layout of the development.
46.21
Consideration should be given to the preparation of flood management and evacuation plans.
Safe development is essential with finished floor levels set at least 600mm above the predicted 1% plus
climate change flood level. Ideally a flood free route for both pedestrians and vehicles should be available to/
from the development. An emergency evacuation plan should be prepared as part of the FRA/drainage impact
assessment for the proposed development. Pollution control measures should also be incorporated to prevent
contamination of the Red Ditch, which may be achieved through the incorporation of Sustainable Drainage
Systems (SuDS).
46.22
Water management - The appropriate methods to manage surface water on this site should be
implemented, with runoff from the site not exceeding existing greenfield rates and ideally improving current
volume and rates of runoff. This could be adequately achieved through the use of SuDS and enhancements
to the watercourse, such as creating flood attenuation and storage. Appropriate landscaping should also be
utilised to improve drainage efficiency within the site and to direct flow paths away from development to flood
storage areas. The site will also be expected to incorporate appropriate SuDS throughout the scheme to deal
with surface water runoff created from the development and resulting from potential cumulative effects from
development in the Brockhill area.
46.23
Waste water infrastructure - Necessary upgrades to the existing drainage system must be implemented
to ensure there is enough capacity for the waste water needs arising as a result of development of the
Strategic Site and a satisfactory water supply is provided. The waste water collection infrastructure required
is small diameter sewerage systems upgrades and local upsizing to accommodate the increased flow.
Further hydraulic modelling is required to confirm the extent of any capacity improvements.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)106
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites107
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 47
47.3
A Strategic Site at land to the rear of the Alexandra Hospital is appropriate for delivery of a
mixed use development. To deliver a sustainable development with the successful combination of
employment and residential uses, the Strategic Site must ensure that the following principles are
applied:
Development type
i.
incorporate a minimum of 5000 sq m (approximately 1.85 ha) of B1 office development or
employment development that is medical related;
ii.
incorporate housing (a minimum of 145 dwellings);
Design and the environment
iii.
ensure design of the site is appropriate to its surroundings, with regard to the openness and
landscape and the requirement to be sensitive to the use of the hospital facility. The design must
create a central sense of place, which ensures legibility and successful function;
iv.
ensure the design respects the natural features of the site, including the lowland meadow, the UK
Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) Priority Habitat and any designated ‘Important hedgerows’, the sites
topography and biodiversity, and the close proximity to the Rough Hill & Wire Hill Woods SSSI;
v.
incorporate Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS), particularly to the south of the site.
Opportunities exist to achieve the SuDS requirements of this Plan alongside other Green
Infrastructure and landscaping benefits;
vi.
increase tree planting at the edges of the site to extend the tree belts, in accordance with the
‘Land to the rear of the Alexandra Hospital Green Infrastructure Concept Statement’ and Policy 11
Green Infrastructure;
vii.
conduct an Ecological Assessment and implement any necessary mitigation measures;
viii. green infrastructure must be provided, including open spaces (in line with the Open Space
Provision SPD), landscaped areas, and new balancing areas for biodiversity opportunities;
47.4
The Historic Environment Record should be consulted during the formulation of development
proposals to establish the potential for heritage assets and used to inform any necessary appraisal or
evaluation of the site;
Policy 47
Land to the rear of the Alexandra Hospital
47.1
This Strategic Site is currently greenfield, ideally located in the Woodrow area of Redditch to support a
significant amount of housing and employment development to support the delivery of the Local Plan Vision
and Objectives. The development of the site is also considered to add value to the existing health facilities. The
site is proposed for a mixed use development, incorporating B1 offices and housing.
47.2
A parcel of the land is the subject of an adopted SPD (2007) for employment purposes, however during
the development of the Local Plan it has emerged that a more viable way of bringing the land forward is to
incorporate a wider site boundary and develop the Strategic Site for a mixed use development.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)108
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 47
continued
Infrastructure
ix.
proposals should demonstrate that there is no adverse risk of pollution to controlled waters
through the submission of an appropriate risk assessment and if necessary, a site investigation
and mitigation scheme;
x.
ensure appropriate waste water treatment infrastructure is in place to support development;
xi.
develop the site sequentially to direct development to areas of the site at lowest flood risk and
submit a site-specific Flood Risk Assessment (FRA) which assesses the watercourse to the south
of the site, and drainage impact assessment;
xii.
complete a detailed Transport Assessment (incorporating traffic modelling) to assess any impacts
and implement all mitigation measures that may be required;
xiii. assess the cumulative impacts of development of the site on transport infrastructure with
solutions delivered in line with the policies in this Plan, in particular footpaths and cycleways to
connect the site to Redditch Town and the transport interchange at the front of the hospital;
xiv. incorporate any necessary infrastructure identified for the effective delivery of the site; and
xv.
drainage proposals for the site should include appropriate pollution prevention measures to avoid
risks to controlled waters.
47.5
This Strategic Site is expected to be delivered within 5 years following Local Plan adoption.
The Borough Council will issue further strategic planning guidance in order to guide and accelerate
the sustainable delivery of this Strategic Site.
47.6
Planning permission will not be granted for any scheme which would restrict the delivery of the
entire Strategic Site, or the achievement of the development principles.
Reasoned Justification
47.7
Development Type - The Strategic Site is located to the rear of the Alexandra Hospital and comprises
8.23 ha of greenfield land. The site is in close proximity to the Alexandra Hospital and Kingsley College.
47.8
The site is to be developed for B1 offices for a minimum of 5000 sq m which would add value to the
adjacent hospital facilities. A minimum of 145 dwellings should be provided, however further work will need
to be undertaken to assess whether constraints result in this capacity being lowered. However, based on the
site analysis completed as part of the development of this policy, this figure is feasible and the policy is flexible
enough to accommodate a change in circumstance.
47.9
The development of this Local Plan has included assessments of the site and consultation with
landowners, as a result it is considered that the most viable means of bringing the site forward would be to
progress a comprehensive mixed use development incorporating housing and employment. This mixed use
development will allow the creation of linkages between different uses and can thereby create more vibrant
places. This mix of housing and employment must be developed sensitively, respecting the use of the adjacent
hospital. Consideration should be given to the daily functioning of the hospital site, for example thought should
be given to limiting overlooking to and from the hospital facilities and development should not impact on
emergency services. The end use of the office facilities should be compatible with the hospital and also with
the adjoining residential development proposed as part of the Strategic Site. It is essential the surrounding
uses of the site are considered when formulating proposals in order to improve the character and quality of
the area.109
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
47.10
Design - A design that reflects and improves the site and its surroundings will help create a sense of
character, the design of the site should respond to existing features of the site including views. The design of
the site must consider all uses of the site including residential and employment uses, as well as integrating the
need for SuDS. This site should be developed to make a positive and integrated approach to the use,
management and enhancement of the site in this location should have full consideration.
47.11
The layout of the site and the buildings should make it easy to navigate around the development.
This Strategic Site should be designed to ensure users can get around easily, with a clear network of routes,
this makes users feel safer and creates a sense of place. Navigation can be improved by creating landmarks
and focal points. This will add to the sustainability and long term viability of the site by ensuring minimal
enhancements are needed in the future.
47.12
This site falls within Historic Environment Character Zone 138 of the Historic Environment Assessment
(HEA) which has been identified as having moderate potential for unknown archaeology; therefore an appraisal
of the site may be required prior to any development. Please see Policy 36 Historic Environment for more
information.
47.13
The Environment - The site is adjacent to a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI); consequently it is
important any development respects these features, and that it is inclusive of the design of buildings but also
the positioning of development in terms of respecting the topography of the area, considering the impact on
local biodiversity and the screening of the site. An assessment should be conducted in line with the Hedgerow
Regulations (1997) to establish whether there are any ‘Important Hedgerows’ on site. In addition the site is
currently a greenfield site, therefore there are likely to be ecological impacts of any development in this area.
In order to mitigate against any impacts an ecological assessment should be carried out as well as
implementing any necessary measures identified. The Worcestershire Biodiversity Action Plan (BAP) is a
series of Action Plans (divided by theme, species or habitat group). Further information can be found on the
Worcestershire County Council Website.
47.14
Strong tree belts are located around the boundaries of the site, planting here should be increased in
order to maintain this strong containment. In addition, it is also essential that multifunctional green space is
provided as part of any development in line with Policy 11 Green Infrastructure.
47.15
The site is underlain by the Mercia Mudstone Group, which is classified as a secondary aquifer.
Development proposals must demonstrate that there is no adverse pollution risk to the aquifer through the
submission of an appropriate risk assessment and if necessary, a site investigation and mitigation scheme.
47.16
Accessibility - Accessibility by a range of transport modes to and from the site must be incorporated
into any proposal. The transport network impacts and implications arising as a result of development of the
strategic site must be mitigated against and this should be informed by a Transport Assessment submitted
alongside any planning application. This site has limited cycle and walking opportunities to employment
opportunities and health facilities in the Borough, with distance from the railway being one significant factor,
which should seek to be improved through any proposals for this site.
47.17
Transport infrastructure - The full development site must be considered at the first stage of delivery.
Evidence prepared in support of a planning application must be to the satisfaction of the Borough Council
and Worcestershire County Council (WCC) Highways Department.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)110
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
47.18
Flood risk - There is a known isolated highway flooding problem to the south of the site affecting Green
Lane. A site-specific FRA should be prepared alongside a land drainage impact assessment. Opportunities
should also be sought through the design and layout for reducing the flood risk in the area. Consideration
should be given to ensuring properties do not encroach into the floodplain. There should be no increase in
runoff following development. It is essential that the existing, greenfield runoff rates from the site are
maintained. This could be adequately achieved through the use of SuDS and enhancements to the
watercourse. It has been identified that the southern edge of the site may be a suitable location to incorporate
SuDS as part of the development scheme. The unnamed watercourse which flows next to the site is a tributary
of the River Arrow is known to flood, measures should be incorporated to attenuate and store runoff through
the use of sustainable drainage techniques. Proposals should ensure that the capacity of the drainage
system downstream of the site is not compromised. To achieve this, SuDS should be implemented. Appropriate
landscaping should also be utilised to improve drainage efficiency within the site and to direct flow paths away
from development to flood storage areas. Pollution control measures should also be incorporated to prevent
contamination of the unnamed watercourse and River Arrow. This may be achieved through the incorporation
of SuDS measures.
47.19
An assessment of the watercourse which runs adjacent to the site to the south should be assesses
including potential modelling, to inform developable areas and safe development.
47.20
Waste Water Infrastructure - Subject to hydraulic modelling, accommodation of the additional foul
flows from development is not envisaged to require significant capacity improvements. Any foul waste water
infrastructure required in order to support the delivery of this site must be implemented at the first phase of
development of this Strategic Site.
47.21
Further strategic planning guidance will assist in developing this policy further as well as providing
further policy guidelines which will assist in bringing forward development that will aid in delivering the Vision
and Objectives of the Local Plan.111
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic SitesBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)112
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 48
48.2
A Strategic Site at Webheath is appropriate for a high quality development comprising around
400 - 600 dwellings.
48.3
Delivery of this Strategic Site is best achieved in two phases; the first phase of this site should
deliver 200 dwellings and is expected to be delivered within 5 years following Local Plan adoption.
The second phase of this site should deliver 200 – 400 dwellings comprehensively to make the best
use of the land available. This phase is likely to contribute towards the long term housing requirement
and therefore is unlikely to be delivered within 10 years following Local Plan adoption.
48.4
Any proposals must not individually or cumulatively jeopardise the future use of any other part of
the site or the achievement of the development principles.
48.5
Development of the Webheath Strategic Site should ensure that the following principles are
applied:
Development type
i.
incorporate a mix of housing types including housing which meets the needs of the ageing
population. The provision of bungalows and / or 1 bedroom flats/maisonettes that meet Lifetime
Homes Standards would be welcomed in this area;
Design and the environment
ii.
the design of this site must be of a high quality and appropriate to its surroundings, taking all
opportunities available to improve the character and quality of the Webheath area and the way it
functions;
iii.
the open character of the site and special features of the landscape should be retained through
sympathetic design and through ensuring open space is integral to the design;
iv.
legibility and a central sense of place should be provided through good design, with views from
and into the site incorporated and maximised;
v.
topography of the site should be respected with any excessive remodelling of the land avoided
wherever possible;
vi.
green infrastructure must be provided based on the needs identified in the Green Infrastructure
Concept Statement for Webheath, including open spaces (in line with the Open Space Provision
SPD);
vii.
planting and landscaping must be incorporated (informed by a Hedgerow Assessment), to
enhance
the ecological and woodland features of the site, including the unnamed watercourse
and trees to capture all benefits for biodiversity;
viii. submission of an ecological survey and an archaeological survey to be approved by the Borough
Council;
ix.
proposals should consider how they can improve the ecological status of the Bow Brook;
x.
The Historic Environment Record should be consulted during the formulation of development
proposals to establish the potential for heritage assets and used to inform any necessary
appraisal or evaluation of the site;
Policy 48
Webheath Strategic Site
48.1
Webheath is located on the south west boundary of the Redditch urban area and is ideally located to
support a significant amount of Redditch’s housing requirements.113
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 48
continued
Infrastructure
xi.
development proposals should address contamination associated with any previous uses on the
site, including the disused sewerage works, through the submission of an appropriate risk
assessment and if necessary, a site investigation and mitigation scheme;
xii.
the Strategic Site must be accessible by a choice of modes of transport, particularly sustainable
transport. Investment informed by a Transport Assessment is required for necessary transport
infrastructure, safe access, service improvements and Smarter Choices measures should be
delivered;
xiii.
pedestrian links should be provided between the site and the Green Belt area to the west for
recreational purposes, and also to the existing Webheath area to the north. Cycle and pedestrian
links should be provided to link into existing cycle and footpath networks to Redditch Town Centre
and where public rights of way exist these should be incorporated into any design proposals;
xiv.
biodiversity enhancements should be provided along transport routes such as SuDS schemes;
xv.
any necessary measures to mitigate flood risk are to be implemented and flood modelling will be
required, which must be outlined in a site specific Flood Risk Assessment. Development will only
be permitted in Flood Zone 1;
xvi.
drainage system upgrades identified in the Borough Council’s Outline Water Cycle Strategy must
be in place to make development acceptable. This includes upsizing of local sewers and an
appropriate solution to dealing with waste water;
xvii.
appropriate SuDS systems to attenuate and balance any surface water runoff must be
incorporated;
xviii.
infrastructure deficits arising from the cumulative impact of the site being developed should be
provided through financial contributions, implemented early on in developing the site or, where
appropriate future proofed to allow their delivery at a later stage; and
Boundaries
xix.
a defensible Green Belt boundary must be maintained or where appropriate enhanced at the
south and west of the site, along the existing Green Belt boundary outlined on the Policies Map.
Reasoned Justification
48.6
Development Type - This site is a greenfield site and was designated as an Area of Development Restraint
(suitable to meet future housing needs) in the Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.3. This Plan now designates
this site as a Strategic Site suitable for housing. An approximate capacity for residential development is around
400 - 600 dwellings; however a specific capacity figure should be determined through detailed design
proposals and should make the most efficient use of the land available. Housing which meets the needs of
the ageing population would be appropriate in this location.
48.7
Design and the environment - This site has a number of landscape considerations and topographical
issues which must be incorporated into the design of this site. The landscape and topographical issues may
be such that the capacity of the site is restricted. It is considered that the delivery of housing suitable for the
elderly population may achieve a number of the aspirations of this Plan including the delivery of appropriate
housing of the right style in the right location and making the most efficient use of land. It is considered that
1 bedroom flats/apartments would allow a suitable capacity to be achieved, whilst not compromising the
landscape character qualities of this site and delivering much needed housing in an appropriate location.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)114
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
48.8
There is a Public Right of Way (the bridle way) which crosses the site from east to west, from Hill Top Lane
to Pumphouse Lane. Views from this track should be maximised.
48.9
There is a steep ridgeline following existing Hill Top Lane south west which slopes north to south and a
steep ridgeline also exists to border the site east of the northern boundary. These ridgelines should be
incorporated into site development.
48.10
The landscape character within the site contributes to the character of the landscape and local
distinctiveness of the area. Applicants should refer to the Worcestershire Landscape Character Assessment
and the Worcestershire Historic Environment Record to inform proposals.
48.11
Proposals should consider how they can improve the ecological status of the Bow Brook by considering
the ‘Bow Brook Biodiversity Delivery Area statement’ by Worcestershire Biodiversity Partnership.
48.12
This site falls within Historic Environment Character Zone (HECZ) 146 of the Historic Environment
Assessment (HEA) which has been identified as having high potential for unknown archaeology; therefore an
appraisal of the site will be required prior to any development.
48.13
Accessibility - The need to facilitate public transport provision is essential in this site due to the current
limited service to the area. The ability to access services and facilities (with exception of retail) near to
Webheath through walking are limited at present. Further consideration should be given to enhancing the
Public Transport, walking and cycling access to and from the site.
48.14
With regard to public transport, consideration should be given to extending the 68 service so that it calls
within the Webheath Strategic Site and providing equivalent service of 55A and 56A in the daytime to the
Hospital/south east of Redditch.
48.15
Development of this site provides an opportunity to address the remediation of any potential
contamination as a result of the former sewage works located within the site boundary.
48.16
Transport infrastructure - With regard to the specific access point for the Phase One of this
development, the single point of access from Church Road and emergency access from Pumphouse Lane have
been designed to take account of current highway constraints and the need to retain existing trees on the site
(which is important at this particular location due to close proximity to Green Belt land). However Phase One
must ensure the infrastructure requirements associated with Phase Two are not compromised.
48.17
Waste Water management - There is potential for the Webheath site to be drained either by gravity
(through a new gravity sewer) to the Priest Bridge sewerage system or by pumping flow into the Spernal
catchment (through a new sewage pumping station). Local sewers in both catchments are of small diameter
and require upsizing to provide additional capacity. Further hydraulic modelling will be required to assess the
extent of any capacity improvements and agreement should be sought with the Borough Council’s Drainage
Engineer and Severn Trent Water Limited to determine the most suitable approach before an application is
submitted. Any infrastructure needed to deliver Phase One of the development must ensure the infrastructure
requirements associated with Phase Two are not compromised.
48.18
Flood risk - A site specific flood risk assessment should also be provided to support development and all
measures to mitigate flood risk fully implemented. A small section of the site lies in Flood Zone 3 (both a and b);
development in these areas should be avoided. The Sequential Test should be applied to the site layout, to direct
built development to areas at less risk from flooding. The watercourse running through the site is a tributary of
Swan’s Brook. The design of the site should ensure that there is sufficient stand-off from the watercourse and
functional floodplain, in accordance with Environment Agency guidance. A precautionary approach should be
adopted to flood risk to ensure that development does not adversely impact on existing flood risk.
48.19
The appropriate methods to manage surface water on this site should be implemented, with runoff from
the site not exceeding existing greenfield rates and ideally improving current volume and rates of runoff.115
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic SitesBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)116
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 49
49.2
A Strategic Site at Woodrow is appropriate for residential development incorporating the former
Dingleside School, former playing fields and land to the rear of properties 1-11 Auxerre Avenue. This
Strategic Site must ensure that the following will apply to the development of this site:
Development type
i.
it will incorporate a mix of housing types (180 dwellings) and provide the Borough Council’s
current standard of affordable housing provision;
ii.
the development will be accessible by a choice of modes of transport, incorporating any
necessary infrastructure improvements and include a pedestrian link between Woodrow North
and the linear park and Woodrow District Centre;
iii.
the site is in a strategically accessible location where enhanced pedestrian links should be
created to Studley Road and hence services to the Town Centre, creation of linkages between
different uses and can thereby create more vibrant places;
Design and the environment
iv.
good design should contribute positively to making this area better for residents. Design must be
appropriate in this context, and take this opportunity to improve the character and quality of the
area and the way it functions;
v.
this site will promote regeneration to improve the well being of communities, improve facilities,
promote high quality and safe development and create new opportunities for the people living in
the communities;
vi.
green infrastructure must be provided, including open spaces (in line with the Open Space
Provision SPD), landscaped areas, and new balancing areas for biodiversity opportunities;
vii.
proposals will be required to be in accordance with the Open Space Provision SPD, which requires
on-site provision of open space or contributions to off-site provision;
viii. the Historic Environment Record should be consulted during the formulation of development
proposals to establish the potential for heritage assets and used to inform any necessary
appraisal or evaluation of the site;
Infrastructure
ix.
a pedestrian link to nearby bus stops should be considered – particularly connecting to Studley
Road, environmental improvements including green infrastructure should be enhanced along
these links;
x.
ensure transport infrastructure required to support this site is in place and supported by a
Transport Assessment;
xi.
the cumulative effects of development on transport infrastructure must be assessed and
solutions sought in line with the policies in this Plan, with particular regard to the cumulative
effects of the delivery of this Strategic Site;
Policy 49
Woodrow Strategic Site
49.1
A site which lies to the rear of properties 1-11 Auxerre Avenue, Greenlands was identified for residential
development in both Local Plan No.2 and Local Plan No.3. The site was the subject of a SPD, adopted in March
2006, which allocated the site for 100% affordable housing. Also, the site of the former Dingleside School
has been identified through the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment as appropriate for residential
development and the boundary of this site lies adjacent to the Auxerre Avenue site. Together these two parcels
of land form one Strategic Site.117
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites
Policy 49
continued
xii.
ensure that benefits for biodiversity are captured from the development of this site in order to
contribute to urban quality and green space;
xiii.
the development will work with and respect the topography of the site and avoid any excessive
remodelling of land;
xiv.
surface water must be managed sustainably and is not connected to the foul/combined water
sewer; and
xv.
ensure appropriate waste water treatment infrastructure is in place to support development.
49.3
This Strategic Site will be required to meet the short term housing requirement (delivery within
5 years after Local Plan adoption).
49.4
Planning permission will not be granted for any scheme which would restrict the delivery the
entire Strategic Site, or the achievement of the development principles.
Reasoned Justification
49.5
Development Type - This Strategic Site is capable of accommodating around 180 dwellings at a minimum
density of between 30-50 dwellings per hectare.
49.6
Design and the Environment - The part of this site which is to the rear of Auxerre Avenue rises steeply
from north to south. The design should carefully consider the exposure of the highest parts of this site and
seek the retention of some mature trees as visual screening. The retention of mature trees and hedgerows on
and adjacent to the site will also be encouraged as far as possible. This site falls within Historic Environment
Character Zone (HECZ) 138 of the Historic Environment Assessment (HEA) which has been identified as having
moderate potential for unknown archaeology; therefore an appraisal of the site may be required prior to any
development. Please see Policy 36 Historic Environment for more information.
49.7
Accessibility - Proposals will be required to maximise opportunities for access on foot, by bicycle and by
public transport and improvements to existing infrastructure will be sought. It is essential that any scheme
on this site creates a safe and attractive pedestrian route to link Woodrow North and the linear park; this
should be alongside the vehicular access route. Woodrow District Centre provides for the local community’s
day-to-day needs and it is therefore important that provision is made for a pedestrian link to the District
Centre from the development. Consideration should be given to increasing pedestrian access to surrounding
bus stops in particular connecting Studley Road.
49.8
Transport infrastructure - With regard to assessing the transport infrastructure required to support
proposed development, the full Strategic Site’s impact must be considered at the first stage of delivery.
Evidence prepared in support of a planning application must be to the satisfaction of the Borough Council
and Worcestershire County Council (WCC) Highways Department.
49.9
Water Management and Waste Water Infrastructure - Surface water must be managed sustainably
and not be connected to the foul/combined water sewers, the additional foul only flows generated from this
development is not envisaged to have any capacity issues (subject to hydraulic modelling). Any foul waste water
infrastructure required in order to support the delivery of this site must be implemented at the first phase of
development of this Strategic Site. There are several public sewers crossing this site which may need to be
diverted/relocated as part of any redevelopment.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)118
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Strategic Sites119
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Monitoring and Implementation
Monitoring and Implementation
The delivery of this Plan is considered to be an iterative process and the Borough Council aims to constantly
strive for improvement. The Borough Council will monitor and consider best practice advice to see if there are
any lessons that can be learnt.
Given the length of the Plan period, it is inevitable that some aspects of this Plan will become outdated.
In addition, there are likely to be considerable changes in economic conditions, public opinion and political
and government priorities. Other wider issues such as energy supply, climate change, technology development
and flood risk are also likely to change over the Plan period. Therefore it is important to carry out regular
monitoring to identify where elements of the Plan need reviewing, or where some of the Plan’s policies may
need to be reviewed if they are no longer achieving what they were intended to achieve.
In order to successfully achieve this, the Borough Council produces a Monitoring Report on an annual basis.
This is a publicly available report, setting out the extent to which policies in the Local Plan are being
implemented, and assesses whether the implementation of these policies is having the intended effect.
The indicators to measure are informed by the Sustainability Appraisal Framework indicators and the
monitoring indicators related to the Infrastructure Delivery Plan (Appendix 4).
In addition to the Monitoring Report the Borough Council is also committed to undertake monitoring on the
following matters:
i.
Sustainability Appraisal with an update of the baseline information about the condition of the Borough,
measured against key issues;
ii.
Housing, with annual updates of the five year land supply to make sure housing delivery comes forward as
anticipated;
iii.
Employment Land with updates to employment land supply information; and
iv.
Retail with updates of vacant uses as part of a wider Town Centre health check and supply of Town Centre
sites.
This wider monitoring assists in identifying wider contextual issues which may result in the need to amend
policies or in some instances may lead to the need for new policies.
Each year the Plan will be evaluated and if a partial or total review is necessary, it will be undertaken. Where it
is necessary, some of the policies in this Local Plan have a trigger or threshold for when the Borough Council
would need to look at revisions if the actual policy proposals either under provide or overachieves significantly.
Appendix 4, Infrastructure Implications of Local Plan No.4 Policies contains more information on the
implementation of each of the Local Plan’s policies, including infrastructure related to Strategic Sites.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)120
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 1
Appendices
Appendix 1:
RCBD1 Redditch Cross Boundary Development
RCBD1 Redditch Cross Boundary
Development
8.53
The Worcestershire Strategic Housing Market
Assessment (SHMA) identifies that Redditch’s housing
requirements up to 2030 should be around 6,380 dwellings.
The Redditch Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment
(SHLAA) identifies that Redditch Borough only has the capacity
to accommodate around 3000 dwellings within its own
boundaries, leaving a shortfall of around 3400. Bromsgrove
District Council and Redditch Borough Council have worked
together in accordance with the Duty to Cooperate to find
preferred locations to accommodate this shortfall.
An assessment (Housing Growth Development Study January
2013) has been carried out, building upon a consultation
conducted in 2010, to ensure that the most suitable and
sustainable sites have been selected.
8.54
Two sustainable mixed use urban extensions
(Foxlydiate and Brockhill) are proposed adjacent to the west
and north of Redditch Town which will deliver two new
sustainable communities. The two development sites, as
shown on Page 41, will provide a minimum of 3400 dwellings
and comprehensive provision of associated new infrastructure
to meet some of Redditch’s housing requirements up to 2030.
These sites are currently designated as Green Belt; however
exceptional circumstances exist to allocate these sites to meet
development needs. These developments will create balanced
communities that fully integrate into the existing residential
areas of Redditch, addressing the social, economic and
environmental elements of sustainable development,
whilst being sympathetic to the surrounding rural areas
of Bromsgrove.
8.55
Site 1 Foxlydiate
is located to the north western side
of Redditch within the Parish of Bentley Pauncefoot and will
provide opportunities to improve facilities and services in the
wider Webheath area. It also offers the opportunity to extend
existing bus services and through the provision of facilities
within development has the potential to reduce the need to
travel. The site has a sensitive hydrogeological setting and the
aquifer below the site is overabstracted. There are Source
Protection Zones
20
1, 2 and 3 located on the site and the
historic landfill
21
presents a potential source of contamination.
Development and surface water drainage will need to be
carefully located and designed to avoid pollution risks to
controlled waters and maximise recharge to the underlying
aquifer.  For example, to achieve the water quality objective
of the WFD, SuDS on the site may need to provide multiple
levels of treatment to avoid pollution risks.  To address the
quantitative issues with the groundwater body SuDS should
be designed so to maximise recharge to the aquifer.
8.56 Site 2 Brockhill
is located to the north of Redditch,
partly within the Parish of Tutnall and Cobley, has good access
to Redditch Town Centre, is well served by existing bus routes
and has employment close by.
20.
Map of the extent of the Source Protection Zones and location of the historic
landfill is available at:
http://maps.environment-agency.gov.uk
21.
Map of the site geology is available at:
http://mapapps.bgs.ac.uk/
geologyofbritain/viewer.html121
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 1
© Crown Copyright and database rights 2017. Ordnance Survey 100023519.
RCBD1
Redditch Cross Boundary Development MapBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)122
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 1
RCBD1
Redditch Cross Boundary Development
RCBD1.1 Two mixed use urban extensions are proposed (as shown on Map 10 RCBD1 across two sites adjacent to
Redditch and are appropriate to deliver approximately 3400 dwellings and comprehensive provision of associated
new infrastructure to meet some of Redditch’s housing requirements up to 2030.
RCBD1.2 Site 1 Foxlydiate will include approximately 2800 dwellings, a first school and a Local Centre, including
associated community infrastructure.
RCBD1.3 Site 2 Brockhill will contain approximately 600 dwellings which will integrate with the Strategic Site at
Brockhill East, as shown in the Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 and should integrate well into the existing
urban fabric of Redditch.
RCBD1.4 In order to achieve these sustainable new communities all aspects of the delivery of the urban extensions
must be in accordance with the Policies contained within the Bromsgrove Development Plan and any other
relevant Policies. In addition, it is a requirement that the following principles are applied to both sites:
I.
The residential development will reflect the local requirements as detailed in the most up-to-date Housing
Market Assessment and comprise of up to 40% affordable housing with a flexible mix of house types and
tenures;
II.
An overall Transport Assessment will be produced taking account of the prevailing traffic conditions and the
individual and cumulative effects of development on transport infrastructure. This will define the mitigation
necessary to protect the safety and operation of the road network, including sustainable travel measures
and any new and improved access arrangements;
III.
Significant improvements in passenger transport will be required resulting in integrated and regular bus
services connecting both sites to key local facilities. In particular, services should be routed through both Site 1
Foxlydiate and Site 2 Brockhill, with all dwellings to be located accessible to the bus network;
IV.
Walking and cycling routes should be well integrated with the Green Infrastructure Network. Site 1 Foxlydiate
should make full use of existing walking and cycling routes, such as Sustrans Route No. 5 and Monarch’s
Way and Site 2 Brockhill should create routes;
V.
Both sites will have an overall Strategy and Management Plan for Green Infrastructure which maximises
opportunities for biodiversity and recreation, whilst protecting existing biodiversity habitats and landscape
geodiversity. Green Corridors should be created around Spring Brook in Site 1 Foxlydiate and the Red Ditch in
Site 2 Brockhill. Both sites should be sensitively designed to integrate with the surrounding existing
environment and landscape. In particular, development should be respectful and sympathetic to the
topography of the sites, with no development on prominent ridge lines and where appropriate retain tree
lined boundaries;
VI.
Flood risk from the Spring Brook on Site 1 Foxlydiate and the Red Ditch on Site 2 Brockhill East should be
managed through measures that work with natural processes to improve the local water environment.
A detailed, site specific, Flood Risk Assessment will be required. This must provide a model of the nearby
ordinary watercourses to ascertain the design flood extents, including the 1% plus climate change allowances,
and determine the developable area of the site. This will inform the sequential approach and the need to
include any necessary avoidance or mitigation measures such as the incorporation of open space and green
infrastructure within the floodplain regime. Surface water runoff must be managed to prevent flooding
on, around and downstream of both sites through the use of Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS);123
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 1
RCBD1
Redditch Cross Boundary Development
continued
VII.
Water efficiency measures will meet the tighter Building Regulations optional requirement of 110 litres per
person per day;
VIII. SuDS proposals on Site 1 must provide an appropriate level of treatment to avoid pollution risks to controlled
waters, and be designed to achieve the greenfield rate of run-off, maximise recharge to the underlying aquifer
and support water levels in the Bow Brook.  In accordance with the objectives of the Water Framework
Directive, development should ideally contribute towards the improvement of, but as a minimum not have a
deteriorative effect on, the water bodies associated with the site;
IX.
An appropriate assessment of the pollution risks to controlled waters on Site 1 Foxlydiate will be produced
taking account of any previous contaminative uses on the site including the historic landfill, and the risks
associated with the proposed uses;
X.
Proposals for development will need to ensure that sufficient capacity of the sewerage systems for both
wastewater collection and treatment is provided through engagement with Severn Trent Water Ltd and the
Environment Agency and delivered at the appropriate stage;
XI.
Supporting developments that follow the water conservation hierarchy. Where standards currently exist for a
particular non-domestic building type in BREEAM, maximum points should be scored on water and a minimum
of 25% water savings for any other development;
XII.
All development must be of a high quality design and locally distinctive to its surrounding rural and urban
character; contribute to the areas’ identity and create a coherent sense of place; and respect and enhance the
setting of any heritage asset. There should be a continuous network of streets and spaces, including the
provision of public open spaces, creating a permeable layout with well-defined streets;
XIII. Development proposals should incorporate provision for any necessary infrastructure to be delivered in
parallel with the implementation of new development;
XIV.
Any proposals for development on either site must not individually or cumulatively jeopardise the future use
of any other part of the site (s) or impede the delivery of the two sustainable communities;
XV.
To ensure the protection of Heritage Assets, future proposals including development boundaries should be
in conformity with Policy BDP20 and informed by an understanding of the Setting of Heritage Assets set out
in the most recent Setting Assessment(s) produced, or formally endorsed, by the Council in accordance with
current Historic England guidance. Specifically, built development should not take place in the
‘no development’ areas identified in the Hewell Grange and Lanehouse Farm Setting of Heritage Assets
Assessments (both dated December 2015).Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)124
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 2
Appendix 2:
Schedule of Housing Sites
Policy 4 Housing Provision explains how Redditch Borough Council will meet its housing needs of around 6400
dwellings between 1 April 2011 and 31 March 2030.
This appendix provides more detailed information on the component parts of the housing requirement.
Additional monitoring information is available from the Development Plans Team. Monitoring information and
the Strategic Housing Land Availability Assessment (SHLAA) are updated annually on 1 April.
i.
Sites allocated for housing development in the Borough of Redditch in order to meet the Strategic
Housing Requirement for the period 2011-2030
Site
Site Name
Capacity for
Brownfield/
Area
(Ha)
No.
completions
Greenfield
on or after
1.4.2011
124
Brush Factory, Evesham Road
6
B
0.09
143
Adj. Castleditch Lane/Pheasant Lane
16
G
0.52
147
Windsor Road Gas Works
37
B
5.68
153
Prospect Hill
71
B
1.40
155
Former Claybrook First School
36
B
1.31
156
Land at Millfields and the Fire Station
30
B+G
1.02
157
Former Ipsley School playing field
41
G
0.93
158
South of scout hut, Oakenshaw Road
46
G
1.02
200
Land at Wirehill Drive
12
G
0.71
201
The Hills, Tanhouse Lane
14
B
0.57
203
Former Dingleside Middle School
180
B/G
7.27
204
Former Marlfield Farm First School
79
B/G
1.41
205
Mayfields Works, The Mayfields
23
B
0.19
206
Church Hill District Centre
51
B
1.23
207
Matchborough District Centre
70
B
0.92
208
Widney House, Bromsgrove Road
40
B+G
1.56
209
Loxley Close
10
B
0.31
210
RO Alexandra Hospital
145
G
7.74
211
A435 (former ADR)
205
G
7.36
212
Brockhill East
1025
G
60.13125
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 2
Site
Site Name
Capacity for
Brownfield/
Area
(Ha)
No.
completions
Greenfield
on or after
1.4.2011
213
Webheath
600
G
215
Birchfield Road
29
G
216
Former Hewell Road swimming baths
30
B
217
Sandycroft, West Avenue
9
B
218
RO Windsor Road Gas Works
44
B
219
Studley Road/Green Lane
10
G
220
Park House, Town Centre
14
B
Total
2873 dwellings
ii.
Additional land beyond the Borough of Redditch in order to meet the Strategic Housing Requirement for
the period 2011-2030. (Land within Bromsgrove District)
Site
Site Name/Address
B/G*
Capacity on
Completions
No.
or after
up to
1.4.2011
31.3.2013
(Ha)
1
Land at Foxlydiate
G
2800
0
2
Land at Brockhill East
G
600
0
Sub Total
3400
0
* Brownfield/GreenfieldBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)126
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 3
Appendix 3:
Schedule of Employment Sites
Policy 23 Employment Land Provision explains how Redditch Borough Council will meet its employment needs
of around 55 hectares between 1 April 2011 and 31 March 2030.
This appendix provides more detailed information on the component parts of the employment requirement.
Additional monitoring information is available from the Development Plans Team. Monitoring information and
the Employment Land Review (ELR) are updated annually on 1 April.
i.
Sites allocated for employment development in the Borough of Redditch in order to meet the Strategic
Employment Requirement for the period 2011-2030
Site
Site Name/Address
B/G*
Site Area (Ha)
No.
Capacity on or
after 1.4.2011
IN15
Woolaston Road, Park Farm
G
0.40
IN19
Studley Road (Aeroquip)
B
1.44
IN20
Old Forge Drive (BACO)
G
1.21
IN34
Merse Road, North Moons Moat
G
0.65
IN37
Bartleet Road, Washford
G
0.62
IN38
Adj. 47/52 Heming Road, Washford
G
0.22
IN52
Shawbank Road, Lakeside
G
1.03
IN54
Palmers Road, Moons Moat (E)
G
0.29
IN58
Crossgate Road, Park Farm (N)
G
1.04
IN59
Adj. Greenlands Business Centre, Park Farm (N)
G
0.38
IN67
Brockhill East (west of railway)
G
6.60
IN69
Land rear of Alexandra Hospital
G
2.00
IN80
Land at Winyates Way/Moons Moat Drive
G
0.64
IN81
Brockhill East (Weights Lane, east of railway)
G
1.85
IN83
Land at Kingham Close/Far Moor Lane
G
0.19
IN84
Land off Pipers Road
G
0.22
Sub Total
18.78 Ha127
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 3
ii.
Additional vacant land which counts towards the Borough’s employment land allocation in order to
meet the Strategic Employment Requirement for the period 2011-2030. (Land within Bromsgrove and
Stratford-on-Avon Districts)
Site
Site Name/Address
B/G*
Site Area (Ha)
No.
Capacity on or
after 1.4.2011
Land at Ravensbank (BDC)
G
5.32
Ravensbank ADR (BDC)
G
10.00
Land at Gorcott (SoADC)
G
7.47
Winyates Green Triangle (SoADC) (gross)
G
12.00
Sub Total (gross)
34.79 Ha
TOTAL
53.57 Ha
* Brownfield/GreenfieldBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)128
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Appendix 4:
Infrastructure Implications of the Borough of Redditch Local Plan
No.4 Policies
Infrastructure provision and contributions triggered by BORLP4 and its requirements and developments are included within the Infrastructure Delivery
Plan (IDP). The Draft IDP Report provides more information on the infrastructure that has been identified to support proposed development. Throughout
the BORLP4 preparation process the IDP has been informed by discussions that have taken place with key infrastructure delivery agencies. The IDP will
be a live document continuously updated through the Plan period to reflect new requirements when they are known and also to identify when
infrastructure needs have been met.
The table below gives a broad indication of the infrastructure implications arising from the Local Plan policies including what is required, when it should
be delivered, how much it will cost, who is responsible for delivery and how it might be funded.
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 1 Presumption in
Favour of Sustainable
Development
n/a
Redditch Borough
Council
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Policy 2 Settlement
Hierarchy
Policy 3 Development
Strategy
Policy 4 Housing
Provision
Policy 5 Effective and
Efficient Use of Land
Policy 6 Affordable
Housing
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Redditch Borough
Council
All Developers
Redditch Borough
Council
All Developers
Redditch Borough
Council
All developers
Redditch Borough
Council
All developers
Redditch Borough
Council
RSL’s
All developers
See Settlement Hierarchy
and Accessibility Study for
Astwood Bank and
Feckenham existing
provision
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Appropriate infrastructure
to support development
and for settlements to
maintain their role as
detailed in IDP
Appropriate infrastructure
to support development
as detailed in IDP
Appropriate infrastructure
to support development
as detailed in IDP
n/a
Appropriate infrastructure
to support development
as detailed in IDP
Various in relation to
individual development
sites as detailed in IDP
Various in relation to
individual development
sites as detailed in IDP
Various in relation to
individual development
sites as detailed in IDP
n/a
Various in relation to
individual development
sites as detailed in IDP
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Sustainable places to live to meet our needs129
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Creating and sustaining a green environment
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 7 Gypsies,
Travellers and
Travelling Showpeople
Policy 8 Green Belt
Policy 9 Open
Countryside
Policy 10 Agricultural
Workers Dwellings
Redditch Borough Council
Worcestershire County
Council
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Borough Council
GTAA (2008) identifies 3
showpeople sites in the
Borough.
n/a
n/a
n/a
Appropriate infrastructure
required for new site(s)
once identified
n/a
n/a
n/a
No known deficiencies
in infrastructure at
existing sites.
n/a
n/a
n/a
Delivery of new site(s) in
line with identified need.
Number of enforcement
cases regarding
unauthorised
encampments
n/a
n/a
n/a
If appropriate provision is
not made, the needs of
gypsies and travellers is
not met and there is likely
to lead to unauthorised
encampments (M)
n/a
n/a
n/a
Policy 11 Green
Infrastructure
Policy 12
Open Space Provision
Redditch Borough Council
Worcestershire County
Council
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
All Developers
300 formally designated
open spaces within the
Borough.
The Borough has an
informal unrestricted
open space standard of
5.9ha/1000 population
21 mini football pitches
4 junior rugby pitches
4 youth football pitches
9 senior rugby pitches
33 senior football
pitches
3 cricket pitches
3 Artificial Grass Pitches
16 Multi Use Games
Areas
2 bowling greens
22 tennis courts
Redditch Borough
allotment sites = 14
Redditch Borough
allotment plots = 790
Developers will be
required to provide open
space, play areas and
pitches directly on site
and/or provide a financial
contribution towards off-
site facilities
Developer contributions
through CIL/S106 and
direct provision in
relation to specific
planning applications.
Changes in levels of
open space in each
ward
Changes in supply of
sports pitches
Lack of open space can
reduce opportunities
for recreation, nature
conservation and CO2
absorption (L)
The GI Strategy for Redditch, once complete, will identify and assess the existing GI network and make recommendations on how
the network can be enhanced. The multifunctional nature of GI means that infrastructure identified in other sections of this IDP,
such as flood attenuation, play areas and playing pitches can also contribute to green infrastructure.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)130
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 13 Primarily
Open Space
Policy 14 Protection of
Incidental Open Space
Policy 15 Climate
Change
Policy 16 Natural
Environment
Policy 17
Flood Risk
Management
Policy 18 Sustainable
Water Management
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Number of planning
permissions granted
contrary to the advice of
the Environment Agency
on either flood risk or
water quality grounds
Number of new
allocated developments
located in the floodplain
Number/percentage
of new (residential and
commercial) develop
-
ment in flood zone 3
and flood zone 2
Number of applications
approved in areas prone
to non-fluvial flooding
Percentage of new
developments incorpo
-
rating SUDS
Number of planning
permissions granted
contrary to the advice of
the Environment Agency
on either flood risk or
water quality grounds
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Worcestershire County
Council
Redditch Borough Council
All Developers
Worcestershire County
Council
Severn Trent Water Ltd
Environment Agency
Redditch Borough Council
All Developers
Worcestershire County
Council
Severn Trent Water LTD
Environment Agency
Redditch Borough
allotment coverage = 15
hectares
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Existing flood defences
at the Red Ditch - several
culverts, a pond located
north of Windsor Road is
likely to provide some
attenuation and storage.
Existing flood defences at
the River Arrow - informal
earth embankment at
Papermill Farm
The WCS has identified
limited capacity in the
waste water treatment
network
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Individual development
sites to provide
appropriate flood risk
management, for example
SuDS to attenuate and
store runoff.
New gravity sewers and/
or pumping station
Local upsizing of sewers
to provide additional
capacity
SuDS to attenuate and
store runoff
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Direct provision on site
by developer at time of
development.
To be delivered at the
time of development.
Approximately £2.5
million for gravity sewer
solutions
Between £120,000
and £750,000 for new
gravity sewers and
upgrades
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
If defences are not
maintained or are not
adequate to deal with
increased river flow this
could result in flooding
to properties, roads etc
(H)
If the waste water
treatment network is
not upgraded as
required to support new
development at the
appropriate time,
delivery of development
will be delayed. (L)131
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Creating a Borough where businesses can thrive
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
The developer will
provide the on-site
drainage.
Severn Trent will provide
any off site infrastructure
and/or any upgrades to
the sewage treatment
works.
Policy 19 Sustainable
Travel and Accessibility
Policy 20 Transport
Requirements for New
Development
Policy 21 Alexandra
Hospital Public
Transport Interchange
Policy 22 Road
Hierarchy
Worcestershire County
Council including Choose
How You Move Team
All developers
Network Rail
Bus service providers
Rail service providers
Redditch Town Centre
Partnership
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Appropriate infrastructure
to support development
as detailed in IDP
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Various in relation to
individual development
sites as detailed in IDP
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
An assessment of transport infrastructure requirements has been carried out by Worcestershire County Council (as Transport
Authority) in conjunction with consultants Halcrow on behalf of Bromsgrove District and Redditch Borough Councils. The Redditch
Local Plan - Transport Network Analysis and Mitigation Report identifies schemes for sustainable transport and highways, indicative
costs and associated risks.
Policy 23 Employment
Land Provision
Policy 24 Development
Within Primarily
Employment Areas
Policy 25 Development
outside of Primarily
Employment Areas
Policy 26 Office
Development
Policy 27 Rural
Economic Development
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Redditch Borough
Council/North
Worcestershire Economic
Development and
Regeneration
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
All DevelopersBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)132
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 28 Supporting
Education, Training and
Skills
Policy 29 Broadband
and
Telecommunications
n/a
n/a
Redditch Borough Council
/ North Worcestershire
Economic Development
and Regeneration
Developers of major
applications
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Telecommunications
suppliers
n/a
n/a
n/a
New development sites
will have broadband
supplied by commercial
suppliers
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Improving the vitality and viability of Redditch Town Centre and District Centres
Policy 30 Town Centre
and Retail Hierarchy
Policy 31 Regeneration
for the Town Centre
n/a
Delivery of Town Centre
strategy
Redevelopment of
strategic sites
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Town Centre
Partnership
North Worcestershire
Economic Development
and Regeneration
Kingfisher Shopping
Centre
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Town Centre
Partnership
Homes and Communities
Agency
Worcestershire
Healthcare Trusts
Kingfisher Shopping
Centre
Worcestershire County
Council
n/a
n/a
n/a
The Redditch Town
Centre Strategy identifies
a number of potential
infrastructure
requirements including:
Downgrading the Ringway
Improving Public spaces
Car parking
Train station
improvements
Rejuvenation of silver
street/royal square
Lighting
Safety and security
Public art
Specific infrastructure
will also be required
in relation to the three
strategic sites
n/a
Infrastructure will be
delivered directly by
developers or service
providers in relation to
development sites
Wider infrastructure
requirements may be
delivered through CIL/
S106 financial
contributions and/
or by funding from the
Redditch Town Centre
Partnership
n/a
Economic Climate
means viability of town
centre developments
may be questionable (H)133
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 32
Protection of the Retail
Core
Policy 33
Use of Upper Floors
Policy 34
District Centre
Redevelopment
Policy 35 Health of
District Centres
n/a
n/a
Completion of
redevelopment
n/a
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Town Centre
Partnership
Kingfisher Shopping
Centre
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch Town Centre
Partnership (Town Centre
only)
Kingfisher Shopping
Centre (Town Centre only)
Redditch Borough Council
Developers
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Electricity: One or two
new 11kV circuits direct
from Redditch North PSS
to the site and four or five
distribution substations,
depending on type of
demand
May require local upsizing
of sewers
n/a
n/a
To be determined based
on proposed schemes;
likely to be enhancements
to existing infrastructure
Open space and
education contributions
may be required in
relation to any new
residential development
n/a
n/a
n/a
Delivered by developers
as part of development
n/a
n/a
n/a
Economic Climate may
stall developers coming
forward (H)
Public opposition (M)
n/a
Protecting and enhancing Redditch’s Historic Environment
Policy 36 Historic
Environment
n/a
Redditch Borough Council
English Heritage
All developers
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/aBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)134
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 37
Historic Buildings and
Structures
Policy 38 Conservation
Areas
n/a
n/a
Redditch Borough Council
English Heritage
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
English Heritage
All developers
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Creating safe and attractive places to live and work
Policy 39
Built Environment
Policy 40
High Quality Design
and Safer Communities
Policy 41 Shopfronts
and Shopfront security
Policy 42
Advertisements
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
West Mercia Police
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
West Mercia Police
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Policy 43 Leisure ,
Tourism and Abbey
Stadium
Policy 44 Health
Facilities
n/a
Loss of healthcare land
or buildings to other
uses
Number of planning
applications for new/
improved health
facilities
Redditch Borough Council
All developers
Redditch Borough Council
Redditch & Bromsgrove
Clinical Commissioning
Group
Worcestershire Acute
Hospitals Trust
Worcestershire County
Council
n/a
1 acute hospital -
Alexandra Hospital
Primary care facilities
(GPs, dentists, etc) across
the Borough
n/a
Review of services at
Alexandra Hospital on
going
Review of primary care
facilities is being under
-
taken but there is likely
to be a shortfall to meet
need in relation to new
development
n/a
Unknown
n/a
Health facilities may
not be delivered at the
appropriate time to
support new
communities (M)
Promoting Redditch’s community well-being135
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 45 Cemeteries
Number of sites
identified for cemetery
facilities
Redditch Borough Council
Existing Cemeteries
at Bordesley Lane (4
years plot availability in
2010)  and Plymouth
Road (closed to new
burials) & Edgioake Lane,
Astwood Bank (25 years
plot availability in 2010)
(outside Borough
boundary, but RBC
managed)
Cemetery site of at least
1.7Ha is required
Costs for a new cemetery
based on a 3ha site:
EA consent - up to
£6,000; Survey (ground
water and environmental)
up to £3,000; Boreholes
up to £6,000; Borehole
Monitoring up to £3,000;
Ecology surveys - up
to £20,000; Design
fees and costs - 4% of
build cost; Build cost -
£550,000 to £800,000
Short term delivery
required within five years
from adoption
Site constraints and
land availability within
the Borough could result
in a suitable site not be
-
ing identified (H)
Strategic Sites
Policy 46 Brockhill East
Delivery of required road
infrastructure
Required bus services
delivered
Delivery of education
facilities required
Amount of leisure
facilities completed by
type
Redditch Borough Council
Worcestershire County
Council
Developers
Greenfield site therefore
little existing provision.
The site is adjacent to
the existing Brockhill
development, which will
integrate with the new
strategic site
development
Electricity: New 11kV
circuit direct from
Redditch North PSS to
the site and four or five
distribution substations,
depending on type of
demand
New Gravity sewer and
upgrades to existing
sewers
SuDS to attenuate and
store runoff
New first school and
Middle and high school
provision of around 30
places per year group.
Financial contribution
required towards
additional provision at
existing schools.
Highway infrastructure
and sustainable transport
requirements contained
in the Redditch Transport
Network Analysis and
Mitigation Report
Infrastructure will need
to be delivered in line
with development.
It will be provided either
directly by the service
provider, the developer
or a financial
contribution made
through S106/CIL.
New sewer estimated to
be up to £750,000
New first school -
Estimate in the region of
£5 million (not including
land value) and
£2,995,290 based
on cost multiplier for
middle and high school
provision
Multiple landowners. (L)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)136
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 47 Land to the
rear of the Alexandra
Hospital
Policy 48 Webheath
Strategic Site
Residential completions
on site
Amount of floorspace
developed for
employment by type
B1a, B1b, B1c, B2, B8
Residential completions
on site
SoS for Health  and
Worcestershire Acute
Hospitals
Redditch Borough Council
Worcestershire County
Council
Developers
Redditch Borough Council
Worcestershire County
Council
Severn Trent Water Ltd
Greenfield site therefore
little existing provision.
Greenfield site therefore
little existing provision.
May require upsizing of
local sewers
SuDS to attenuate and
store runoff
Electricity: 11kV circuit
reinforcement work and
one or two distribution
substations
Highway infrastructure
and sustainable transport
requirements contained
in the Redditch Transport
Network Analysis and
Mitigation Report
Electricity: 11kV circuit
reinforcement work and
one or two distribution
substations
SuDS to attenuate and
store runoff
Leisure facilities: Play
Area; Green space com
-
munity improvements
at Morton Stanley Park
(off site); Contribution to
improve Webheath Vil
-
lage Hall; contribution to
Public Arts Trail at Morton
Stanley Park (off site)
New Gravity Sewer or new
Pumping Station
Highway infrastructure
and sustainable transport
requirements contained
in the Redditch Transport
Network Analysis and
Mitigation Report
Infrastructure will need
to be delivered in line
with development.
It will be provided either
directly by the service
provider, the developer
or a financial
contribution made
through S106/CIL.
Infrastructure will need
to be delivered in line
with development.
It will be provided either
directly by the service
provider, the developer
or a financial
contribution made
through S106/CIL.
Leisure facilities: circa
£275k
£120,000 for pumping
station or £2.789m for a
new gravity sewer
Multiple landowners but
all with willingness to
develop (L)
Due to land ownership
issues the delivery of
the second phase of this
site is a risk.  (H)
Waste water
infrastructure solution is
unknown (M)137
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Policy 49 Woodrow
Strategic Site
Residential completions
on site
Developers
Redditch Borough Council
Worcestershire County
Council
Planning permission
granted for 160
dwellings (2010/210
outline & 2013/066
reserved matters)
Open space - a contribu
-
tion to the improvement
and/or enhancement of
leisure equipment at the
adjacent Woodrow Park
and/or other existing play
areas in the locality
Sports facilities -
contribution towards
the improvement,
renovation and/or
extension to sports
facilities that are
available for use by
members of the public
within the Borough
SuDS to attenuate and
store runoff
Highway infrastructure
and sustainable transport
requirements contained
in the Redditch Transport
Network Analysis and
Mitigation Report
Infrastructure will need
to be delivered in line
with development. It will
be provided either directly
by the service provider,
the developer or a
financial contribution
made through S106/CIL.
Open space - £454.54
per dwelling
Sports facilities -
£1590.90 per dwelling
No additional risks other
than those normally
associated with the
development industryBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)138
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 4
Project/Site/Policy in
BORLP4
Monitoring indicators
Delivery Partners
Existing provision
Infrastructure
requirements
Funding sources,
timescales & indicative
costs
Risks (High/Medium/
Low)
Appendix 1: RCBD1
Redditch Cross
Boundary Development
Development
completions on site
Developers
Bromsgrove District
Council
Redditch Borough Council
Worcestershire County
Council
Greenfield sites therefore
little existing provision.
New Gravity Sewer or new
Pumping Station
Open space,
play area & play pitches
(undetermined
requirement)
SuDS to attenuate and
store runoff
Electricity: Foxlydiate -
New 11kV circuit direct
from Redditch South to
the site and four or five
distribution substations
Brockhill - Some 11kV
circuit reinforcement
work and one or two
distribution substations
Highway infrastructure
and sustainable transport
requirements contained
in the Redditch Transport
Network Analysis and
Mitigation Report
Education: Foxlydiate -
New first school with
capacity for up to 90 per
year group and
contribution towards
expansion of existing
middle and high school
provision for additional
82 places per year group.
Brockhill - First school
provision for Brockhill
East Strategic Site will
be expanded to also
serve this site.
Contribution towards
expansion of existing
middle and high school
provision for additional
20 places per year group.
Infrastructure will need
to be delivered in line
with development.
It will be provided either
directly by the service
provider, the developer
or a financial
contribution made
through S106/CIL.
£120,000 for pumping
station or £2.789m for a
new gravity sewer
Foxlydiate - New first
school estimate in
region of £6 million
Middle and high school
provision
£8,187,126
Brockhill - Cost of school
extension to provide
additional places
to be confirmed.
Middle and high
provision £1,996,860
Due to multiple land
ownership issues there
could a risk to delivery
of these sites (H)139
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 5
Appendix 5:
Saved Supplementary Planning Documents
The following list details which of the Borough Council’s Supplementary Planning Documents (SPDs) are to be
retained:
Education SPD
Open Space Provision SPD
Designing for Community Safety SPD
Local List SPD
Encouraging Good Design SPG
Employment Land Monitoring SPGBorough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)140
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
Appendix 6:
Glossary and Abbreviations
Adoption
The final confirmation of a Local Plan as a statutory document by the
Local Planning Authority.
Affordable Housing
The Government’s definition of Affordable Housing includes social rented
and intermediate housing, provided to specified eligible households who
are unable to buy or rent housing on the open market.
Annual Monitoring Report
A monitoring report completed at least annually to assess the
(AMR)
implementation of the Local Plan’s policies.
Areas of Development
An area of land safeguarded for consideration for possible long-term
Restraint (ADR)
development needs. These areas were excluded from the Green Belt in
previous Local Plans.
Biodiversity
The whole variety of life encompassing all genetic, species and ecosystem
variations.
Brownfield
See Previously Developed Land.
Building for Life
The national standard for well-designed homes and neighbourhoods.
The 12 questions are used to assess the quality of new housing schemes.
Building Research
BREEAM is the world’s most widely used environmental assessment
Establishments
method for buildings. BREEAM assesses buildings against a set criteria
Environmental
and provides an overall score which will fall within a band providing either
Assessment Method
a; PASS, GOOD, VERY GOOD, EXCELLENT or OUTSTANDING rating.
(BREEAM)
Carbon neutral
Achieving net zero carbon emissions by balancing carbon released with
an equivalent amount. It can refer to the practice of balancing carbon
dioxide released into the atmosphere from burning fossil fuels, with
renewable energy that creates a similar amount of useful energy, so that
the carbon emissions are compensated.
Census
An official count of the population. Demographic information is also
usually collected.
Change of use (COU)
More correctly referred to as a ‘material change of use’. A change in the
use of land or buildings that is of significance for planning purposes, often
requiring planning permission.
Climate change
An  increase in the mean annual surface temperature of the earth’s
atmosphere, due to increases in atmospheric concentrations of
greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as Carbon Dioxide (CO
2
), Methane (CH4)
and Nitrous Oxide (N
2
O).
Climate-resilient
To ensure development fully mitigates against the effects of climate
change and minimises the potential impacts of climate change now and
in the future.141
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
Comparison goods
Those goods that are required on an infrequent basis by individuals and
households such as clothing and footwear, furniture and furnishings and
household equipment (excluding non-durable household goods), medical
and pharmaceutical products, therapeutic appliances and equipment,
educational and recreation equipment and accessories, books,
newspaper and magazines, goods for personal care and goods not
elsewhere classified.
Conservation Area
A specifically defined and protected environmental area chosen because
of its special architectural or historic interest. They are designated by
Local Planning Authorities.
Convenience goods
Convenience retailing is the provision of everyday essential items,
including food, drinks, newspapers/magazines and confectionery.
Demand Management
Measures that are implemented to ease the demand for water.
Density
Density is a measure of the number of dwellings on a site or in an area,
normally expressed as a number of ‘dwellings per hectare’.
Development
The Town and Country Planning Act 1990 defines ‘development’ as ‘the
carrying out of building, engineering, mining or other operations in, on,
over or under land or the making of any material change in the use of any
building or other land’. Unless a particular activity is exempt by statute,
the carrying out of any form of development requires planning permission.
Additionally, there are specific exclusions from, and inclusions within, the
definition.
Development Plan
Documents which outline Local Planning Authorities’ policies and
proposals for the development and use of land within their areas.
Decisions on planning applications should be made in accordance with
the Development Plan unless material considerations indicate otherwise.
District Centre
There are three distinctive levels of shopping facilities in Redditch: the
Town Centre, District Centre and Local Parades. District Centres are the
secondary level of shopping, meeting daily needs for basic items. With
relation to the types of shopping facilities they provide, District Centres in
Redditch are equivalent to the definition of ‘Local Centres’. Typically,
District Centres in the Borough accommodate a newsagent, a general
grocery store, a sub-post office and occasionally a pharmacy, a
hairdresser and other small shops of a local nature.
Employment Land
Assesses the suitability of sites for employment development, safeguards
Review (ELR)
the best sites in the face of competition from other higher value uses and
helps identify those which are no longer suitable for other uses.
Evidence Base
A collection of research projects or studies that are undertaken to look at
specific factors or areas that may influence the future development of
Redditch Borough. It allows a thorough understanding of local needs,
opportunities and constraints to direct decisions and policies and can be
made up of the views of stakeholders and background facts about the
area.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)142
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
Examination in Public
A procedure that tests the soundness of the Local Plan. A Local Plan is
(EiP)
considered sound if it has been produced based on good evidence and
prepared in accordance with legal duties and procedures including those
outlined in the SCI. Whether or not there are comments in support of,
or opposed to, policies produced, this examination will consider all
policies. An Inspector presides over the examination and issues a report
of recommendations to the Council so that the Plan can be adopted.
Green Belt
A specifically defined area where development is controlled to prevent
settlements merging and to keep land open. Guidance on Green Belt
policy is contained within the National Planning Policy Framework.
Green Infrastructure
The physical environment within and between our cities, towns and
villages. It is a network of multi-functional open spaces, including formal
parks, gardens, woodlands, green corridors, waterways, street trees and
open countryside. It comprises all environmental resources, and thus a
green infrastructure approach also contributes towards sustainable re
source management.
Green Space
Open, undeveloped land with natural vegetation.
Greenfield Sites
Undeveloped or vacant land not included in the definition of ‘previously
developed land’.
Greenways
Greenways are safe, quiet routes through parks, green spaces and lightly
trafficked streets.
Greywater Recycling
The process of reusing water within the home and within offices.
Gypsies and Travellers
Persons of nomadic habit of life whatever their race or origin, including
such persons who on grounds only of their own or their family’s or
dependants’ educational or health needs or old age have ceased to travel
temporarily, but excluding members of an organised group of travelling
showpeople or circus people travelling together as such.
Habitat
The natural environment of an organism.
Hectare (Ha)
A unit of surface, or land, measure equal to 10,000 square metres (sq m)
or 2.471 acres.
Historic Environment
Provides an integrated historic environment evidence base to support
Assessment (HEA)
policy and Green Infrastructure documents. It combines county landscape
character mapping with Historic Environment Record data and an outline
Historic Landscape Character assessment. The assessment produced 20
distinctive Historic Environment Character Zones, which are supported
by character statements assessing historic environment survival,
potential, documentation, diversity, group value, sensitivity and amenity
potential for each zone.
Housing Needs
An assessment of housing needs in the local area. This assessment plays
Assessment (HNA)
a crucial role in underpinning the planning policies relating to affordable
housing. In addition, the information on local needs is required to
determine the location of such housing. This is now superseded by the
SHMA (See later Glossary entry).143
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
Infrastructure
The basic facilities, services, and installations needed for the functioning
of a community or society, such as transportation and communications
systems, water and power lines, and public institutions including schools,
post offices and prisons.
Intermediate housing
Housing at prices and rents above those of social rent, but below market
price or rents.
Landscape Character
The description and classification of areas where distinctive features
Assessment (LCA)
occur in repeated patterns. It seeks to describe what makes one area
different from another, avoiding personal preferences or judgemental
values.
Lifetime Homes
A form of design which provides accessible and adaptable
Standards
accommodation for everyone.
Local Development
These are the documents contained within the Local Development
Document (LDD)
Framework (LDF). It can be Local Plans, Development Plan Documents,
Supplementary Planning Documents, Statement of Community
Involvement, Sustainability Appraisal and Strategic Environmental
Assessment.
Local Development
The Local Development Framework is the collection of Local Development
Framework (LDF)
Documents (LDD) produced by the local planning authority which
collectively delivers the spatial planning strategy for its area.
Local Development
Sets out the programme for developing the Local Plan and other Local
Scheme (LDS)
Development Documents.
Local Distinctiveness
The features of an area and its communities which contribute to its
special character and sense of place.
Local List
A list of buildings and structures that have a special architectural or
historic local importance.
Local Nature Reserve
An area of publicly owned land which is conserved and managed for its
(LNR)
wildlife interest. Bylaws can be applied to prevent disturbance.
Local Needs
The anticipated requirements (e.g. for housing) generated by local growth
or other trends. This specifically excludes demands generated by inward
migration.
Local Planning Authority
The Local Authority or Council that is empowered by law, to exercise
(LPA)
planning functions. This is normally the local Borough or District Council,
but in National Parks and some other areas there is a different
arrangement.
Market housing
Private housing for rent or for sale, where the price is set on the open
market.
Mitigation
To lessen the force or intensity or to make less severe.
Mixed Use Development
Developments that include a combination of land uses which may include
housing, employment, leisure, community facilities and retail.
Natural Environment
Trees, wildlife corridors, rivers, sites of national, regional or local
importance and other sites of biodiversity importance.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)144
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
National Planning Policy
The National Planning Policy Framework set out the Government’s
Framework (NPPF)
planning policies for England and how these are expected to be applied.
New Town
Free-standing new settlement designated and planned under the New
Towns Act 1946 and subsequent legislation.
Nottingham Declaration
The Nottingham Declaration is a public commitment by council leaders
and chief executives to tackle the causes and effects of a changing
climate in their councils. Launched in October 2000 in Nottingham.
Open Countryside
Countryside outside Settlements and beyond the Green Belt,
undeveloped apart from isolated buildings, farmsteads, and hamlets.
Not built-up.
Open Space
Open Space ranges from developed parks and recreation facilities, to
undeveloped hillsides. It comes in a variety of sizes, shapes and types
and performs different functions, benefits and purposes. It may remain in
a pristine state or could include land that is actively farmed.
Orientation
The location in the environment of a person or object in relation to true
North, or other specific place or object.
Planning Obligations
Agreements between developers and the Council to properly
accommodate or mitigate proposed development. They are often sought
at the time of the determination of a planning application to provide
community and/or infrastructural benefits. They are usually secured via a
legal agreement.
Policies Map
A map which identifies the location of any geographically specific policies
and proposals or designations of land.
Previously Developed
Land which is, or was, occupied by a permanent structure (excluding
Land (PDL)
agricultural or forestry buildings, land in built up areas such as private
residential gardens, parks recreation grounds and allotments), and
associated fixed surface infrastructure.
Quiet Lanes
A Countryside Agency initiative for minor rural roads or networks of minor
rural roads with low traffic volumes which are appropriate for shared use
by walkers, cyclists, horse riders and other vehicles. The aim of Quiet
Lanes is to maintain the character of minor rural roads by seeking to
contain rising traffic growth in rural areas.
Rainwater Harvesting
The method of collecting rainwater for its re-use.
Renewable Energy
Sources of energy which are reusable and sustainable such as wind,
water, sun, wave, refuse and geothermal energy. These sources do not
produce the harmful emissions often associated with fossil fuels.
They are energy forms that occur naturally and repeatedly in the
environment and are thus more environmentally-friendly.
Rural Area
The area outside the urban, developed parts of Redditch town.145
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
Safer Routes to School
An initiative that is run by Sustrans which encourages children to walk
and cycle to school through a range of practical and educational
measures. The scheme also seeks to improve key routes to schools for
pedestrians and cyclists to break the vicious circle of people using cars to
take children to school.
Secretary of State (SoS)
A cabinet member in charge of a government department. E.g. the
Department of Communities and Local Government.
Secured by Design
The UK Police flagship initiative supporting the principles of “designing
out crime” by use of effective crime prevention and security standards.
Sequential Test
A Sequential Test must be applied to planning applications for main town
centre uses that are not in an existing centre and which are not in
accordance with an up-to-date Local Plan. They should require
applications for main town centre uses to be located in town centres,
then in edge of centre locations and only if suitable sites are not available
should out of centre sites be considered.
Site of Special Scientific
Specifically defined areas where protection is afforded to sites of national
Interest (SSSI)
wildlife or geological interest. Natural England is responsible for
identifying and protecting approximately 4,100 SSSIs in England.
Soundness
Soundness means founded on a robust and credible evidence base and
the most appropriate strategy when considered against the reasonable
alternatives. For something to be sound is must also be positively
prepared, justified, effective and consistent with national policy.
Spatial planning
Planning that is not solely related to land use as it brings together other
policies and programmes for the development and use of land. It is a tool
to deliver and provide a geographical expression to the economic, social,
cultural and environmental sustainability policies of society. It is a
proactive, positive approach to managing development and the future
distribution of activities, people and spaces on various scales.
Special Wildlife Sites
Areas of particular special wildlife importance, outside that of legally
(SWS)
designated areas.
sq m
Square metres.
Statement of Community
A ‘process’ document that sets out the Council’s proposals for involving
Involvement (SCI)
the local community in the preparation of planning policy and deliberation
of planning applications.
Strategic Environmental
A strategic environment assessment is a generic term used to describe
Assessment (SEA)
environmental assessment as applied to policies, plans and programmes.
The European SEA directive (2001/42/EC) requires a formal
environmental assessment of certain plans and programmes, including
those in the field of planning and land use.
Strategic Flood Risk
A study to examine flood risk issues on a sub-regional scale, typically for a
Assessment (SFRA)
river catchment or local authority area during the preparation of a
development plan.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)146
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
Strategic Housing Land
Assessment of the likely level of housing that could be provided if
Availability Assessment
unimplemented planning permissions and other appropriate sites were
(SHLAA)
brought forward for development.
Strategic Housing Market
An assessment of housing needs in the local area. This assessment
Assessment  (SHMA)
should identify the scale and mix of housing and the range of tenures that
the local population is likely to need over the Plan period, addressing the
need for all types of housing.
Sustainable Drainage
A sequence of management practices and control structures, often
Systems (SuDS)
referred to as SuDS, designed to drain surface water in a more
sustainable manner. Typically, these techniques are used to attenuate
rates of run-off from development sites.
Supplementary Planning
Elaborates upon the policy and proposals in Development Plan
Document /
Documents, but do not have the same status as DPDs.
Supplementary Planning
Guidance (SPD / SPG)
Sustainability Appraisal
Sustainability Appraisal (SA) is carried out for all DPDs and SPDs. It is
and Strategic
a formal, systematic process with the purpose of assessing the likely
Environmental
social, environmental and economic impacts of implementing the
Assessment (SA and SEA)
proposed plans and programmes. A Strategic Environmental Assessment
(SEA) must also be carried out as requested by the European legislation
(Directive 2001/42/EC) to assess the likely effects of the plan or
programme on the environment.
Sustainable Rural
Village/settlement which is capable of meeting its own economic and
Settlement
social needs whilst maintaining the quality of the environment. Astwood
Bank is Redditch Borough’s only Sustainable Rural Settlement.
Town Centre
The primary focus for major shopping needs in Redditch. The Town Centre
provides a broad range of facilities and services which fulfil a function as
a focus for community and for public transport.
Transport
The movement of goods and people, incorporating movement by means
of walking, cycling, public transport and the private car. This also
incorporates the use of footpaths, cycleways and bridleways for
recreational purposes.
Transport Assessment
A comprehensive and systematic process that sets out transport issues
(TA)
relating to a proposed development.
Travel Plan (TP)
A package of measures which aim to monitor and reduce motor car
reliance along given routes or destinations through initiatives such as car
sharing, promoting the use of public transport and encouraging walking
and cycling. They analyse the key transport challenges and opportunities.
Travelling showpeople
Members of a community that consists of self- employed business people
who travel the country, often with their families, holding fairs.
Viability
To be capable of existing/surviving successfully. The term is often used
with reference to whether town centres are able to exist as viable retail
areas.147
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Appendix 6
Vitality
Used to describe the liveliness of an area, which may be measured by
particular local features, the general environment or the quality of life for
local residents.
Water Cycle Strategy
Provides a plan and programme of water services infrastructure
(WCS)
implementation.
Wildlife Corridors
Includes countryside features such as hedgerows and watercourses
which act as links or stepping stones from one habitat to another.Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)148
Borough of Redditch Local Plan No.4 (Adopted 30 January 2017)Noteswww.redditchbc.gov.uk/localplanDevelopment Plans
Redditch Borough Council, Town Hall
Walter Stranz Square, Redditch
Worcestershire B98 8AH
Telephone: 01527 64252
Email:
devplans@redditchbc.gov.uk
If you need this information in another
language or format, please contact us to discuss how
we can best meet your needs.
Phone: 01527 548284
Email:
equalities@bromsgroveandredditch.gov.uk