Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
RIBBLE VALLEY LOCAL PLAN 2021 – 2038  
 
 
    REGULATION 18  
    STRATEGIC ISSUES CONSULTATION  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A NEW LOCAL PLAN FOR RIBBLE VALLEY
  
Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
2 
 CONTENTS  
 
 
FOREWORD  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  3 
INVITATION TO EXPRESS VIEWS  ................................ ................................ .........  4 
1     INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT  ................................ ................................ .... 5 
1.1 What is the local plan and its process?  ................................ ................................ ...................  5 
1.2 Key Plan -Making Stages  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........  6 
1.3 The Existing Development Plan for the Ribble Valley  ................................ ..............................  7 
2 OUR APPROACH  ................................ ................................ ...........................  9 
2.1 Testing the plan and its process against environmental considerations  ...............................  10 
2.2 External Testing  ................................ ................................ ................................ .....................  11 
2.3 Duty  to Co -operate  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  12 
3 UNDERSTANDING THE AREA  ................................ ................................ ...... 13 
3.1 Spatial Portrait  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......................  13 
3.2 Local Plan Evidence Base  ................................ ................................ ................................ .......  17 
3.3 Vision and Objectives  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  20 
4 KEY ISSUES TO CONSIDER  ................................ ................................ ...........  22 
4.1 Development Strategy Options  ................................ ................................ .............................  22 
4.2 Housing Requirements  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  24 
4.3 Affordable Housing  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  30 
4.4 Employment and Growth  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...... 31 
4.5 Main Centres and Retail  ................................ ................................ ................................ ........  33 
5 APPENDICES  ................................ ................................ ...............................  35 
Appendix 1 – Core Strategy Key Diagram  ................................ ................................ .........................  35 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
3 
 
 
FOREWORD  
Welcome to the Ribble Valley Strategic Matters consultation, the first part of the Council ’s 
Local Development Plan consultation on a new Local Plan for the area.  
 
Having adopted our Core Strategy in 2014 we have reviewed that Plan and now need to 
prepare  an updated strategy and new Local Plan for the area to ensure planning and 
investment decisions will be relevant to the area’s needs into the future.  
 
At this stage we are keen to hear your views on these key issues to help us shape the new Plan, 
which wi ll also be subject to further consultation.  
 
This is your opportunity to help shape our borough and the Council  now seeks your views, 
which are important to us in ensuring that key stakeholders, partners and the local community 
have a say in delivering our vision for the future.  
 
This consultation p aper sets out the key housing and economic issues including housing and 
employment requirements as well as options for a development strategy. We look forward to 
hearing your views and ideas.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Council lor Alison Brown  
 
Chair of Planning and 
Development Committee  
 
May 2022  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
4 
 INVITATION TO EXPRESS VIEWS  
This document is the first public consultation stage in preparing a new Local Plan. It provides 
the opportunity for public and stakeholder involvement at an early stage in the statutory plan 
making process. The Council  is inviting views and feedback on several specific matters.  
 
As well as hearing views on the strategic matters identified the Coun cil is also inviting 
representations on any other matters the Council  should address in the new Local Plan.  
 
This consultation runs from Thursday, 2 6 May until 5pm on 7 July 2022.   
 
Responses received will be considered and used to inform the preparation of a new Local Plan 
for the area, which will be subject to further consultation.  
 
Representations can be submitted to the Council  at the addresses b elow:  
 
Web form responses: available here1 and submission is automatic.  
 
Email responses to: localplanconsultation@ribblevalley.gov.uk  
 
Post responses to:  Local Plan consultation, Forward Planning, Regeneration and Housing, 
Council  Offices, Church Walk, Clitheroe, Lancashire, BB7 2RA.  
 
Please note that we will not formally acknowledge responses and will only contact you if we 
need further  clarification.  Your details will be held on our database in accord with the 
provisions of the Data Protection Act 1998 and you will be contacted again at further stages 
unless you explicitly tell us that you do not wish to be involved in further stages. We will not 
publish your personal details, but comments will be available to others to read. We may share 
responses including your personal details with the Planning Inspectorate as part of the 
statutory process.  You can also ask to be notified specifical ly about the adoption of the Local 
Plan.  
 
All representations received will be given due consideration and a document containing a 
summary of representations will be produced.   
 
Further information on the statutory process that must be followed can be obt ained by 
contacting the Forward Planning team on 01200 425111 . 
 
1 Regulation 18 Response Form – Available at:  
https://ribblevalleygov -self.achieveservice.com/service/regulation18_consultation_may2022   Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
5 
 1     INTRODUCTION  AND CONTEXT  
1.1 What  is the local plan and its process?  
1.1.1  Successive Governments have operated an approach of a planning system led by clear 
development plans at the local level which  guide planning and investment decisions 
for an area. In this way services and facilities can be planned  for, local people and 
service providers have a greater understanding of what is likely to take place in their 
area and business es can make informed inv estment decisions.  
 
1.1.2  It is worth noting that whilst there may be some subtle variations in many regards the 
term Local Plan and Development Plan are interchangeable. You may also see 
reference to the Local Development Framework (LDF). The term LDF sim ply describes 
the collective of documents previously prepared under national guidance to provide 
relevant planning policy both Strategic (typically where and how much) and non -
strategic (more detailed policies for deciding planning applications) as well as  other 
associated guidance and process management documents.  
 
1.1.3  The system of plan making provides the opportunity for those interested to participate 
in forming and influencing the plans. There are a number of stages set out in planning 
legislation w here people are able to take part and this consultation is one of the 
earliest points at which local people are able to make their views known.  
 
1.1.4  This process is set out in relevant legislation with the Government also providing  
direction to planning  policies through the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF) 
and National Planning Policy Guidance (NPPG). Local Planning Authorities (LPA) such 
as Ribble Valley Borough Council  (RVBC) need to ensure that the local plans they 
produce are in line with national policy which includes guidance on how the LPA should 
formulate their plans and what matters can be included.  
 
1.1.5  The stages of plan making are set out on the next page  and the process includes many 
opportunities to take part, express views and ma ke representations. The Council  must 
follow the regulations set out in law when creating a plan and has to demonstrate that 
it has prepared any plan in line with the National policy.  
 
1.1.6  The process does take time, culminating in an Examination in Publ ic where a Planning 
Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State scrutinizes the plan and relevant issues 
raised and will determine if the plan can be adopted by the Council  as the 
development plan for the area.  
 
1.1.7  Once adopted , the new local plan will replace existing plans, bringing planning policies 
up to date and them being used to inform decisions on planning applications. In areas 
where there are Neighbourhood Plans in place prepared by the local community, 
these plans will need to be reviewed to  ensure they continue to be consistent with any 
new local plan for the area and there may need to be a separate process undertaken 
to ensure  the Neighbourhood plan aligns with the new local plan. This work can of 
course be don e in parallel by the responsib le Neighbourhood planning body but would 
be subject to separate consultation and publicity requirements.  
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
6 
 1.2 Key Plan -Making Stages  
1.2.1  Planning legislation sets out several key statutory stages for creating and putting a plan 
in place . For ease these stages tend to be referenced by the regulatory stage and this 
is reflected in the Council s Local Development Scheme (LDS) This document is 
produced by the Council  to let people know the intended timetable for creating its 
plan. The current LDS can be viewed on the Council ’s website2. 
 
REGULATION 18  
 
1.2.2  Regulation 18 Is the earliest stage of plan making where the LPA builds its evidence 
upon which the plan will be based, gathering  views on the key issues and matters the 
plan should deal with and exploring reasonable alternatives for development in the 
area. It also provides an opportunity for those interested to identify concerns and 
suggest proposed development to be considered in forming the plan.  
 
1.2.3  The material generated in this stage is used to prepare the plan that the LPA considers 
is the most a ppropriate for the area, taking account of what has been raised. Having 
carefully considered the submissions the LPA will prepare a preferred plan which is the 
Council s view of the most appropriate plan going forward.  
 
REGULATION 19  
 
1.2.4  Having prepared a preferred plan, the process moves to the next statutory stage 
where the plan is consulted on. This is an important stage because the representations 
made at this point are submitted to the Inspector as part of the Examination process. 
The Inspector will have the representations available to him when the matters to be 
Examined are identified and the Inspector may wish to explore in more detail some of 
the issues raised.  
 
1.2.5  Representations made at this stage also give the right to make further submissions in 
response to the Examination and potentially an invite to appear and take part in the 
Examination with the Inspector.  
 
REGULATION 22  
 
1.2.6  Upon  completion of Regulation 19 stage and subject to any further consideration by 
the Council  or the need for further consultation rounds this stage is the point at which 
the Council  submits  the plan and all relevant supporting documents to Secretary of 
State who will then appoint an Inspector to Examine the Council ’s plan.  
 
1.2.7  Once the Inspect or has completed the Examination and issued their findings in a 
report to the Council , if the plan is found acceptable (including any amendments) 
there is a process under this regulation to move the plan forward through the legal 
steps required to formally  adopt the plan and it will become the new local plan for the 
area.  
 
 
2 Ribble Valley Borough Council  – Local Development Scheme. A vailable at: 
https://www.ribblevalley.gov.uk/downloads/download/334/local -development -scheme -lds  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
7 
 1.3 The Existing Development Plan for  the Ribble Valley  
1.3.1  In line with previous guidance the Council ’s planning policies are contained within The 
Local Development Framework which sets the policy framework.  
 
1.3.2  The Ribble Valley Borough Council  Local Development Framework (LDF) comprises the 
following : 
 
• Ribble Valley Core Strategy 2008 -2028  
 
• Housing and Economic Development – Development Plan Document   
 
• Longridge Neighbour hood Plan  
 
1.3.3  Other Development Framework Documents include:  
 
• Statement of Community Involvement  
• Authority Monitoring Reports  
• Local Development Scheme  
 
1.3.4  The above collection of documents effectively complete s the necessary LDF for the 
area. Recent changes to National Guidance and the need to undertake 5 yearly reviews 
of adopted plans means that the Council  is intending to move from the LDF to a Local 
Plan.  It will be a different approach to how the Council ’s planning policies are 
presented but is an opportunity to bring policy together in a single, up to date local 
plan for the area where all relevant policies can be brought together and can be 
reviewed together in a consistent and comprehensive manner going forward.  
 
1.3.5  The process was commenced with a review of the Core Strategy which identified 
several  policies that needed updating and some policy gaps where national policy had 
changed since that plan was formulated. There were also some policies that were 
judged to need refinement in the light of experience from using the policies since the 
plan was fo rmally adopted.  
 
1.3.6  If you want to read further information about the review that was undertaken, you 
can access the relevant  report on the Council ’s website3. 
 
1.3.7  Unfortunately progress on the local plan has been severely impacted by the ongoing 
pandemic. However, the Council  wishes to move forward to establish an up -to-date 
local plan for the borough and recogni ses that there are a number of circumstances 
that have  changed since the first Core Strategy was put in place. National policy has 
changed, development pressures have changed and the drive for responding to 
Climate Change has become a much greater priority.  
 
3 Ribble Valley Borough Council  – Report to Planning & Development Committee. Available at: 
https://www.ribblevalley.gov.uk/download/meetings/id/7475/Agenda%2520item%25208%2520 -
%2520Update%2520on%2520Local%2520Development%2520Pla   Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
8 
 1.3.8  What is important to recogni se is that the pre paration of the new local plan does not 
mean that the documents listed above are no longer the relevant decision -making 
tools. The policies contained in them remain in place, albeit where there are relevant 
national changes to policy those changes may need  to be considered  as a “material 
consideration”. The starting point for decisions remains in law as the adopted 
development plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
9 
 2 OUR APPROACH   
As indicated at the start, bringing a new plan to fruition will take time and there are  a 
series of steps to go through. Investing in the process means that the right plan is put 
in place. This is a  plan that people have had the opportunity to help shape a nd that 
addresses the key issues for today’s community balanced with the many pressures 
that an area like the Ribble Valley must  address.  
 
Local plans have to be prepared in a positive way, ensuring that the development 
needs of the area are properly plann ed for and that their approach ensures sustainable 
development which  can mitigate for the effects of climate change. Local Plans are not 
about stopping development happening. Their role is to ensure the right development 
happens in the right place at the r ight time, in a coordinated manner. This is the 
starting point for that journey and one that we hope that you will take part in.  
 
In undertaking this review the Council  has sought to identify the key areas for which 
our evidence base needed to be updated a nd further information is contained in this 
consultation document about this. This has helped us form what we view as the initial 
key areas that must be addressed in a new plan. However, we do recogni se that there 
may be issues that may be  identified or  which people consider that further evidence 
should be gathered. This consultation is an opportunity to raise those concerns, 
identify evidence gaps to be considered or propose areas of planning policy that 
should be addressed further.  
 
In this document we wi ll start to set out how the plan is likely to look by testing 
alternative approaches or confirming where we consider that existing policy is still 
relevant and can be rolled forward into the next iteration of our planning policy for 
the area.  
 
Our review has identified that some areas of policy remain relevant and we will be 
proposing that these policies are rolled forward as appropriate. At this stage we are 
also proposing that the key plan vision and objectives remain relevant and will be 
retained albeit with some minor refresh to reflect current circumstances. Similarly, 
where policy content is currently set out in the more recently adopted Housing and 
Economic Development, Development Plan Document (HED DPD) adopted in 2019 
this policy conten t, including allocations will be incorporated into the new local plan. 
This is important as allocations in the HED DPD remain part of the adopted plan. Whilst 
they can be revisited in the new local plan that process in itself does not void those 
allocation s and policies.  
 
It is important to recogni se that the approaches set out in this document are for 
consultation purposes only. They have been formulated based on the evidence base 
work undertaken so far  and in that regard are only potential approaches. The y do not 
represent policy or new allocations and are not endorsed by the Council  for anything 
other than consultation purposes.  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
10 
 2.1 Testing the plan and its process against environmental considerations  
2.1.1  To help inform the plan and to meet accompanyin g regulations the Council  has had 
consultants prepare a Sustainability Appraisal scoping report. This has been subject to 
consultation with the statutory bodies whose comments have been considered and 
taken into account in preparing the final version of th e scoping report.  
 
2.1.2  This is available to view on the Council ’s website4 and has been published alongside 
this Regulation 18 consultation document. Comments are also invited on the scoping 
report which forms an important part of the checks and balance approach to the plan 
making process and which will work in parallel to it.  
 
2.1.3 The SA process is governed by its own regulations and statutory provisions and is 
intended to help ensure the plan meets the objective of delivering sustainable 
development as the  core function of the local plan. There are separate guidance notes 
in relation to comments on the SA.  
 
2.1.4  Regulations also require a Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) where there may 
be a risk of substantial environmental effects. Given the nature of the local area and 
the wide variety of issues that the plan will a ddress it is anticipated that this will be the 
case for Ribble Valley. In effect this process can be combined into the SA work and 
delivered in conjunction with that work but it should be noted how the Council  intends 
to satisfy that area of policy testing . 
 
2.1.5  As the plan develops over its next stages it is also often appropriate to hold further 
detailed consultation and workshop events that inform the testing of options and 
ultimately the plans proposals that are formulated to become the plan submitted  to 
the Secretary of State.  
 
2.1.6  Similarly, there will also be a requirement to undertake screening for what is known 
as Appropriate Assessment (AA). Although not directly related to the management of 
or connected to any areas of designated habitats (suc h as Sites of Scientific Intertest 
SSS or Special Protection Areas (SPA) , a local plan can impact their preservation and 
quality over the long term . The AA process considers if there are any implications for 
the designated site from proposals in the plan i n view of the particular site’s 
conservation objectives. This too will be undertaken simultaneously with the SA and 
will be published for comment at relevant future stages of plan making . 
 
 
 
 
4 Ribble Valley Borough Council  – Sustaina bility Appraisal Scoping Report. Available at: 
https://www.ribblevalley.gov.uk/downloads/download/474/sustainability -appraisal ---scoping -report   Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
11 
 2.2 External Testing  
2.2.1  Throughout the  plan -making  process , proposals are tested through public 
consultation. This provides regular opportunity, a wide variety of local and national 
organisations ; the public; business interests; land -owners and the development 
industry to contribute to the plan and to cha llenge what is being proposed. These 
consultations are documented and form an important part of the material that is 
submitted to the Inspector appointed by the Secretary of State to scrutinize the plan. 
At Regulation 19 and subsequent consultation stages representations are also 
provided to the Inspector as part of the submitted evidence.  
 
2.2.2  The Council  will document how the plan has evolved and how it has responded to 
issues raised in order to demonstrate that it has taken a “sound” approach to 
prepar ing the local plan.  
 
2.2.3  At present it is a principle of the plan making and Examination process that the Council  
can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Inspector that the plan has been prepared 
in such a way as it can be found sound by the Inspector  and recommended for 
adoption.  
 
2.2.4  To be found “sound” the local plan should be POSITIVLEY PREPARED, JUSTIFIED, 
EFFECTIVE and consistent with National policy.  
 
 
2.2.6  “JUSTIFIED” means that the plan is:  
 
• Founded on a robust and credible evidence base.  
• Is the most appropriate stra tegy when considered against reasonable 
alternatives.  
 
2.2.7  “EFFECTIVE” means that the document must be:  
 
• Deliverable  
• Flexible  
• Able to be monitored  
 
2.2.8  “CONSISTENT WITH NATIONAL POLICY” Means that the plan will enable the delivery 
of sustainable development in accordance with the policies in the NPPF and other 
statements of national planning policy, where relevant.  
 
 2.2.5 “POSITIV ELY PREPARED” means providing a strategy which, as a minimum, seeks to
meet the area’s objectively assessed needs and takes account of any needs agreed￿
with neighbouring authorities under the Duty to Co-operate.Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
12 
 2.3 Duty to Co -operate  
2.3.1  An important aspect of plan making is a requirement for LPA’s to demonstrate that 
they have  worked with neighbouring authorities or relevant infrastructure providers 
to address matters in a strategic manner. There is a specific duty in legislation to co -
operate which the Council  must demonstrate that it has satisfied. This does not mean 
the Council  has to agree to another authorities’ proposals but it does need to ensure 
that relevant factors have been considered and where appropriate accounted for in 
its local plan. Typically, this will relate to matters of identified need that cannot be 
accommo dated in an authorities’ area and agreements are put in place to meet those 
needs constructively in a neighbouring area such as housing or employment where it 
is appropriate and supports the delivery of sustainable development.  
 
2.3.2  As part of the plan m aking process consultation will be undertaken with relevant 
authorities to establish any cross -boundary issues that need to be addressed and this 
will be taken into account as the local plan is formed. To date the Council  has worked 
with other authorities as they have prepared their plans and at present there has been 
no requirement to accommodate needs from those areas.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
13 
 3 UNDERSTANDING THE AREA  
Before we start to consider what is appropriate in terms of planning policy for the area 
it is important to give ourselves an insight into the nature and characteristics of the 
area. This helps to establish a context for the area in Spatial Planning terms (where 
things are and how they sit together) how that might influence aspirations for the 
Ribble Valley and what do we need to see in a detailed planning policy context to 
ensure the special characteristics of the area are protected. This is balanced whils t 
ensuring development can take place to meet the needs and requirements of the 
wider community.  
         
As part of this process we look to a range of information that allows us to understand 
the area better including published sources Council  documents a nd a variety of reports 
covering more technical or specialized aspects that form our evidence base.  
   
In this section we will explore this understanding and provide information on the key 
evidence base elements to inform the plan. As indicated, it is ack nowledged that there 
may be evidence gaps and it is important for these to be identified in response to the 
consultation.  
 
3.1 Spatial Portrait  
3.1.1 Situated in North -East Lancashire, Ribble Valley is a predominantly rural borough 
spanning 583 square kilometres, making it the largest district in the county. It is 
situated to the east of the M6 motorway and north of the M65, above the corridor of 
settle ments including Blackburn, Accrington, and Burnley. The map  shown opposite  
presents the borough in its geographical context, highlighting both its largely rural 
setting but good connectivity with other areas of Lancashire such as Lancaster, Preston 
and Bla ckburn, which are most often visited by residents for both work and leisure.  
 
3.1.2 Despite being the largest authority in the county by geographic area, the borough is 
home to a population of just 62,0005 making it the least populated within Lancashire. 
These characteristics and resulting densities are more akin to rural parts of Yorkshire 
and Cumbria, however, the borough’s population has been growing at one of the 
fastest rates in the county in recent ye ars6. This, combined with a relatively ageing 
population (23% of the population aged over 65 years) presents a complex 
demography for whom this plan seeks to deliver for.  
 
5 ONS, 2021. ‘Mid -year Population Estimates, June 2020’ , Available at: 
https://www.ons.gov.u k/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/bulleti
ns/annualmidyearpopulationestimates/mid2020   
6 ONS estimates for 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 show the population of the Ribble Valley to be growing at rates of 
1.4% and 1.9% respectiv ely, which are the highest percentage increases in the county for those years.  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
14 
  
3.1.3 Within the borough, the main population and economic centres  are the three principal 
centres  of Clitheroe, Longridge and Whalley as identified in the Core Strategy. These 
built -up areas are the primary settlements visited within the borough for work and 
leisure and have evolved to be the most populated settlements. The graph below 
outlines the estimated growth in relative population of these three main settlements, 
using their 2011 Census figures as a baseline.   
 
3.1.4 As the main centre within the borough, Clitheroe has a population of 16,000 and is the 
primary administrative, retail and service centre. This results in the town also providing 
employment for many within the borough. Longridge and Whalley are smaller centres, 
with populations estimate d to be 8,200 and 4000 respectively, but they are no less 
important. These smaller centres act as local hubs which serve their own communities 
as well as wider catchment areas. These catchments are made up of much smaller 
villages which although picturesqu e, offer a level of services which sometimes may not 
be capable of providing for all needs. As a result, all three principal settlements act as 
cornerstones of local economy and community, which underlines the importance of 
the new Local Plan to ensure the ir success and health as service centres.  
 
  
                       Map demonstrating the geographical context of the Ribble Valley.  
Clitheroe  
Longridge  
AONB 
Whalley  
Contains OS data © Crown copyright [and database] 
2022 
Preston  
Lancaster  
Accrington  
Burnley  
Blackburn  
Nelson  
Settle  
Garstang  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
15 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.1.5 Despite the rural nature of the borough, the Ribble Valley maintains a strong and 
diverse economy which compares favourably  to that of other neighbouring districts. 
The three principal set tlements outlined above are home to many retail and SME 
businesses which are indicative of the creative and entrepreneurial spirit of the local 
economy. In addition, the borough is home to a number of larger employers within 
manufacturing and rural industr ies which are well positioned to take advantage of a 
skilled workforce within the Ribble Valley, which at the moment predominantly 
commutes out of the borough to work. Retaining this workforce and ensuring that the 
value of their output is realised within our borough is a continued focus through this 
plan, as well as continuing to promote inward investment.  
 
3.1.6 The daily migration of residents outlined above is representative of the Ribble Valley’s 
close economic relationships with the wider Lancashire r egion. The numerous rail and 
road transport links connecting the area with the rest of the Northwest provides 
businesses with the opportunity to widen their area of operation, as well as enabling 
employees to realise the benefits  of a broader extent of emp loyment opportunities. 
These connections are predominantly with Pennine Lancashire, the Functional 
Economic Market Area (FEMA) for the Ribble Valley.  
 
3.1.7 Setting aside the wider connectivity of the borough, the three main service centres act 
as a vital component of the settlement hierarchy within the Ribble Valley, helping to 
provide goods and services to the population in combination with over 40 picturesq ue 
villages set within an idyllic rural landscape. Rolling hills, wooded valleys and 
meandering country lanes characterise an unspoilt natural environment, part of which 
has been designated as an Area of Outstanding National Beauty (AONB) such is its 
quali ty. The Forest of Bowland AONB covers over 70% of Ribble Valley and is 
complimented by a multitude of Biological Heritage Sites as well as 16 sites of Special 
Scientific Interest. Other natural environment assets include extensive footpath 
networks and ove r 92 Ha of formal open space.  -5000500100015002000
2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019Relative Net Population Change YearRelative Population Change in Clitheroe, Whalley and 
Longridge Parishes, 2011 -2019.
Clitheroe Longridge WhalleyRibble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
16 
  
3.1.8 Such is the high quality of Ribble Valley’s natural environment that a range of leisure 
attractions utilise it to provide activities for local residents and tourists. Within the 
Ribble Valley there are many opportunitie s to walk, cycle, fish and even ski, which are 
in addition to various cultural events and festivals throughout the year. These include 
Ribble Valley Jazz Festival, Clitheroe Food Festival and the Royal Lancashire 
Agricultural Show, all of which attract vis itors from afar. The magnificent landscape 
and related attractions are complimented by eye -catching boutiques, cafes, farm and 
village shops to provide both residents and visitors with a unique sense of place.  
 
3.1.9 This results in a highly attractive pl ace to work, live and visit, evidenced by the borough 
previously being cited as the happiest place in the UK7. Despite this, these qualities will 
only remain if they are used sustainably, and this presents a key challenge which this 
new Local Plan must ad dress.  
 
3.1.1 0 Complimentary to the quality natural environment, Ribble Valley also boasts a high -
quality built environment and heritage. The National Heritage List for England lists 862 
entries for heritage assets within the Ribble Valley  which outlines t he range of 
important historic assets which shape our towns and villages. Clitheroe’s skyline is 
dominated by a 12th century Norman Castle which sits atop of a Limestone Knoll; both 
Whalley and Sawley are home to Cistercian Abbeys and Ribchester has a Roman 
history, with many artefacts found held in the nearby Roman Museum.  
 
3.1.1 1 Many other villages such as Billington  and Downham are rich in history and, as a result, 
the borough as a whole is an attractive destination for those with relevant interests. 
This new Local Plan will need to ensure the longevity of these assets, so that they can 
be preserved for future genera tions.  
 
3.1.1 2 The attractions, landscape qualities and thriving economy outlined above are what the 
Ribble Valley is known for, and this new Local Plan seeks to balance each of these to 
create a healthy and positive place for people to grow up, get on and  grow old. 
However, this is all to be done within the global context of Climate Change, which does 
not present a new issue but instead a renewed level of urgency  as recent events 
demonstrate the damage that rising carbon emissions can do to places across t he 
world. As an area with one of the most picturesque landscapes within the United 
Kingdom, this plan seeks to achieve the most it can in order to protect the Ribble Valley 
from the consequences of Climate Change through mitigation and adaptation, 
concepts  which are woven into every aspect of this plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 The Guardian, 2019. ‘Happy -go-lucky: Ribble Valley officially named UK's happiest place’ – Available at: 
https://www.theguardian.com/uk -news/2019/oct/23/ribble -valley -officially -the-yk-happiest -place  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
17 
 3.2 Local Plan Evidence Base  
3.2.1  The policies and wider strategic vision that are found within this plan must be based 
on a sound, credible and robust evidence base. This is critical to understanding the 
issues and matters most pertinent to the area. The authority has updated some of the 
key elements of the evidence base to bring it up -to-date and is continuing to add 
additional documents as the new Local Plan evolves.  
 
3.2.2  The documents currently in place are detailed below, together with other evidence 
base documents which the Council  expects to produce before publication stage. The 
evidence base is intended to evolve as issues are identified or new information 
becomes available,  and it will change as the plan making process moves forward . 
Despite this, at this stage it is intended to provide  key information to commence the 
process and to stimulate debate . All the documents can be viewed on the Council ’s 
website8. 
 
3.2.3  Housing Land Availability Study and 5 Year Supply Statement 2021  
 
These documents prove the existing housing supply within the Ribble Valley. These 
figures will be used in part to determine the housing requirement for the borough and 
any shortfall that may require the allocation of sites. These are updated annually.  
 
3.2.4  Strategic Housing and Economic Needs Assessment (SHENA) 2020  
 
The SHENA presents evidence on the overall housing need in Ribble Valley and the 
level of economic growth proposed for the borough. The assessment also separately 
considers how this overall need is segmented into a need for d ifferent types, sizes and 
tenures of housing as well a more detailed consideration of the specific needs of 
individual groups in the local housing market.  
 
3.2.5  Public Transport Position Paper 2021  
 
An evidence base study outlining the current extent and status of Public Transport 
within the Ribble Valley. This report assesses existing policy and legislative context 
relevant to public transport provision, whilst also outlining the existing network within 
the borough. This document identifies which settleme nts are most connected to the 
public transport network and surrounding town centres.  
 
3.2.6  Service Centre Health Check Assessments 2021  
 
This report provides a review of the three main service centres (town centres) within 
the Borough of Ribble Valley, un dertaken to assess their vitality and viability in the 
 
8 Ribble Valley Borough Council  – Local Plan Evidence Base. Available at: 
https://www.ribblevalley.gov.uk/localplan   Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
18 
 form of a ‘health check’ exercise in line with Planning Practice Guidance. The findings 
from this study have influenced town -centre specific policies within this plan.  
 
3.2.7  Authority Monitoring Repor t 
 
Published annually, the AMR uses indicators to monitor the implementation of existing 
policies held within the Core Strategy. These reports are highly useful as evidence base 
material, highlighting the performance of existing policies and influencing the revision 
of policies within the new plan.  
 
3.2.8  Sustainability Appraisal (SA) – Scoping Report  
 
This report represents the initial stage in the SA, in which the context and scope of the 
process are set. It proposes and agrees with the SEA Statutory Bodies the scope of the 
forthcoming SA.  
 
3.2.9  Strategic Housing and Employment Land Assessment (SHELA)  
 
The most recent assessment was undertaken in 2013 and focused upon land for 
housing. It demonstrated a wide -ranging supply of land that was p otentially available 
to meet requirements for development such that the borough would be able to meet 
demands within in its own boundaries and without having to review Green Belt 
boundaries. The Council  expects to produce a full SHELA to indicate the exist ing land 
supply within the borough which will address both land for Housing and Employment. 
This will assess the suitability of sites for housing or commercial development and will 
include sites put forward within the Call for Sites process, which ran duri ng September 
and October 2021.  
 
What is clear from the call for sites is that an extensive number of sites are available 
to consider when looking to address requirements. The strategic importance of this is 
that it demonstrates that the Council  will not need to consider removing sites from 
Green Belt as alternative sites are available. Similarly, sensitive locations where key 
Landscape, Heritage or Conservation protections are significant in relation to potential 
sites are less likely to be considered for  release as alternative sites are available.  
 
3.2.10  Strategic Flood Risk Assessment (SFRA)  
 
The most recent SFRA produced by the Council  in 2017 summarised existing situation 
regarding flood -risk within the borough at the time of publication. The Council  is in the 
early stages of producing a revised SFRA (Level One) and has begun liaising with the 
Environment Agency as well as the Lead Local Flood Authority, Lancashire County 
Council , as work is progressed.  
 
 
 
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
19 
 3.2.11  Economic Baseline Study 2018  
 
This Baseline Report was prepared to update the economic evidence base which 
underpins and informs the borough’s Economic Strategy and Local Plan. The work also 
establishes the Functional Economic Market Area (FEMA) that is relevant to Ribble 
Valley to help und erstand how the area relates to neighbouring areas from an 
|economic and planning viewpoint.  
 
3.2.12  Ribble Valley Economic Plan 2019 – 2022  
 
This strategy outlines the economic objectives and priority action areas for the Council  
to address in order to ac hieve the vision for the area. The local plan will provide a 
framework to help deliver the aspirations and actions included in the Council ’s 
economic plan . 
 
3.2.13  Employment Land Review (ELR) 2022  
 
This study establishes land requirements and policy imperatives in relation to 
employment land classes E(g)(i) offices, E(g)(ii) R&D, E(g)(iii) light industrial, B2 and B8, 
other key economic matters arising from the study and provides growth options to 
consider with their workforce implications and associa ted impact on housing 
requirements.  
 
3.2.14  ARK Report March 2022  
 
Prepared in response to the need to understand the challenges faced by our service 
centres as a result of the impact of Covid 19, this report provides a review of each 
centre identifying  a range of issues to consider to help maintain their attraction and 
promote their roles. The report includes a number of suggested actions to address 
including land use related factors that should be considered in the new local plan.  
 
3.2.15  Climate Change S trategy 2021  
 
Prepared by the Council  to steer its approach to the challenge of Climate Change, and 
whilst it seeks to address several  matters it highlights the role that the local plan and 
associated planning policies will have in helping mitigate the imp acts of climate 
change.  
 
3.2.16  Draft Homelessness Strategy 2022  
 
This document is currently undergoing an update and a consultation version has been 
published for comments. Whilst it sets out the Council ’s approach to dealing with 
Homelessness. It provide s a valuable context for how Planning can integrate with 
issues around Homelessness.  
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
20 
 3.2.17  The above list of documents outlines key evidence documents that inform the 
strategic context of the local plan as it develops. Other documents contained in the 
evidence base will also be relevant and new material will be generated or existing 
evidenced updated as relevant throughout the process.  
 
3.2.18  As part of this consultation comments are invited on the evidence documents and in 
particular any additional areas of evidence you would propose the Council  should 
consider.  
 
3.3 Vision and Objectives  
3.3.1  Our current planning vision for the area was deve loped through extensive community 
consultation and has guided the preparation of planning policy for many years. Our 
evidence base and monitoring continues to endorse the vision as an appropriate basis 
to plan for the area.  
 
3.3.2  We consider that the vis ion remains relevant and would not propose to change it at 
this stage other than to introduce a need to ensure that it is clear that sustainable 
development has to have regard to climate change and the need to ensure effects are 
mitigated and carbon reduct ion through development is recogni sed.  This is an 
opportunity to influence any aspects that you consider need to be addressed and we 
would welcome your comments.  
 
3.3.3  Our proposed vision is:  
 
“The Ribble Valley will be an area with an exceptional enviro nment and quality of life for 
all, sustained by vital and vibrant market towns and villages acting as thriving service 
centres , meeting the needs of residents, businesses and visitors.  
 
We will seek to create an area with unrivalled quality of place, respecting the unique 
natural, social and built heritage of the area. New development to meet the needs of 
the area for growth, services and quality of life will be managed to ensure the spec ial 
characteristics of the area are preserved for future generations and that opportunities 
to reduce carbon and mitigate the effects of Climate Change are embedded in the future 
development of the area.”  
 
(Text in bold is the addition proposed to the current vision).  
 
3.3.4  In forming the new plan we intend to ensure that policies will lead to the achievement 
of the vision by the end of the plan period. It remains ambitious and will require a very 
careful balance between social, economic and environmental factors. Addressing issues 
around Climate Change may result in some challenging decisions however it is seen as 
vital that our new local plan ensures decision making recogni ses the importance of 
addressing the global implications of Climate C hange.  
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
21 
 3.3.5  Similarly, the objectives for our plan have been reviewed and it is proposed that the 
following objectives should remain at the heart of the new local plan and underpin the 
Council ’s approach.  
 
3.3.6  The local plan should:  
 
• Contribute to loca l, regional,  and wider sustainable development, including 
addressing and mitigating against the impacts of climate change.  
 
• Respect, protect and enhance the high -quality environment and biodiversity in the 
borough.  
 
• To increase the supply of affordable an d decent homes in the borough to help 
meet identified needs in a sustainable manner.  
 
• Ensure a suitable proportion of housing meets local needs including the types of 
housing delivered.  
 
• Improve the competitiveness and productivity of local businesses by safeguarding 
and promoting local employment opportunities.  
 
• Support existing retail business whilst improving the retail offer by ensuring the 
vitality and viability of the retail areas a re considered.  
 
• Co-ordinate, innovate and diversify sustainable tourism, building on our strengths 
and developing new initiatives.  
 
• Ensure neighbourhoods are sought after locations by building cohesive 
communities and promoting community safety  
 
• Improve accessibility and service delivery to address rural isolation.  
 
3.3.7  Comments are invited on the Vision and Objectives which form the basis of what the 
Council  will set out to achieve through the new local plan, in particular the proposal to 
strengthen th e commitment to Climate Change which although always part of the 
planning objectives for the area is now given greater emphasi s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
22 
 4 KEY ISSUES TO CONSIDER  
As part of the review process the Council  needs to establish its approach to spatial 
strategy over the next plan period, the underlying requirements for housing including 
affordable housing and wider economic needs for the wellbeing of the local economy. 
These elements are interlinked in terms of ensuring the new local plan makes provision 
for the future needs of the borough. These issues are informed by key evidence pieces 
within the evidence base for the plan.  
 
 In the next section we set out, in summary , the key considerations and the impacts to 
consider in taking the new plan forward that we have drawn from our evidence base 
so far. This results in a number of options to consider in how development needs could 
be planned for. At this stage again it is i mportant to emphasize that we are raising 
these for discussion and any suggested proposals have no status in planning terms.  
 
4.1 Development Strategy Options  
Evidence Base: AMR; HLAS; ELR; SHENA  
 
4.1.1  The existing development strategy contained in the Co re Strategy was arrived at 
following extensive consultation and refinement which lead to a strategy intended to 
direct growth towards the main settlements, a specific growth point (The Standen Site, 
Clitheroe), strategic employment locations at the Enterpr ise Zone and Barrow on the 
A59 and then a tiered approach which directed development towards the more 
sustainable  developments in the borough. Development in identified, but less 
sustainable settlements was controlled whilst development outside the settlem ent 
and in the open countryside were more tightly controlled essentially to facilitate the 
meeting of proven, identified local needs.  
 
4.1.2  This approach provided the most sustainable approach to development in the 
borough, focusing development to those l ocations considered most accessible and 
areas with an improved access to services to support the developing community. 
Housing requirements were planned for against this hierarchy, distributed initially in 
accord with the scale of the identified settlement s such that planned growth was 
proportionate to the relative size of the settlement which was viewed as the most 
appropriate means to distribute growth reflecting local communities.  
 
4.1.3  There were some anomalies to this approach in so far as in parallel to progressing the 
Core Strategy planning applications were approved in line with government policy in 
relation to housing supply meaning that growth at some locations was approved 
outside the plan making process, including growth at Barrow, parts  of Clitheroe and 
Longridge.  
 
4.1.4  In looking at the Development Strategy as part of the local plan review, the 
developments that have taken place can be taken account of in formulating the new Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
23 
 plan, but it must be recogni sed that the development commitme nts (see Housing Land 
Availability evidence) will reflect the strategy in the core strategy as it is now. Certainly, 
in the initial part of the new local plan period those commitments will continue to be 
delivered. Any substantive change in approach to dev elopment strategy identified 
now will not be effective until later years. One thing that the plan will not be able to 
do now is to reverse decisions on committed sites. However, regard can be given to 
longer term strategic change.  
 
4.1.5  At this stage it i s worth remembering that there are some strategic policy designations 
that have a strong influence on the Development Strategy. Much of the borough is 
designated as Area of Outstanding National Beauty (AONB). Some 70% of the borough 
falls into this nationa lly designated protected area which constrains the extent of 
development that can be directed into it. Similarly, there are areas of designated 
Green Belt which are intended to form a long -term constraint on the development of 
those designated areas in ord er to protect openness and separation between principle 
urban areas. The purpose of the Green Belt is enshrined in National Policy (NPPF) and 
its release for development is only considered in very special circumstances. It is 
intended  as Development Policy  rather than a landscape protection policy such as the 
AONB. The Extent of the AONB and the designated Green belt can be seen on the 
proposals map in detail and is illustrated schematically on the diagram below. At the 
point there are no proposals to remov e land from the designated green belt or to alter 
the established boundaries.  
 
4.1.6  These key designations and the pattern of identified settlements is shown on the key 
diagram of the adopted Core Strategy and is included in the appendix to this report 
for reference.  
 
4.1.7  In terms of options for the broad Spatial Development Strategy, which establishes the 
guiding principles where development should take place there are limited options 
given the key constraints identified, the desire to protect open coun tryside and the 
need to deliver “sustainable development”  
 
4.1.8  The Council  proposes the following options for the Development Strategy should be 
considered to address identified requirements:  
 
1. Retain the existing Development Strategy (as per the Core Strategy).  
 
2.  Retain the existing Development Strategy but identify growth opportunities in 
appropriate identified settlements adjusting the distribution of development 
accordingly.  
 
3.   Identify targeted growth points to accommodate the majority o f new planned 
growth at each of the main settlements Clitheroe, Longridge and Whalley with 
limited development elsewhere.  
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
24 
 4.   Identify a targeted growth point as a village expansion to accommodate future 
requirements having regard to sustainability.  
 
5.   Identify locations for future growth based on areas with least constraints.  
 
6.   Something else?  
 
4.1.9  These concepts are intended to promote debate to ensure the Council  can 
demonstrate it has looked at reasonable alternatives. There is also the opportunity for 
other options to be promoted at this stage. The amount of development to take place 
will be depe ndent upon the outcome of our work on requirements but there is the 
opportunity to give some thought to the proportion of new development anticipated 
in response to other elements of this consultation document set out later in this 
document.  
 
4.1.10  With regard to option 5, this is intended to be an approach guided by taking account 
of key constraints which can be mapped, leaving areas that are clear of constraint and 
therefore could be identified as the areas where development may be directed. It 
would be  a starting point based upon accessibility, ecology, heritage and landscape 
features and principal  development constraints such as the Green Belt.  
 
4.1.11  We are keen to hear views on the Development Strategy and any alternatives. We 
would urge you to res pond constructively as the Council  is not able  to simply stop 
development. But, it can lead where and how it takes place in the future and ensure 
that the best possible forms of development are delivered to the benefit of the local 
area providing for futur e generations in a sustainable way and influencing how Climate 
Change is addressed pro -actively.  
 
4.2 Housing Requirements  
Evidence Base: SHMA; HLAS; 5 Year Statement; AMR; SHENA, Draft Homelessness 
Strategy  
 
4.2.1  Housing development is often the key area of concern for many local communities in 
the planning process, whether it is based around pressures for new housing 
developments or a need for more affordable housing to meet demands. In Ribble 
Valley the attractive environment as a location to live, the need to accommodate 
changing household structures, new housing as a vehicle to help address the supply of 
affordable homes all contribute to significant development pressures that the Council  
through its planning policy has to aim to manage. New housin g is recogni sed by the 
government as a priority especially as a factor in support of economic growth and 
national policy is directed towards increasing the numbers of new homes delivered. 
New housing contributes to the local economy and is a major industry  in itself as a 
driver of the national economy also. Attractive locations such as the Ribble Valley will 
remain attractive to investment and market desirability which will ensure that 
development  pressures will continue to be experienced. In this light it is important Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
25 
 that the Council  can put in place a robust local plan that allows these pressures to be 
managed and through the local plan process for the community to have the 
opportunity to shape the area they live in.  
 
4.2.2  As identified previously our existing Core Strategy established housing requirements 
for the period 2008 to 2028 (the plan period). This adopted requirement was 
established as a minimum requirement of 280 dwellings per year. Having initially spent 
some time catching up on under delivery from previous years, the borough has seen 
in the last few years a high rate of delivery with a pandemic related dip in the last year 
as illustrated in the diagram below.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2.3  As the Council  has been planning at a leve l of 280 dwellings as the minimum and taking 
account of previous undersupply in establishing its 5 -year position, this level of housing 
is reflected in the supply of houses both completed, under construction but also with 
planning permission yet to be delivered. Information on the supply situation is included 
in our evidence base but can be summarised and illustrated in the graph (figure 2) 
below;  
 
4.2.4  Changes to Government policy have altered how the requirement for housing in an 
area is established compared to the approach used for the Core Strategy in 2011. The 
approach is to apply a Standard Methodology (see NPPF/NPPG) in order to calculate 
the baseline requirements for housing. It is designed to address projected household 
growth and h istoric under supply and affordability to determine an appropriate local 
housing need (LHN). The calculation is based upon a range of Office for National 58
57 36 116121155316
268376 371 370516
419
1732 33 3151
28 29 32142942 4334758969147172183345
300390400412559
453
0100200300400500600
2008 -
20092009 -
20102010 -
20112011 -
20122012 -
20132013 -
20142014 -
20152015 -
20162016 -
20172017 -
20182018 -
20192019 -
20202020 -
2021HOUSING COMPLETIONS
MONITORING PERIODHOUSING COMPLETIONS BY YEAR, SPLIT BY NEW 
BUILD AND CONVERSION/CHANGE OF USE, RIBBLE 
VALLEY.
New Build Completions Conversions and Change of Use Total CompletionsRibble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
26 
 Statistics (ONS) data including household growth projections and house price to 
earnings . 
 
4.2.5  This approach provides for a much lower housing requirement for the Ribble Valley as 
the minimum level of housing. It is a statistical formula that takes account of changes 
in the number of households, demographics and the impact upon affordability as a 
result of the supply of new homes. It is a process of the local plan to establish the most 
appropriate housing requirement for the area, and the Council  is keen to receive your 
views, evidence, and justifications to support alternative levels of housing requireme nt 
for the area.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4.2.6  The calculation using the Standard methodology generates a baseline, annualised 
figure (as at  March 2021) of 130 dwellings. For further details of how this figure is 
derived refer to the Annual Housing Land Statement.  
 
4.2.7  At a baseline of 130 the annualised figure for 5 -year purposes becomes 137 , equal to 
685 over a five-year  period and 2055 dwellings over the plan period. (15 years). It 
needs to be borne  in mind however that the SM figure recalculates each year usually 
with minor data driven adjustments and that LPA’s are required to review their plans 
every 5 years including  the housing requirement element and so this requirement is 
likely to be subject to change. The government may also review its approach to the 
Standard Methodology which the Council  will need to take in to account.  
 
 
7000  
LOCATION  OF CONSENTS  AND EXTANT  PERMISSIONS  WITHIN  THE RIBBLE  VALLEY,  2008 - 
2021.  
   6525   
6000  
 
5000  
 
4000  
 
3000  
2223  
1991  
2000  
 
1000  
448 
763 
518 
 531 
51 
 
Clitheroe  
 Clitheroe
Parish  
Longridge  
 Longridge  
Parish  
Whalley  
 Whalley  
Parish  
Other  
 Total  
LOCATION  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
27 
 4.2.8  The impact of the Standard Methodo logy in determining a 5 -year supply of housing is 
also significant compared to the previously established housing position. Again, more 
information is included in the evidence base, but the comparison can be illustrated as 
follows:  
 
Supply Numbers: 1957 dw ellings (deliverable and available sites)  
 
5-year supply based upon SM Requirement    14.2 years      
 
5-year supply based upon Core Strategy Requirement  6.65 years     
 
All figures and calculations are correct as at 31st March 2021.  
 
4.2.9  The Council  is required to ensure that it maintains an ongoing supply of available land 
to deliver housing. It monitors planning permissions and completions to ensure that 
requirements can be met. This information is published in the Housing Land 
Availability Survey, the AMR and the supply position summarised annually in the 5 -
year housing statement.  
 
4.2.10  At first sight applying the SM based figure would suggest that there is little need to 
release further land at this stage and that the Council  has already made provision to 
address requirements going forward through existing commitments. Indeed, what is 
vital now is to ensure that committed developments are delivered. By controlling the 
release of additional land through planning policy this can focus invest ment on those 
sites that are already in the system.  
 
4.2.11  However, as the graph (figure 1) illustrates notwithstanding an earlier need to catch 
up on delivery, the development rates experienced in the Ribble Valley are significantly 
higher than the plan ned rate of delivery, such that permissions are being used up, and 
in reality, few new sites have come forward. There continues to be a reserve, but 
monitoring has indicated that new supply has not grown significantly in recent years 
as the market has focu sed on those sites already in the system. Consideration needs 
to be given therefore to identifying a future reserve of sites through the local plan to 
help guide development patterns in the future and enable some certainty on where 
development will take pl ace and in particular what infrastructure needs to be 
delivered.  
 
4.2.12  If we look at the monitoring information the Council  has identified the amount of land 
that it can commit to the 5 -year supply, and also the number dwellings that whilst 
committed, ar e not anticipated to come forward before the 5 -year period. The total 
number of dwellings anticipated to deliver after 5 years is 1107 in terms of future 
supply.  
 
4.2.13  We have also identified that on average small sites are delivered at an average of 49 
per year and we currently allow for 246 units in the 5 -year supply. It is reasonable to 
predict that this level of small sites in area like Ribble Valley is likely to be maintained.  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
28 
  
4.2.14  We have therefore assessed that in the last 10 years of the plan our supply at this point 
is likely to be in the order of 1107 +246 +246 = 1599 dwellings assuming no other sites 
come forward.  
 
4.2.15  The LHN  to address in that 10 -year period is anticipated at 1370 (that is 2 x 685) 
dwellings giving a surplus of some 229 dwellings or approximately 17% in surplus 
against the LHN. This could reinforce the need to consider not making further 
allocations at this s tage but that this would need to be kept under review and 
potentially allocations considered at the next 5 -year review.  
 
4.2.16  Further analysis of the monitoring data however raises an important factor to consider 
and that is the rate at which sites are b eing built out. This is showing an average since 
the start of the Core Strategy in 2008 of around 276 units a year but looking at the last 
5 years the average build -out rate is 443 dwellings. Factor this build out rate into the 
supply data and it gives a d ifferent picture again. At this rate of delivery our existing 
supply will be used within 4.4 years (by 2025) and against the total identified supply 
within 7 years (by 2028) leaving a further 5 years within the plan period to identify 
land for or be at the  risk of sites coming forward in an uncontrolled and unplanned 
manner.  
 
4.2.17  In these scenarios additional land should be identified for years 2028 -2033 of the plan 
period but to ensure development can be properly planned some land will be required 
for the period from 2025. Whilst there will be requirement to review the local plan in 
5 years from adoption (that is a review anticipated by 2028) it is likely that housing 
land will need to be planned for in this plan review despite the lower local housing 
need resulting from the Standard Methodology.  
 
4.2.18  Based on the approach proposed the Council  will need to make provision for a 
minimum of 1096 houses in the period 2025 to 2033 (based upon a LHN of 137 per 
year).  This will mean additional growth will n eed to be accommodated against the 
chosen development strategy. However, the Council  needs to ensure, given the 
development pressures in the area that land is released in a timely manner and supply 
is not used up prematurely in response to market demands r ather than planned 
requirements. It is proposed that as a strategic policy approach any allocations would 
be identified for release only after 2026 at the earliest, unless housing supply indicated 
an earlier release was appropriate.  
 
4.2.19  Whilst the above scenario is based on applying the SM it should be noted that work 
undertaken by the Council ’s consultant’s (Turleys: Strategic Housing and Economic 
Needs Assessment 2020. which can be viewed on the Council ’s website using the 
following link: https:// www.ribblevalley.gov.uk/downloads/file/2603/shena -report) 
identified that there was a case to maintain the housing requirement around that of 
the Core Strategy (280 dwellings per annum) as this reflected the historic levels of 
development being achieved an d the economic driver that housing development 
provided to the local economy.  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
29 
  
4.2.20  The Council  is concerned that such an approach would generate a requirement 
significantly above that of the Standard Methodology and risks inflating the 
requirement out of step with National Guidance that indicates that LPA’s should only 
move away from the SM where there is a growth approach being pursued or there are 
other exceptional circumstances such as regeneration imperatives that would warrant 
it. The Council  does not believe this is the case in Ribble Valleys circumstances.  
 
4.2.21  It needs to be recogni sed that with existing commitments housing will continue to be 
delivered and it will take time to move towards a SM based figure. The Council  believes 
that by plan ning at the SM baseline this will help promote delivery of existing 
commitments and will avoid a significant oversupply of sites enabling a smoother 
transition to planned sites being identified through the planning process.  
 
Proposed Housing Requirement  
 
4.2.22  In summary the housing requirement to be addressed is therefore proposed as 2330 
for the period 2021 – 2038 . This allows for a baseline of 2021 and a 15 -year period 
going forward assuming an adoption baseline for the local plan in 2023.  
 
4.2.23  Against this requirement our supply position is as follows:  
 
Current 5 -year supply :   1957  Dwellings  
 
Residual to find :   2330 -1957 = 373 Dwellings  
 
Identified supply beyond 5 years:  1107  Dwellings  
 
Surplus of 734 (+37.5%)  
 
4.2.24  In addition, small sites would be likely to come forward as a minimum, as well as other 
sites that are policy compliant. This approach would not see a need for expansion of 
settlements as currently defined but may limit choice in the longer term which the 
Council  would need to respond to in future reviews.  
 
4.2.25  An option for the Council  is therefore  to plan, going forward on the basis of the SM 
requirement but comments on this approach are invited, in particular views on 
whether this is an appropriate level to plan for and if, despite the residual position 
requi ring no additional supply to be identified at this stage the Council  should make 
some provision to address current build rates to smooth the transition towards the 
Standard Methodology based LHN in the longer term and phase new land release.  
 
 
 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
30 
 4.3 Affordable Housing  
Evidence Base: SHENA; HLAS; 5 Year Statement; AMR; Draft Homelessness Strategy.  
 
4.3.1  Affordability is a key issue within Ribble Valley as an area with very high housing values 
that continues to place pressure on many residents’  ability  to access housing. The 
Council  has pursued as a corporate objective a desire to try and re -balance the housing 
market by seeking to match needs with supply. This of course continues to be a 
challenge and the lack of truly affordable housing has an impact upon people being 
able to remain in their local area, live close to where they work or return to support 
older family members. There is a recogni sed impact on workforce who often live 
outside the borough and travel in which has been identified by business as a constraint 
upon both recruitment and retention of their workforce and pressures upon costs as 
people increasingly find transport and travel costs with employers in competition 
against opportunities in other areas for people to take up.  
 
4.3.2  There are also ongoing issues around the availability of the right affordable stock to 
address people’s needs as well as tenures that people can afford with a well reported 
shortfall in affordable rented accommodation. The SHMA report sets out detail of ke y 
issues in relation to affordable housing and provides for the area, based on national 
guidance , an assessment of need for affordable housing.  
 
4.3.3  One advantage of the levels of housebuilding that have occurred in recent years is the 
ability to address  the identified needs for Affordable homes through new 
development. The adopted policy in the Core Strategy which sought a 30% affordable 
housing contribution on most sites has seen a significant increase in availability.  
 
4.3.4  Delivery of affordable unit s is a key monitoring metric and the Council  has achieved 
success in securing provision since the start of the Core Strategy period with some 929 
affordable units delivered with further units secured in on going commitments. 
Evidence prepared for the Core Strategy identified that the Council  would need to 
secure some 404 units per year. The most recent SHENA calculates a need for 
affordable housing of some 88 dwellings annually. This is important in considering the 
housing requirement overall as the main me chanism for delivery relies on new house 
building. Consequently, any significant reduction in requirement going forward, 
notwithstanding existing commitments is likely to have a long -term impact on the 
ability of the Council  to address local housing needs.  This is a component of the 
consultants reasoning set out in SHENA that a higher than SM requirement should be 
considered and the suggestion that the Council  will need to maintain a requirement 
of around 280 units per annum to meet these needs as well as e conomic growth.  
 
4.3.5  On the whole the current policy framework in relation to affordable housing has been 
successful. It has driven up supply  but policy requirements have also sought to secure 
stock that meets the needs of older persons with a requirements for specific 
percentages of units (both affordable and market) to be aimed at meeting needs of 
older persons.  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
31 
 4.3.6  The consultant’s report (Turley) recogni ses this but also identifies that going forward 
in terms of needs there is a shortfall in smaller units for single person households and 
starter homes and also a need for affordable, larger family homes with 3 and 4 beds 
to meet needs. This  will require an adjustment to the Council ’s policies on house types 
which to date, with the exception of older persons requirements has tended to be 
market led reflecting market demands.  
 
4.3.7  The Council  is interested in your views on how affordable re quirements should be 
addressed and indeed the extent to which housing requirements should be influenced 
by the need to ensure delivery of affordable housing.  
 
4.4 Employment and Growth  
Evidence Base: Economic Baseline; Employment Land Review; Economic Strategy; 
AMR 
 
4.4.1  The Ribble Valley is able to demonstrate a robust local economy with a wide variety of 
business operating across most sectors. In the past the main issue has been the 
availability of land to support economic growth and deliver  locally based employment. 
Land requirements were identified through the Core Strategy and sites allocated in 
the Housing and Economic DPD to deliver against those requirements. These 
allocations coupled with a number of long -standing commitments have been  able to 
support economic stability and contrary to the start of the Core Strategy investment 
circumstances have been right to drive demand with the consequence that much of 
the supply has been delivered. The Council  is in a situation where the ongoing str ength 
of the local economy, seemingly largely unaffected by the broader impacts of the 
pandemic is driving the need for further land release if current growth is to be 
sustained.  
 
4.4.2  The Council  commissioned Lichfield associates to undertake an employme nt land 
review, the report of which is included in the evidence base and can be accessed via 
the Council ’s web site . 
 
4.4.3  This reports on a range of key factors but at this stage there are a number of issues 
arising that the Council  considers key to shap ing the new local plan.  
 
4.4.4  These three key issues relate to the amount of new land to be delivered, where it 
should be and also the influence of the identified growth on the workforce, in 
particular the resulting impact upon housing requirements.  
 
4.4.5 Lichfield’s have undertaken an assessment of the need for employment land and 
demonstrate that the Council  should be planning in this local plan for between 22ha 
and 26ha gross, of new employment land depending upon the levels of growth 
deemed appropriat e for the borough. Whilst there is an existing identified supply this 
is not enough in itself to meet the identified requirement. Consequently, additional Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
32 
 land will need to be identified and allocated. The issue to address is location and fit 
with a prefer red development strategy and of course the availability of suitable land.  
 
4.4.6  Existing strategy seeks to focus new employment development (beyond committed 
sites) towards the main settlements (Clitheroe, Longridge and Whalley), the strategic 
site at Barrow and the enterprise zone. Policy also directs employment development 
towards t he A59 corridor.  
 
4.4.7  In reality much of the employment space delivered has been on long standing 
commitments with the exception of development at Mellor where Thwaites have 
developed their new facilities and Headquarters. Clitheroe has seen development  in 
existing employment areas, whilst the needs of Longridge were supported by allocated 
land. Little new land has been brought forward in Whalley itself although the 
successful development of the former Genus site on Mitton Road near Whalley has 
seen a si gnificant amount of new employment space delivered at Mitton Park.  
 
4.4.8  The challenge for the Council  is therefore seeking to identify land to meet the 
requirement ensuring it is in the most appropriate locations.  
 
Identified minimum requirement:   22.00  Hectares (Gross)  
Current supply (committed sites):   11.51  Hectares   
The proposed minimum residual to address:  10.49  hectares  
 
4.4.9  The evidence effectively indicates that a minimum of 10.5ha of additional land for 
employment needs to be identified and t hat this should be suitable for office industrial 
and warehousing uses. The evidence also advises that the primary areas for locating 
new development, reflecting market demands should be Clitheroe, Longridge,  
Whalley and the A59 corridor.  
 
4.4.10  The Council  anticipates making new allocations for additional employment land to 
address this shortfall, and to encourage the retention and refurbishment of existing 
stock.  
 
4.4.11  The Council  in preparing evidence for the local plan review published a call for sit es in 
September 21 and this identified a number of sites suggested as employment land 
amounting to 61ha. These sites include the following:  
 
Location  Land Parcel Size (Ha)  
Clitheroe  6.07  
Chatburn  1.1 
Balderstone  4.1 
Londgridge  2.1 
Langho  1.5 
Pendleton (A59)  24.49  
Pendleton (a59)  18.8  
Whalley  2.5 Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
33 
  
4.4.12  However, at this stage the suggested sites have not been subject to any detailed 
assessment beyond the principle of their availability. Lichfield’s also undertook a 
review of the potential to provide additional land release which is set out in their 
report. In total some 78 hectares of land was considered as being potentially available 
through that process and this is set out in their study.  
 
4.4.13  Land for employment will be iden tified following further site assessments and the 
establishment of the proposed development strategy for the area. Regard needs to be 
given to attitudes towards economic growth as this will impact upon housing 
requirements, sustainability through providing  more local job opportunities balanced 
with wider environmental considerations driven, in particular by location and scale. 
The Council  is keen to receive views on these issues including whether the target 
should be at the higher end of the range and wheth er the existing focus on main 
centres  and the A59 corridor should be maintained.  
 
4.5 Main Centres and Retail  
Evidence Base: Economic Profile; Town Centre Health Checks; AMR; ARK Report  
 
4.5.1  Our monitoring and evidence base has identified that our main centres  remain strong 
and that our retail offer since the core strategy was adopted has grown with additional 
retail space being created through new developments both within centres  and to a 
lesser extent at other appropriate locations controlled through the application of 
planning policy.  
 
4.5.2  Existing development plans for the area do not allocate specific retail sites, 
applications are considered through policy tests. What should be noted i s that the 
quantity of new development required identified within the Core Strategy has been 
exceeded yet the centres  continue to perform well with new development taking place 
within Clitheroe and Whalley through conversion and change of use. Whalley has 
experienced significant change in the nature of its offer and there are concerns that 
there has been a loss of traditional retail outlets. Longridge has seen limited change, 
although it should be noted that the recently developed ALDI supermarket developed  
adjacent to the borough boundary in Preston will support retail choice for the locality 
albeit not within Ribble Valley itself. It will provide opportunities for linked trips and 
will contribute to the overall attractiveness and strength of Longridge as a  retail and 
service centre . 
 
4.5.3  The Council  considers that the existing main retail areas designated in the plan for 
these centres  remain correct and should be carried forward from the 2019 HED DPD 
and that existing policy is still appropriate in delive ring a town centre  first approach.  
 
4.5.4  What does need to be addressed are the implications of the recent changes to the use 
class order which enables a much wider range of uses to take place in the high street. 
This will impact upon the details of exis ting Core Strategy policy which seeks to control Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
34 
 uses in key areas in Clitheroe and the policy will need to be updated to reflect current 
guidance.  
 
4.5.6  The main issue to consider is whether the Council  is correct in maintaining its policy 
approach to ea ch of the main centres  or whether an alternative is necessary. Views 
are welcome.  
 
  Ribble Valley Local Plan 2021 – 2038  
Strategic Issues Consultation  – Regulation 18  
 
 
35 
 5 APPENDICES  
Appendix 1 – Core Strategy Key Diagram  
 
